Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

October 2, 2001 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 2, 2001,
at 9:00 a.m.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Meyer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Poole
Messrs. Jordan, McTeer, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Fox, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Reinhart, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard, Lindsey, Rasche,
Slifman, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Ms. Smith, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ettin and Madigan, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Research and
Statistics and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors

2


Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Connors, Associate Director, Division of International Finance,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
of Governors
Mr. Kumasaka, Assistant Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Eisenbeis and Goodfriend, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick,
Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Philadelphia, Minneapolis,
Dallas, and Cleveland respectively
Messrs. Evans, Hilton, and Judd, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Chicago, New York, and San Francisco respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 

October 2, 2001 


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebody like
to move approval of the minutes of August 21st?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move, Mr. Chairman
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. Dino.
MR. KOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the 

charts with the salmon cover that were distributed to you.1 I will 

break up my remarks into two parts. First, I will talk about general 

market developments, especially since September 11th, and then I’ll 

say a little about our operations in the aftermath of the attacks. 

The first chart shows short-term deposit rates for the United 

States, the euro area, and Japan. U.S. short-term rates continued to 

decline during the intermeeting period. Both cash and forward rates 

had been declining even before September 11th, and the fall in those 

rates accelerated in the days following. Cash rates declined after the 

Committee’s September 17th reduction in the target fed funds rate, 

though the 9-month forward rate barely moved, apparently reflecting 

the lingering expectation among some market participants that rates 

will be reversing course some time next year. 

As shown in the middle panel, euro-area rates followed a 

similar pattern of heading downward gradually even before 

September 11th. And on September 17th the ECB reduced rates by 50 

basis points several hours after the FOMC’s policy announcement. 

The Bank of Canada, the Swiss National Bank, and several other 

central banks cut their rates as well. 

As you can see in the bottom panel, Japanese rates continued to 

scrape along near zero. Late on September 17th our time, early on the 

18th in Tokyo, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) announced another so-called 

easing of policy when it stated that its current account balances would 

be targeted at above 6 trillion yen as opposed to the 6 trillion target it 

had indicated previously. In the days that followed, that balance grew 

and by the last days of the quarter it rose to more than 12 trillion yen. 

By today, it had eased a bit to 10.3 trillion yen, still significantly 

above the earlier 6 trillion target. Interestingly, forward rates actually 

1

Copies of the charts are reproduced in the Appendix.

10/2/01

2

ticked up a bit and the Japanese government bond (JGB) yield curve
was little changed after the announcement, suggesting to some that
the BOJ’s tweaks in the past few months had ceased to have an
impact on rates beyond the very short end of the coupon curve.
The top panel on page 2 graphs the 2-year, 10-year, and 30-year
Treasury yields along with the target fed funds rate since August 1st.
Two-year rates declined, beneficiaries of policy easing, a weak equity
market, and general risk aversion. The curve steepened to 255 basis
points from about 165 basis points at the time of the last meeting.
The 10-year yield declined 32 basis points, while the 30-year fell a
more modest 6 basis points. Some market participants explained the
restrained move in 30-year yields as reflecting nascent inflationary
risks, while others attributed the price action to the canceled
September buybacks and the generally revised fiscal stance that
would lead to far higher Treasury supplies than had been anticipated
previously.
The steepening trend observed in the U. S. Treasury yield curve
has also been seen in yields abroad, as reflected in the middle panel.
The 2- to 10-year Bund spread moved almost in lockstep with
movements in our curve. And even the Japanese 2- to 10-year spread
steepened ever so slightly, primarily due to a shift in the 10-year JGB
yield.
In the bottom panel we observe that in some segments of the
bond markets the reaction has varied. Spreads in the investment
grade sector--not seen here--have largely been stable. And in the case
of agencies and swaps, the spreads have actually declined slightly.
But spreads on riskier paper have widened. The EMBI+ spread and
the Merrill Lynch high-yield spread both widened after the 11th.
These high-yield spreads hit levels last seen on January 2nd, the day
before the FOMC’s first easing move in the cycle. Trading turnover
in emerging markets and on high-yield paper decreased after the
attacks. And liquidity conditions deteriorated and have not yet
recovered to normal levels.
The three graphs on the next page depict the percentage change
in various equity indices for the third quarter. The U.S. indices are
shown in the top panel, major foreign indices in the middle panel, and
a representative sample of emerging market equity indices in the
bottom panel. Most indices declined between 15 and 30 percent and
nearly all had fallen substantially even before September 11th,
adjusting to downwardly revised growth and profit forecasts. Stocks
of less established companies fared worse than more seasoned
companies. In the United States the percentage decline in the

10/2/01

3

NASDAQ was almost double the fall of the Dow and the S&P.
Internationally, emerging markets indices on balance fell somewhat
more than markets in more developed countries.
Turning to page 4 and the major currencies in foreign exchange
markets, the dollar actually was little changed as measured by most
trade-weighted indices, but showed considerable variation in bilateral
rates. In general, risk aversion was reflected in the appreciation of the
Swiss franc and the yen, in part because of perceptions about their
value as safe havens, and probably more importantly as yen- and
Swiss franc-funded carry trades were unwound. On the other hand,
currencies of countries with large commodity sectors, such as the
Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, and the New Zealand dollar,
depreciated to near their all-time lows, as did the currencies of
countries such as Brazil, which have large external financing
requirements. While the downgrade in U.S. growth has probably
reduced expected risk-adjusted returns on dollar assets, the
contemporaneous downgrade of overseas prospects may have offset
those adverse effects on the dollar.
Turning to the middle panel, the yen had been appreciating
against the dollar since early August. With the retrenchment of risk
appetites, yen-funded carry trades were unwound and Japanese
investors were reportedly repatriating funds before their quarter-end.
With the sustained upward pressure on the yen, the Japanese
monetary authorities intervened on September 17th and continued to
intervene in large amounts through this past Friday, the end of the
Japanese fiscal half-year. In all, the Japanese monetary authorities
purchased $26.7 billion and 600 million euros, which the ECB
acquired as agent of behalf of the Bank of Japan. The aggregate
dollar purchases included $200 million which the Desk acquired as
agent for the Japanese on September 27th. Within the foreign
exchange market, a major topic of discussion among traders is
whether the Ministry of Finance’s intervention was intended as a
bridge to get Japanese financial institutions through the fiscal halfyear-end on September 30th or whether the intervention will persist.
If the latter, that would be taken as a signal of a renewed attempt to
jump-start the export sector.
As the bottom panel shows, all of the euro’s recent depreciation
occurred in early August. Since mid-August, the euro has traded in a
narrow range. The currency is perceived as neither a safe haven nor
an asset associated with an economic area that has higher growth
prospects than the United States. Therefore, asset returns are
expected to be no better and no worse than what will be available in
the United States.

10/2/01

4


Turning to the next page, the terrorist attacks triggered an
increase in both observed and implied volatility in most markets, and
these graphs show the volatility of a sample of major asset price
relationships. The top panel depicts implied volatility on one-month
euro-dollar and dollar-yen options. Both rose sharply on the 11th and
hit highs of about 14-1/2 percent on September 17th, the day that the
Committee and other central banks eased policy, but declined in
subsequent days. These volatility levels, though sharply higher than
the volatility levels of 10 percent or so in early July, are modest by
historical standards. In 1998 the volatility of dollar-yen options
reached a high of nearly 28 percent.
The middle panel graphs the implied volatility of the December
Eurodollar contract and the bottom panel graphs the volatility of the
S&P 100, also known as the VIX. Both volatility levels roughly
doubled from their levels in late August and both reached highs that
exceeded slightly the highs observed during the 1998 crisis. In the
case of the December Eurodollar contract, the implied volatility
exceeded the 1998 high by quite a bit. While the VIX index has
declined somewhat from its recent highs, its implied volatility and
that of the Eurodollar contract both remained at elevated levels.
Turning to the next page, the top panel depicts total Federal
Reserve balances day by day since the last FOMC meeting. With the
disruptions caused by the attacks, the combination of discount
window loans, open market operations, plus autonomous factors
sharply increased balances to as high as $121 billion on September
13th. Despite the apparent flushness of markets, even allowing for
higher demand for excess reserves, this was deceiving.
The inset in the top panel shows balances, both borrowed and
nonborrowed, for the entire banking system for the five days starting
on September 11th. The green bar in the inset shows the end-of-day
balances
, which was having problems with
its clearing and settlement system. On September 12th, the entire
banking system held about $63 billion of reserves before borrowing.
before
discount window borrowing and overdrafts. Distribution of reserves
continued to be a problem until the afternoon of the 14th when
began to make progress in clearing its backlog of
transactions. By early the following week, we began to work down
balances as they started to be distributed more efficiently.

10/2/01

5

The bottom panel depicts the fed funds rate in the intermeeting
period. The green line is the target fed funds rate. The red dots mark
the effective fed funds rate on each day, and the vertical line shows
the high-low range for each day. With four of the five major funds
brokers incapacitated by the attacks, banks largely traded directly
with each other rather than through brokers and they did so at the
target of 3-1/2 percent in something of a “gentlemen’s agreement.”
This pattern persisted until late Thursday, September 13th, when the
weight of reserves in the system first began to show through and the
funds rate traded below its target. This pattern of low rates,
especially in later trading, continued in the period after the FOMC’s
intermeeting easing action on September 17th, particularly in light of
the Committee’s statement noting that the funds rate might
occasionally trade below its target. By the 19th the Desk began to
manage its operations with an eye toward restoring a sense of
normalcy in the money market, which had begun to take rates below 2
percent and even 1 percent for granted. Thus we began to nudge the
market back toward the target. In doing so the Desk continued to
balance that objective against the desire to respond to the financing
needs of dealers, but by that time dealers were not experiencing much
trouble getting their funding done through their normal sources.
On page 7, the top panel shows three key autonomous factors
that affected reserves during the period. The grounding of air traffic
created an immediate spike in float to about $47 billion on September
13th. The ECB’s three swap drawings added almost $20 billion at
their peak. Those two factors added more than $60 billion of reserves
on that day. Meanwhile, a near doubling of the repo pool drained
reserves. On balance, these factors added reserves during the first
few days of the crisis and thus reduced what might have been even
more traffic at the discount window on several days. By the week of
September 17th float declined and the foreign exchange swaps
matured but the repo pool remained elevated, in part because of the
large number of fails in the securities markets, and that was leaving
central banks with extra cash at the end of the day. There was also an
apparent desire for higher levels of liquidity, and in the case of
Japan’s Ministry of Finance the need to invest large amounts of
intervention proceeds.
The middle panel depicts the mix of overnight and term
repurchase agreements used to manage reserves. We had no
operations on September 11th. At first we relied on overnight RPs to
add liquidity and allowed several long-term RPs to mature without
replacement. When markets started working better, we increased the
level of long-term RPs to help meet underlying needs.

10/2/01

6

The bottom panel shows for short-term RPs the level of
accepted propositions in red and the level of rejected propositions in
blue. Normally, dealers submit a large number of propositions of
which we accept a relatively small amount. For four business days,
from the 12th through the 17th, our operations were driven by the
demand for financing rather than by reserve levels associated with a
given funds rate. To better meet these demands, we operated later in
the day than normal, after dealers had an opportunity to assess their
financing needs. Then for a couple of days, on September 18th and
19th, we accepted virtually all dealer propositions on our overnight
RPs. This was done not so much directly to meet their demands but
to provide the level of reserves that was needed given that
autonomous factors, especially the repo pool, were draining reserves.
After we arranged several long-term RPs that settled on the 20th, the
volume of our short-term RPs declined and the volume of accepted
propositions was just a fraction of total propositions.
Turning to the last page, I want to give you a quick update on
our securities lending operations during the intermeeting period. On a
normal day, the Desk lends out a handful of securities from SOMA-normally totaling less than $2 billion and frequently less than $500
million. With the disruptions caused by the attacks, not only to the
Bank of New York but to several major inter-dealer brokers and some
large dealers themselves, the number of fails rose dramatically. With
the flow of securities from usual sources disrupted or scaled back,
demand for SOMA securities rose despite our rather high pricing
structure. We lent out about $10 billion on September 11th,
representing 70 different issues, and smaller though still high amounts
in the days following. Volumes rose again last week in the run-up to
the quarter-end and remained high yesterday. Fails began to rise last
week for the 2-, 5-, and 10-year on-the-run securities for reasons that
are not fully clear. The dollar volume of our lending increased
beyond $10 billion, although the number of issues was less than on
the 11th, again because the number of fails was concentrated in the
small numbers of on-the-run issues.
I want to make one final observation. On September 19th, the
very small volume of lending did not imply tranquility on that day.
With the funds rate trading soft, the rate for general collateral fell
below 1 percent in the repo market. Since the Committee’s
authorization permits us to lend securities at a minimum of 1 percent,
the formula implied a negative financing rate. Hence it was cheaper
for dealers to fail and pay the near zero fails rate than to borrow from
the Desk, pay our higher price, and complete settlement. In
reviewing the securities lending facility in coming months, one aspect
that we plan to study is the pricing structure. In a low interest rate

10/2/01

7

environment, the general collateral rate could be susceptible to
occasional declines below 1 percent, thus making it difficult for our
securities lending program to meet its objectives.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign exchange operations 

during the period. I will need a vote to ratify the domestic operations 

and I’d be happy to take any questions. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First, let me say that despite the tensions you
were under, you make it sound very simple. And I applaud both what you did and
making it simple. When will you get data on lending volume for October 1st?
MR. KOS. Securities lending volume?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
MR. KOS. We did a bit over $10 billion yesterday.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, the volume was essentially
unchanged from September 28th?
MR. KOS. That’s right. Apparently the volume of fails is still at a very high
level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you still don’t know fully why that is
occurring?
MR. KOS. There are almost as many explanations as there are market
participants. It is an issue that the market is struggling with, though. But they’re still-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As a working hypothesis, assume they’re all
correct! [Laughter] Further questions for Dino?
MR. POOLE. I’d like to move the ratification of the operations. But I would
also suggest that the Committee add to that a sense of gratitude to those at the Desk for
the way they handled such a very, very complicated and difficult situation. And, of

10/2/01

8

course, the Desk itself was working in difficult circumstances with the relocation of its
offices and all the upset that involved. So I think it was a fantastic performance and I
believe the Committee should reflect that view in its vote to ratify the Desk operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’m sure your suggestion will meet with no
objection from your FOMC colleagues. Further questions? Yes, President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also thought that the Desk
performed extraordinarily. No matter what kinds of contingency scenarios one might
have envisioned, this was way beyond what anyone would have imagined. So the Desk’s
performance really was remarkable.
I was studying Charts 6, 7, and 8, especially in light of the FOMC’s statement
that the funds rate might trade below its target for a while, which you mentioned, Dino.
It is clearly evident on Chart 6 that for four trading days you did let that happen. But I
can interpret the chart as saying that after about four days you pretty much returned to
operating in the way you normally do on a daily basis, letting the funds rate be both a
floor and a ceiling. Part of my question is: Is that a fair characterization? Also, I’d like
to ask you to say a little more about the way you conduct daily operations in terms of
factors supplying and absorbing reserves. What led you to the conclusion that it would
not continue to be appropriate to allow the funds rate to trade below its target? The
reason I raise that is because in periods of heightened anxiety, liquidity preference, risk
aversion, or other characterizations of these reactions we can’t really observe, it would be
very hard to know where an equilibrium is. The question really is: How comfortable
were you in starting to view the target funds rate as a floor in that environment?

10/2/01

9

MR. KOS. In answering, let me try to package those questions together. I

don’t think we viewed the target funds rate as a floor. What we were trying to do was
return to some sense of normalcy in the functioning of the market. The low rate itself
was creating problems. There were problems for investors. For example, money market
funds had trouble investing money; there were complaints from investors who could not
get banks to take their money. These and other problems were being created by the very
low funds rate and those issues had to be considered. What we also tried to do was to
leave the market with enough liquidity, but there was a sense that if the rate remained too
low for too long, some of these unintended adverse affects would continue.
If you look at the bottom of page 7, you can see that for several days beyond
September 17th we were basically accepting all the propositions that the dealers were
giving us. We were trying to respond to the financing demands from the dealers. And
even in the subsequent period, once we got past the 19th and 20th or so, there were days
when we tried to respond to the financing needs of the dealers even though it wasn’t
necessary for reserve purposes. One of the ways we did that was by having the Treasury
increase its balance. That way we could respond by providing the dealers with more
financing than might have been dictated by the numbers. So my message is that we
really did not view the funds target as a floor. A lot of the trading was below the target
rate but there were days, especially in the mornings, when the rate was firm. That often
reflected efforts by European banks in particular to get their financing done early in the
day. So we got a pattern with the rate firm in early-day activity and lower in reduced
trading at the end of the day.
I don’t know if I answered your questions.

10/2/01

10

MR. JORDAN. Well, that was helpful. The reason I’m raising the issue is that

intuitively I think one thing that should not be allowed to happen is for the stock of
central bank liquidity to decline inadvertently because of operational procedures. So I
was judgmentally struggling with the data in the Board’s H4.1 release for the week
ending last Wednesday versus the week ending September 5th, the week before the crisis.
I don’t know what the seasonal factors were doing during that period--I can guess, though
I don’t know for sure--but to see the monetary base actually lower for the week ended last
Wednesday than it was the week ended September 5th alarmed me a bit. I questioned
whether that is something I would want to see happen. If heightened anxiety among
other factors caused the natural equilibrium level to be very low--though I don’t know
where that level is--I don’t think we would want to see our operating procedures result in
the contraction of central bank liquidity.
MR. REINHART. Actually, I think a large part of the reason central bank
liquidity contracted comes through in Dino’s inset at the top of page 6, namely that
intermediation wasn’t functioning when four out of the five federal funds brokers were
out of service. As the fed funds market became operational and those with insufficient
positions could get their reserves from those with excess reserves, there wasn’t a need for
us to blow up our balance sheet to replace the unavailable intermediation. So I
interpreted the reduction in nonborrowed reserves and the decline in the Desk’s open
market operations as evidence of a return of the federal funds market to more normal
functioning.
MR. KOS. Yes, I think that’s an important point. A large part of that market
was in effect bottled up.

10/2/01

11

MR. JORDAN. Yes, and I can understand liquidity coming down from the

elevated levels immediately after the attacks. But I was comparing the recent figures
with those in the week before the attacks, the week ending September 5th. That week
may have been atypical because it included the Labor Day weekend; I can’t readily make
a judgment on that. But I was looking at this in terms of wanting to be comfortable with
our position going forward. We don’t know what’s going to happen or what the next
terrorist event is going to be, but we can expect heightened anxieties, a preference for
liquidity, and risk aversion. Those are all psychological factors that we really can’t
quantify. And we wouldn’t want those things to cause us inadvertently to produce less
central bank liquidity than we think is appropriate. Intuitively I think the demand for
central bank liquidity has had to go up, so I am concerned to see this contraction in
supply.
MR. HILTON. The other issue we were facing early in the week after the 17th
was that, as a symptom that the financing markets were operating much more efficiently,
the liquidity we had provided previously was beginning to have a very telling effect on
financing rates and the funds rate. So when we were coming into the market in the
morning, on some of those operations we were receiving propositions of below 1 percent.
We continued to accept them for a while, but there was no sense of balance in the
financing markets by the 18th or 19th--no sense that there was any upside risk to rates.
And given the liquidity we had put in previously, market participants were really testing
how low rates could go. There is no natural floor above zero. We did consciously reduce
the amount we were supplying at the margin so that at least at the end of the day market
participants would see that there was some risk of rates going up. We saw a little

10/2/01

12

evidence of that risk later in the week when in late trading rates reached as high as 6 or 7
percent. Since we restored that balance to market expectations, though, we have been
supplying somewhat higher levels of central bank balances.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you.
MR. REINHART. I’d like to add just one other point. In establishing a
reference point, President Jordan, you might want to go back one or two weeks from
September 5th. Reserves are very erratic on a week-to-week basis and it looks as if from
a weekly standpoint your base point is a little low relative to the previous two or three
weeks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If I could make a comment, Mr.
Chairman? President Jordan’s concern, as I understand it, is that there not be some sort
of central bank orthodoxy that says that the funds rate target has to be put back in place at
a time when it would be inappropriate. Dino in both his presentation and in his answer to
one of the questions indicated that he was being guided by the desire for a return to
normalcy. That was our mantra at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We were
dealing with a financial community in which there was an advanced degree of trauma on
the part of people at trading desks and those managing firms. And there was a very
strong conviction in the community that the Federal Reserve System and the New York
Reserve Bank as its agent were going to do whatever was necessary to make the system
function. Part of getting through a battle fatigue period is that it is necessary to return life
to normal. So the Desk was under instructions that when it could conduct operations in
the way it normally does, it should do so, because that gives a signal to the financial

10/2/01

13

community that life is okay again. And traumatized people need that signal. In my view
it’s a very important message that the Fed must continue to deliver because the trauma
period is not over. Some of the firms are still operating out of temporary facilities and
will do so for months. Some have suffered enormous human losses. In the case of
Cantor Fitzgerald, two-thirds of the people in the firm lost their lives on September 11th.
So this is not a situation where everybody will soon start to feel tranquil and okay; that
won’t happen for quite a long period of time. The more the Federal Reserve can say
things are all right, we’re functioning as we traditionally do, the better. That’s a very
important message to give.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Just to switch the subject a bit, Dino, you passed over the
changes in the yield curve rather quickly. I’m interested in your perception of what the
market is thinking about the shape of the yield curve these days and whether the outer
end of the curve is a supply issue totally or if it is conveying other information.
MR. KOS. That’s a good question and one that doesn’t have an easy answer.
In my own view, the shift is not so much an indication that people view inflationary risks
as imminent or that they have very strong expectations of future inflation. I think it
reflects more a concern about the fiscal side, given the talk of stimulus coming out of
Congress, the cancellation of the Treasury’s buyback program, and the prospect for lower
federal revenues. In the New York Times or one of the major papers yesterday there was
an article saying that perhaps we’ll have a fiscal deficit. So the fiscal outlook has really
changed. Now, the short end of the curve will tend to follow policy, or at least it has so
far. But the long end is where the Treasury has been especially active with the buyback

10/2/01

14

program and that’s where we might see concerns or a shift in expectations about the
fiscal side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But if it’s wholly a matter of supply, can’t you
normalize that judgment against corporate issues? The yield spreads went up and it’s
very tough to make a judgment, when we see movements like that, as to whether it’s a
relative supply of Treasury securities vis-à-vis other securities or an aggregate supply
effect. There’s no way, I gather, that we can separate it out. I took a look at the TIPS
data and they don’t help either. The question sort of sits out there as a relatively
important one because if we’re looking at a supply phenomenon, the shift we’ve seen in
the yield curve is what one would expect. There has to be some supply phenomenon
involved. But whether, as President Minehan implies, an inflation premium is building
up in the market is in my view an important issue for us to get a sense of.
MS. MINEHAN. Any thoughts on how to do that?
MR. KOS. I’ll work on it! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? I believe President
Poole moved to ratify the transactions. Is there a second?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. Thank
you very much. Let’s move on. We now go to the most important part of the meeting-­
the most informative, illuminating, and provocative, right?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, that fits in perfectly with my introductory remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wasn’t calling on you; I was calling on
somebody else! [Laughter]

10/2/01

15


MR. STOCKTON. If I were to scale the length of my remarks
this morning to be in proportion to my knowledge about the current
state of the economy, then I think it would be fair to say that I have
already spoken too long. The terrible events of September 11 have
altered the political and economic landscape along so many dimensions
that interpreting the data and putting together this forecast presented us
with unusually daunting challenges. In particular, we were required to
take strong stands on questions of psychology and politics-­
considerations that are always present in constructing the forecast, but
rarely with the prominence that they have achieved in the current
circumstances. For that reason, I thought I could be helpful by laying
out as clearly as possible how we handled some of these issues in
addition to describing how we have reacted to the broader
macroeconomic forces operating on the economy.
Our efforts were organized around four principal questions: How
was information about economic developments prior to September 11
changing our view about the baseline forecast? How large were the
economic disruptions directly associated with the attacks? To what
extent and for how long would consumer and business confidence be
damaged in the aftermath of these events? And, importantly, how were
changes in the stock market, interest rates, and fiscal policy shaping the
outlook for output and prices over the next two years?
With regard to the first question, the sharp drop in aggregate hours
worked in August and the ongoing steep declines in manufacturing
output suggested to us that real GDP was, at best, eking out a meager
gain in the third quarter prior to the attacks. Moreover, the composition
of activity was remarkably similar to that which we have observed since
the spring: moderate advances in consumption and government spending
offset by continued declines in equipment outlays and a further runoff of
inventories. Based on developments prior to September 11, I suspect
that we would have been coming back to the Committee this time with a
forecast of essentially no change in real GDP, on net, in the second half
of the year and a slow acceleration of activity next year.
That assessment forms the backdrop against which we had to
evaluate the economic consequences of the terrorist attacks. In collecting
information about the disruption of production and sales that occurred
immediately following the attacks, we relied heavily on our business
contacts as well as the extraordinary efforts made by research
departments at the Reserve Banks to gather intelligence on activity in
their Districts. Taken together, the evidence suggested that while the
disruptions were pervasive and profound for business in New York,
elsewhere the largest problems were concentrated in a few major sectors.
Air travel was virtually shut down for several days, and many sporting

10/2/01

16

and entertainment events were cancelled or postponed. Auto production
was disrupted by parts supply problems associated with the interruption
of air cargo flights and by a backup of trucks on the Canadian and
Mexican borders. Retailing also appears to have been seriously
disrupted, though it is important to bear in mind that much of any
shortfall in sales likely resulted in a buildup of retail inventories rather
than an immediate curtailment of production.
Some of these effects likely were alleviated later in September,
and others could well be reversed in the next couple of months. Our
very rough stab at the magnitude of these effects suggests that direct
disruptions are likely to have reduced growth in third-quarter GDP by
about 1/2 percentage point at an annual rate, with those effects largely
expected to be reversed this quarter.
As we enter the fourth quarter, the bigger question surrounds the
extent to which recent events will weigh on consumer and business
confidence. Readings on auto sales provided by the vehicle makers,
news reports, and common sense suggest to us that consumers are likely
to pull back on spending. With little to go on, we have assumed that
consumer sentiment will drop considerably below levels implied by
current macroeconomic circumstances--not quite so large over the next
year as occurred in the aftermath of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, but
still a significant drop by historical standards. Last Friday’s report on
consumer confidence from the Michigan survey points to a decline in
sentiment in the final week of the month that is roughly consistent with
our expected pattern.
We also examined how large shocks to sentiment play out over
time and how they are correlated with other components of spending,
and we adjusted our forecast accordingly. Going forward, we have the
effects of this shock reducing the growth of real GDP by about 1-1/4
percentage points at an annual rate in the fourth quarter and by about
3/4 percentage point, on average, in 2002. Because there simply has
been no other episode that closely matches the present one, it is very
difficult for us to gauge the reasonableness of our assumption. Given
that uncertainty, we considered a deeper shock to sentiment--one that
roughly equals in size that which occurred after the invasion of Kuwait.
A shock of that magnitude produces something resembling a more
typical recession. But to be perfectly frank, there is no compelling
reason to think that the shock couldn’t be twice the size of the one
associated with the invasion of Kuwait, or for that matter, something
considerably smaller than we have assumed. Moreover, we can’t
predict how political, military, or terrorist actions could unfold in
coming months or their potential influence on confidence and economic
behavior. Obviously, we had to make some big assumptions on skimpy

10/2/01

17

evidence, and those assumptions have had important implications for
the forecast.
Not all of the developments that have occurred since the last
meeting are immune to more conventional economic analysis. With all
of the understandable focus on the recent tragic events, one could be
forgiven for overlooking some significant shifts that have occurred in
monetary and fiscal policy. In our forecast, the federal funds rate is 125
basis points lower over the next year than was incorporated in our
August projection. Taken by itself, a change in short-term rates of that
dimension could be expected to generate considerable impetus to
aggregate demand down the road. But, of course, this change cannot be
taken by itself. The sharp drop in the stock market and the widening of
risk spreads in the bond market to date have substantially blunted the
stimulus from lower short-term rates. Indeed, as you know from
reading the Bluebook, some estimates of the equilibrium funds rate
have fallen almost as much as the actual funds rate. We still view the
funds rate as having fallen below its equilibrium, and thus see the
current setting of policy as capable of restoring a period of above-trend
growth over time. But the near-term shock implies that the adjustment
will take longer and start with a greater shortfall of activity from
potential than we had previously projected.
I should hasten to add that it is important not to view these
changes in financial developments in isolation. No doubt, some of the
firmness in long-term rates in recent weeks reflects an expectation of a
substantially more expansionary fiscal policy, which is poised to add
more impetus to activity over the next year than we projected in
August. We have incorporated in this forecast about $52 billion of
policy initiatives for fiscal 2002 and $76 billion of initiatives in fiscal
2003, relative to a current services baseline. The figure for fiscal 2002
is roughly $30 billion more than in our August forecast. In addition to
the emergency supplemental and airline assistance packages already
passed by Congress, we have assumed nearly $20 billion more in
spending on education and FEMA, an extension of unemployment
insurance benefits that costs about $10 billion, and a fiscal stimulus
package that ramps up to about $22 billion by fiscal 2003. To put the
size of the total package in a cyclical context, the fiscal stimulus
delivered over the next eight quarters is only exceeded, and just a bit,
by the combination of tax cuts and increases in defense spending that
occurred early in the Reagan administration.
Still, on our assumptions, the unified budget surplus is $70 billion
in fiscal 2002 and nearly $40 billion in fiscal 2003. With money left on
the table and an emerging bipartisan consensus for greater stimulus, we
believe that the balance of risks to our fiscal assumptions is on the

10/2/01

18

upside. For that reason, we included in the Greenbook a simulation
having enough additional stimulus to virtually eliminate the unified
surplus over the next two years. Such actions would likely produce a
faster turnaround in the growth of activity and trim the rise in the
unemployment rate; an adverse reaction of the bond market would
damp, but not eliminate, those effects.
While we view fiscal policy as an upside risk to our forecast,
there also are some very prominent downside risks that are likely to be
especially acute in the next couple of quarters. An event such as
occurred on September 11 could act as a clear focal point that causes
already skittish consumers and businesses to pull back simultaneously
on spending plans. Those actions and their feedback on the economy
would raise significantly the probability of a sharp reduction in
aggregate activity. I would also note that even if we do not see
immediate signs that such a contraction is under way, that risk will not
have receded completely. Iraq invaded Kuwait in early August, but the
steep cutbacks in aggregate output did not really commence until
October.
If I had to net the various risks to real activity in this forecast, I
would focus more on the downside risks in the near term and the upside
risks farther out. The near-term forces of contraction could be
substantial, but so too could be the medium-term stimulus from
monetary and fiscal policy.
Let me conclude with a few words about inflation. In an
environment of increasing slack in labor and product markets and
declining energy prices, we expect measures of both total and core
consumer price inflation to decline over the next two years. It might
appear surprising that the disinflation in this forecast is as modest as it
is, given the degree of slack expected to emerge in coming months. But
in our view, there are a few reasons for being cautious in marking down
the outlook for prices. We have built in a sharp deceleration in wages;
our forecast of the increase in ECI wages drops from about 4 percent
this year to 2-3/4 percent in 2003. However, because there are few
signs of any slowing of health insurance costs, the deceleration in
overall benefit costs is likely to be noticeably less than that of wages.
Although benefit costs may well be offset by reduced wage gains in the
long run, the frequency with which business people complain about
health insurance costs suggests that this shifting is not likely to be
immediate or painless.
The effects of the slowing in compensation costs also show
through to a lesser extent on prices because of the slower pace of
structural productivity growth that we are expecting over the next

10/2/01

19

couple of years. Moreover, with business margins having been eroded
in recent years, there is less scope for firms to absorb cost pressures in
margins. All in all, these considerations lead us to expect less
disinflation over the next two years than might be inferred from our
forecast of resource utilization alone.
Karen Johnson will now continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. In trying to come to grips with the implications
of recent events for the forecast, we were confident that we knew in
which direction to revise foreign growth as a result of information
learned since the August Greenbook: down. But it was much less clear
to us how to assess the magnitude of that revision for individual foreign
countries and for foreign growth on average.
Our downward revision to the forecast for foreign growth has
three components: (1) incorporation of the news about economic
activity in the second quarter and some indicators for July and August
that have become available since the August forecast was completed;
(2) assessment of the implications for foreign economies of the new
outlook for the United States; and (3) consideration of the extent to
which the events of September 11, through asset prices, confidence
factors, and key global prices and industries, will influence real output
growth abroad in addition to the direct impact transmitted by U.S.
demand for imports from the rest of the world. The difficulties we
confronted stemmed from our lack of information about real economic
activity in the days since September 11 and the inherent uncertainty of
prospective effects in the rest of the world as foreign consumers and
business firms react to events that, at least so far, have occurred within
the United States.
As we reported in the Greenbook, the economic data that had
become available in recent weeks suggested a more depressed global
economy than we had expected. This was particularly the case for the
emerging Asian economies. There, the news was most negative for
those whose exports of high-tech products were linked to investment
spending in the United States and in other industrial countries.
However, there were disappointing data for other countries, including
such industrial countries as Canada and Japan. Incorporation of this
information accounts for a significant share of our downward revision
to foreign growth.
As has been evident in the global slowdown to date, a
substantially weaker outlook for U.S. real GDP has clear implications,
in the same direction, for real output growth abroad. Those effects are
largest for our principal trading partners, such as Canada and Mexico.

10/2/01

20

However, for other regions of the globe, such as Europe, the
consequences of second and third round effects through multilateral
trading relationships are far from negligible. Should we be further
surprised by developments in the U.S. economy, either positively or
negatively, there would be a significant reinforcement of that surprise
as output in foreign economies responded to the changed demand from
the United States.
My third category of factors includes the host of reactions within
the foreign countries and in global markets to the events of September
11. We have seen net declines in stock markets abroad as large as 18
percent. Our research and that of others suggest that the effect on
consumption of such changes in wealth will not be as large abroad as in
the United States, but the reaction will be significant. Similarly, we
expect that confidence of consumers and businesses will be impaired by
varying degrees across the rest of the world. We have a few bits of
partial information from surveys that included responses after
September 11 that confirm substantial drops in confidence. The latest
Japanese Tankan survey, released on Monday, fell more than expected
to its lowest level since June 1999 for the overall index. At this point,
we can only guess how widespread the reaction of confidence abroad
will be, how long it will persist, and how much it will contribute to
lessening domestic demand in foreign countries.
We also have incorporated into this forecast available information
from global markets. With respect to oil prices, the spot price of WTI
has moved down, on balance, more than 15 percent since September 10,
and futures prices call for it to move down slightly further. Market
participants seem to be anticipating that reduced global demand for oil
will be met by only limited supply cuts by OPEC. The recent
international meeting of oil producers ended with no agreed reductions
in production quotas despite the fact that spot prices were below the
target range for OPEC’s basket.
The global market for high-tech products in general, and
semiconductors in particular, is an important element behind our
projections for the emerging Asian economies. Weakness in this sector
underlies the significantly greater-than-expected declines in output that
were recorded in the second quarter in Malaysia, Singapore, and
Taiwan. We have little hard information about inventories or
production beyond August. Our projection that output in the region
will recover next year depends upon some improvement in this sector.
We asked ourselves in which foreign countries scope might exist
for additional policy response to the further downward pressure on
demand. Among the industrial countries, monetary policy has been

10/2/01

21

broadly eased during the first half of this year, and eight major foreign
central banks cut rates further following your action on September 17.
Our forecast assumes that additional easing moves will be taken in
Europe and Canada by year-end. Some emerging market central banks
had been easing as well, as the global economy slowed and demand
weakened within their economies. However, we expect that external
financing pressures will likely intensify, in particular for Latin
American countries with external deficits, making it less likely that
monetary easing will be enacted there.
Within Europe and in Canada, fiscal policy should be somewhat
supportive of growth in 2002 as tax revenues fall and deficits widen; we
do not expect significant discretionary easing measures. In Japan,
however, the long-standing problems within that economy and the
agenda of the Koizumi government to implement fiscal reform are
expected to result in moderate fiscal contraction during next year. Most
emerging market economies have little scope to increase expenditures
or cut taxes. One important exception is China, where continued
government spending is expected to support growth during the second
half of this year and next year. Other East Asian developing countries
announced some fiscal stimulus measures earlier this year.
The downside risks to this forecast are distressingly clear. The hit
to confidence from the terrorist attacks, coming at a time when output
abroad was already decelerating, could set off a mutually reinforcing
cycle of production and employment cuts, downward earnings
revisions, lower asset prices, and additional drops in confidence. Our
expectation of a rebound next year is based primarily on the projected
turnaround in the United States, recognition that monetary stimulus has
been implemented in the major countries, and our judgment that
inventory adjustments abroad should be nearing completion by then.
There is no evidence as yet on which to base resolution of the timing
and pace of recovery.
That said, we may be too close to the events of September 11 to
judge how countries more distant from those events will respond. We
were aggressive in our reaction to the economic data and world news
since the August Greenbook. It is possible that the effects of the attacks
on growth abroad will be even more muted in comparison to that in the
United States than we have projected. The possibility of such an
outcome constitutes upside risk to our forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.

10/2/01

22

MR. MOSKOW. I wanted to ask you, David, about the psychology question,

to use your term. One of the keys to the forecast obviously is consumer sentiment and
consumer spending. I realize it’s very hard to judge, but I would have thought that
consumer sentiment now would be as bad if not worse than in the 1990-91 period
following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Then we had a fear of terrorism on our soil; now
obviously it’s a reality. Of course, you’ve dealt with a collapse in consumer and business
sentiment in one of the alternative Greenbook scenarios, but I wondered why you didn’t
use that as the baseline. Do you have any other comments on how to compare these two
periods in terms of consumer sentiment?
MR. STOCKTON. I hope I made clear that I didn’t think the probabilities of
our assumptions were significantly higher than the probabilities of a lot of others that
could be made. Obviously, we thought long and hard about exactly how much of a
sentiment effect to build in. I think the reason we ended up going with something less
than what occurred after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait was that that shock was also
accompanied by a very distinct economic shock through much, much higher oil prices.
And if one thinks back to that time, there were certainly enormous fears about how long
and deep a military commitment we might be making in the Middle East. It’s easy in
retrospect to look back and recall that the military action went very well and was over so
quickly. It’s a little hard to put oneself back in the perspective at the time, when the
initial thinking was that a lot of ground troops might be needed and that it might involve
a very bloody and protracted military effort before the United States could disengage. So
we decided not to put in as much sentiment effect at this point and to react to the
evidence as it flows in, making adjustments up or down to what we have built into the

10/2/01

23

forecast. Obviously another characteristic that is different between this event and the
Iraqi invasion episode is that there was a very distinct end to the latter. And we had a
very sharp recovery in sentiment once it became quite clear in February that the military
engagement was going to be a relatively short and victorious effort. We have the shock
fading out more slowly this time. Even though it’s not as deep, it fades out more slowly
than what occurred after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The pattern we have in our
forecast is more typical of large negative shocks to sentiment. These shocks rarely have,
as the Kuwait period did, such a clear ending and such a sharp recovery. So, as I said
yesterday at the Board meeting, the forecast involves a very thin veneer of science
applied to a whole lot of judgment. All I can say is that you as policymakers and we as
forecasters are just going to have to roll with the information as it comes in and make
appropriate adjustments from there.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Karen, I want to ask you to say a little more about Japan. You
mentioned that after the Committee’s action on September 17th eight central banks eased
policy. Well, that list wouldn’t include Japan because in their case there was nothing to
announce in terms of a rate cut. For at least some six months now they have been talking
about quantitative easing and whether they have made that real or not certainly is
questionable. Then you mentioned that fiscal policy in Japan could be contractionary. I
might conclude that a contractionary Japanese fiscal policy would be stimulative because
they’ve had 10 years of pushing on the fiscal strings with no effect, unless one thinks the
economy would have been worse without that. One can look at the results of what has

10/2/01

24

been done over the last decade on the fiscal side and say that the Japanese people are all
Ricardian. The more the government borrows and spends, the more its people don’t
spend; they save, and the government’s effort comes to nothing. But as Dino mentioned,
last week the government did more than double the amount of current account balances
from 6 trillion to 12 trillion yen. So I would think the important question for Japan is:
Are they going to unwind it or are they going to continue on what seems to be
quantitatively a very stimulative monetary policy?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, to be honest I did include them in the eight because
they cut what they call the overnight discount rate, which is a kind of Lombard rate.
Technically it’s an official lending rate of the Bank of Japan and they reduced it, so I said
okay, they are one of my eight. And I think they intended, both from the timing of the
announcement and the way they expressed it, to indicate that they were going to do what
they could along with their brother central banks to weather the storm of this particular
financial crisis. They wanted to be supportive, in the sense of aiding short-term liquidity
and market functioning and so forth in the immediate aftermath of the attacks.
I think this period is somewhat of a crossroads for them. I interpret the
intervention that they did and their decision to let the reserves stay in the system as an
opening. Perhaps they are thinking of deliberately using transactions in the exchange
markets--a concept they had resisted for some time--as opposed to operations in the
domestic money markets as a way of getting more liquidity out there. The combination
of circumstances created an appropriate meeting of the minds between the Ministry of
Finance and the Bank of Japan with regard to undertaking these transactions. They
responded in the way we’ve all urged them to respond. I took that to be a fairly positive

10/2/01

25

sign. It remains to be seen what they will do going forward, because at least today, for
example, the yen has softened and has not moved up from its low. It’s possible that a lot
of the pressure on the yen has had to do with the end of their fiscal half-year on
September 30th. When that is taken out of the picture, I think it remains a completely
open question as to whether the Bank of Japan will revert to its previous practice and say,
“Well, that approach was fine then but it’s not appropriate right now.” I am very
pessimistic that this is a truly long-lasting change in their approach, but I think what they
did in the weeks since September 11th was in the right direction and they could surprise
us. They could be more aggressive than they’ve given signs of so far.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. I had a question about Japan as well. When I look at the tables
in Part I of the Greenbook it seems stunning--I don’t know if that’s the right word--to see
with the addition of the forecast for 2003 what will be five years of deflation for Japan
and a pickup in economic growth that is quite modest. And, of course, we’ve seen those
projected pickups disappear in the past. This certainly says something, I think, about the
effectiveness of their policy, not just in 2001 but over the next two-plus years. It surely
has some major economic implications but possibly political implications as well. I
wonder if you’d comment on that.
MS. JOHNSON. Prior to September 11th, I think the people in the
International Division who closely watch Japan were trying to talk themselves into being
slightly more optimistic about Japan than we had been for a while, and we’ve been rather
pessimistic all along. We were trying to see some energy in the Koizumi reform,
although what the government has done since the upper house election in July

10/2/01

26

disappointed us because instead of running with the reform and building on it they
seemed to be backing off and hemming and hawing. But there were some shreds of signs
of things possibly not getting worse at least. It’s hard to say whether September 11th will
really change that for them. There are no direct implications for Japan except for the loss
in export potential from the rest of the world and certainly from the United States. I think
they’re so bound up in their own problems that I don’t have a sense--or they weren’t able
to tell us is a better way to put it--of whether the Tankan survey was heavily influenced
by the attacks or not. A significant portion of the survey responses were received by the
agency after September 11th, but they made no effort and really had no way to tell how
many had been filled out after September 11th. I think we are at risk of that economy
remaining moribund--sitting there more or less doing nothing for quite some time--and
largely for political reasons. Now, whether that would spark a real political overturn in
Japan I am certainly not the person to say. Obviously, in most other countries it would
have happened long ago. So it just defies my ability to judge. Personally, I had thought
Koizumi might make a difference but I think circumstances are conspiring against that at
the present time.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Dave, I was intrigued by the changes in your estimates of
structural productivity--1.9 percent in 2001, slowing to 1.5 percent in 2002, and picking
up to 1.8 percent in 2003. I know there are close relationships between productivity,
capital deepening, and business fixed investment and so forth. We’ve been looking
backward, but suppose we look forward and make the assumption that the impetus to be

10/2/01

27

more and more productive and more focused on the cost side is still very much present in
U.S. industries. If we assume that this is not as much a function of capital deepening but
increasingly a function of industrial reorganization or a sheer desire to do things better
and cheaper all the time, what would a slightly higher and more stable level of
productivity growth do to your projections? I know you have that feedback effect into
demand. I’m interested in how that might look in the 2002-2003 time frame.
MR. STOCKTON. Basically, if we were to increase the multifactor
productivity portion, which is the portion that would provide all the impetus that you
were talking about, we would get stronger growth in activity brought about probably by a
stronger stock market than we have in the baseline forecast. That stronger growth would
probably be accompanied by very little additional inflation. In essence we’d see an
unwinding or a backing off of exactly the kinds of revisions that we think have occurred
over the past year, as productivity came in weaker than we and others had anticipated, the
stock market weakened, and demand softened significantly. As I think you’ve noted on a
number of occasions, one sometimes needs to look through the snapshots of structural
productivity that we have in this forecast. Indeed, even with this 1 percent growth in
multifactor productivity, we would expect, moving beyond this period of cyclical
weakness in investment spending, to see some reacceleration of underlying productivity.
But that occurs beyond the horizon that we currently are forecasting. Of course, we’ve
made big mistakes in both directions in recent years, so it certainly could be the case that
things will turn out even better in the near term. Businesses may be moving more
aggressively on the cost-cutting side and may in essence get us back closer to the
production possibilities frontier than we have assumed here. And that would produce a

10/2/01

28

stronger economy. But because of less cost pressures, it probably would be accompanied
by less upward pressure on inflation as well.
MS. MINEHAN. And slightly lower unemployment?
MR. STOCKTON. Yes, working it the way that we have told the story and the
way the model sees it, we would get stronger near-term demand effects than supply
effects and that would produce somewhat lower unemployment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, who would like to
start the Committee discussion? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The tragic events of September
11th have had a profound impact on the Seventh District’s people, businesses, and
economy. The response in terms of the giving of time, money, and blood has been
inspiring.
As for our District economy, overall activity was sluggish before the terrorist
attacks. Our weak manufacturing sector appeared to be nearing the bottom of its
adjustment but contacts indicated that consumer spending had softened. The District
economy has clearly deteriorated since the attacks. We’ve seen some improvement from
the near standstill conditions experienced around September 11th, but overall activity is
still significantly lower than it was in August and early September. The impact on travel
and tourism has been particularly dramatic. Downturns are evident not only in airline
travel but across a large number of related industries such as hotels, restaurants, car rental
agencies, taxi cabs, and airport concessions. Contacts at Boeing told me that many
airlines now expect double-digit declines in passenger traffic during the calendar year
compared with a 2 percent decline in 1991 following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. As a

10/2/01

29

result, Boeing expects aircraft production cuts to be roughly four times as large as the
cuts in the early 1990s.
Tighter security procedures are evident everywhere, not just at airports. They
are affecting business activity and likely will continue to do so for some time. For
example, we heard of 12- to 18-hour delays at the U.S./Canadian entry points, which
effectively reduced cross border trucking capacity by a third in the week following the
attacks. If such delays continue, obviously they would have a significant impact on many
of our businesses, particularly the automobile industry. But as of late last week, waiting
times were reported to be very close to normal. That was one of the few good pieces of
news I’ve heard recently.
Consumer spending has definitely slowed. The sharp 50 to 70 percent sales
declines retailers experienced on the 11th have narrowed significantly on average. But
some retailers continue to report double-digit declines. Controlling inventories is a major
concern and order cancellations are occurring more frequently, especially for apparel.
Expectations for the upcoming holiday sales season have been lowered even further and
are described as poor.
Sales of autos and light trucks have also slowed considerably and the weakness
in car rentals is adversely affecting fleet sales. Automakers have responded by offering
interest-free financing. Reports indicate that traffic in auto showrooms has been
improving only slowly since September 11th and that automakers will need to cut
production schedules substantially. One contact indicated a need to eliminate three to
four weeks of production.

10/2/01

30

More generally, reports from our directors and other contacts from a broad

range of industries have been decidedly gloomy. Many cite anxiety and wait-and-see
attitudes as restraining factors. Most are planning for the worst and hoping for the better.
As a result, firms are becoming even more cautious about capital spending, and many
have taken or are seriously considering taking additional steps to reduce costs and trim
their workforces.
Turning to the national outlook, at our August meeting it seemed possible that
the economy could avoid a recession. Consumer spending seemed to be holding up
relatively well in the face of the investment-led slowdown. But a major concern was that
a further drop in consumer confidence would set off a second wave of economic slowing.
In view of the layoff announcements and the stock market declines following the terrorist
attacks, it seems certain now that consumer spending will decelerate further. Increasing
unemployment will likely diminish confidence further. Reductions in household wealth
will also be a restraining factor.
The outlook for business investment continues to be poor. Reductions in
business confidence and declining corporate profits will be a drag on new capital
investment decisions. This may lead businesses to believe they have an even larger
capital overhang than they had previously perceived. The rest of the world will not be a
stimulus for U.S. growth at this point, as we’ve discussed. Instead, our domestic slowing
will continue to be a drag on the global economy. One positive note is the lack of
inflationary pressures in today’s economy.
Following the events of September 11th, the environment for formulating
monetary policy is much more complex. There is a series of new unknowns on which we

10/2/01

31

must make judgments, including the impact on consumer confidence and spending,
adverse disruptions to the physical and financial operations of businesses, prospective
fiscal stimulus, and the reaction of the financial markets. In addition, military action by
the United States and any further terrorist attacks will undoubtedly have significant
impacts on the economy. It will take several months just to begin assessing these
challenges. In the meantime, I believe there continues to be a substantial downside risk
that the current economic slowdown will unravel further.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the Twelfth District was
weak even before the terrorist attacks. Employment contracted in July and then was
nearly flat in August. On net it fell about 1 percent at an annual rate in the two months.
The main source of weakness was the high-tech sector. High-tech equipment
manufacturers have been shedding jobs all year and the pace of decline accelerated
substantially in July and August, with cuts at double-digit rates reported in California,
Arizona, and Oregon. High-tech service providers also have been cutting jobs, including
the loss of over 5 percent of employment in that sector in the State of Washington during
July and August alone.
The slowdown was also evident in other sectors such as construction. Vacancy
rates for office space have risen substantially in most metro areas, and home sales and
price appreciation have come down as well. The slowdown in construction activity so far
this year is most evident in the San Francisco Bay area, where the number of permits for
new homes is running 13 percent below last year’s numbers. Consumer spending and
confidence in the District, which had been holding up well in the spring and early

10/2/01

32

summer, showed signs of weakening in early September. Of course, these weaknesses
have been exacerbated in the aftermath of the attacks.
The immediate economic effects of the attacks included substantial reductions
in consumer spending and some disruptions in business activity. Since then retail sales
among large discount stores have recovered, though sales at department stores have
remained depressed. As a result, for some apparel manufacturers clothing orders for
spring reportedly are running well below pre-attack expectations. By contrast,
construction activity in recent weeks has not been affected to any appreciable degree.
However, the postponement or cancellation of some projects means that the pipeline is
not filling up as fast as before.
The largest negative effects of the attacks have been on air travel and tourism,
as was indicated by President Moskow. Due to the resulting bleak outlook, Boeing--and I
think our numbers about Boeing are similar to those presented by President Moskow-immediately cut its estimated deliveries of commercial aircraft next year by 20 percent,
with substantial additional cuts expected in 2003. In Seattle as many as 20,000 jobs
could be lost at Boeing by the end of next year. District contacts have reported that
airline bookings have been running 50 percent or more below normal. And in cities like
San Francisco, where 85 percent of the hotel demand is derived from arrivals by air, hotel
occupancies are very low. As a result, substantial layoffs are under way or planned by
airports, airlines, and firms in other segments of the travel industry. Although this has
been felt nationwide, the impact will be especially hard on some Twelfth District states
that have unusually large tourism and travel sectors, notably Nevada and Hawaii, whose
tourism sectors had already begun to struggle prior to the attacks.

10/2/01

33

Let me turn to the national picture. I certainly won’t take exception to the

widely held view that the terrorist attacks probably ended any chance of avoiding
recession. In this regard, a member of our staff has taken a careful look at the monthly
indicators and methods used by the NBER to date recessions. He concludes that if, as
seems likely, activity falls enough in coming months for the NBER to declare a recession,
the business cycle peak could well be backdated to the first half of this year and perhaps
as early as March. This date would represent a compromise among the unusually diverse
peaks in the various data series that the NBER relies upon.
In any event, our forecast for the second half of this year is similar to that of
the Greenbook. It shows a small decline in real GDP in the third quarter and a drop of
1/2 to 1 percent in the fourth quarter. Assuming a funds rate of 2-1/2 percent, the most
likely scenario for next year seems to be a gradual pickup in growth, especially in
response to the easing of monetary policy as well as recent and expected fiscal actions.
However, while growth should be more acceptable, it will likely remain well below the
potential rate for some time. The exceptionally large risks surrounding the outlook are
skewed to the weak side, especially in view of the potential hit to confidence that would
go along with likely military action and possible additional terrorism. Another risk is the
deepening stagnation of economies around the globe.
We have revised down our inflation forecast by about 1/2 percent since the
August meeting, obviously in response to the greater expected slack in labor and product
markets and a lower path for oil prices, but also due to negative speed effects. Our best
estimate is for inflation of about 1-1/2 percent in the core PCE price index in 2002.
Given the economic outlook as well as its downside risks, there is a strong argument for

10/2/01

34

implementing the additional cut in the funds rate that underlies our forecast and that in
the Greenbook. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. One of the minor casualties of September 11th was our
educated and informed views and knowledge regarding the state of the economy. That
knowledge, such as it was, is now obsolete and there’s very little with which to replace it.
I agree that our economy will probably be okay in the long run once we get past this
unsettlement. And I’m fairly confident that the consequences in the very short term will
be seriously negative. The economy was already teetering on the brink of recession and
this event has surely pushed it over that brink. What I don’t know is how deep and how
long the recession will be--that is, the outlook for the medium term. No one can know
that now because it hasn’t been determined yet. The length and depth of the recession
will depend more on how everyone reacts to what happened on September 11th than on
the event itself. It’s hard to imagine that the great uncertainty on all fronts won’t cause
consumers and businesses alike to withdraw from new commitments and to hunker down.
We deal here in spending and income as measured by GDP and its
components, but we should not forget that we are now poorer in ways beyond any
estimates of GDP measures. We will be poorer at each level of GDP than we were before
September 11th. To buy a level of security at or even below what we were already used
to or thought we had will require more of our scarce resources to be devoted to security.
More policemen, firemen, airport security, border security, and air marshals will be
needed. They will generate measured income or GDP, but their opportunity costs will be
large.

10/2/01

35

We will also be poorer as a result of longer lines and longer waits at airports,

sporting events, concerts, and simply getting in and out of public buildings. We will miss
out on a lot of good immigrants who won’t get into our country as we try to screen out
the undesirable ones. We will probably have to reintroduce some redundancies and
inefficiencies that had been wrung out of the economy. As Ed Yardeni put it, “just-in­
time inventories may become just-in-case inventories.” Backup and relocation sites that
will sit idle most of the time will become more important, even essential. Much of this
will contribute to GDP but will represent a downgrading of living standards. Poorer will
be the workers who will have to postpone retirement because their 401ks have tanked and
the potential students who will have to enter the labor force rather than college. I don’t
know how to add all these factors, along with the decline in the stock market, into an
estimate of the size of the negative wealth effect. But I believe they will be important
factors.
As to the specific impact on the Eleventh District, I don’t know much beyond
the obvious. Most sectors and regions have weakened. American, Continental, and
Southwest Airlines are headquartered in Texas, so we will feel the decline in air travel
and related industries more than most areas. Our exports, especially to Mexico and Asia,
are off. The decline in energy prices will remove a local positive, thank goodness.
Natural gas is back down to $2.50 per million BTUs, half of last year’s price. We
probably do have some firms that will benefit from beefed up defense spending, but we
should not forget that that will represent a diversion of spending and not necessarily new
spending. I’m told that Texas has about 500 manufacturing firms involved in the
manufacture of instruments relating to research, detection, navigation, guidance,

10/2/01

36

aeronautical and nautical systems, as well as measuring and controlling systems. We also
have a significant regional presence of high-tech defense companies, such as Northrop
Grumman, Raytheon, Lockheed Martin, and Bell Textron. The stock prices of the first
three have risen since the market reopened. Bell Textron’s has not. It is still suffering
from setbacks to the Osprey--the airplane that is supposed to land and take off like a
helicopter and not require airports or flat terrain. If they could just get that plane to work,
I know some places with bad terrain where they might be able to use it!
As for the national economy and the policy question, I had been thinking that
this year’s reduction in the funds rate from 6-1/2 to 3 percent plus all the extra liquidity
that has been provided would probably be enough. But the psychology of the financial
markets and their fragility might require a tad more easing. I’m somewhat surprised,
however, by the near unanimity in the markets that we will reduce the funds rate by
another 50 basis points today. The markets seem insatiable as well as fragile! I tend to
think something less would be sufficient, but it is an awkward time to disappoint the
markets in an effort to reclaim the Committee’s authority over monetary policy. A fed
funds rate of 3 percent was the low point of the nominal rate during the ’90-’91 recession.
But as the staff points out, the lower inflation rate today makes the current fed funds rate
about a percentage point higher in real terms. Aside from the potential consequences of
disappointing the market, I believe the amount of weight that we give to that distinction
between the nominal and the real rate is probably the key to today’s policy decision.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me talk first about conditions as
described to me by my various contacts. Because of the obvious importance of consumer

10/2/01

37

confidence, I’ve had four conversations with my contact at Wal-Mart since September
11th --on the 14th, 17th, 19th, and again yesterday. His overall assessment is that sales are
holding up pretty well. On the Tuesday of the terrorist attacks, of course, sales at WalMart were down sharply, but for the week as a whole they were just slightly below plan.
As I talked with my source several more times, that was the basic message--that sales
were fairly close to what had been anticipated before the day of the attacks. Some
changes in buying patterns have emerged that he doesn’t know completely how to
explain. Wal-Mart tracks the number of sales tickets and the average amount spent per
sales ticket on a same-store basis to analyze data at comparable stores. He is seeing more
of a split between the volume of traffic and that of tickets than usual; that is, there’s a
greater increase in the number of tickets and less growth in the amount spent per ticket.
But as of yesterday, the total amount spent was coming in just slightly below what WalMart had anticipated before September 11th.
My contact also said that the company has done a little research with some
focus groups regarding Christmas spending plans. Of the consumer groups they’ve
talked with, the percentage of respondents who say they’re going to spend less for
Christmas is about the same as the typical response in their focus groups at this time of
year. The percentage saying that they will be spending more, however, is down
significantly. The proportion planning to spend about the same is therefore up
significantly. He said--and I pressed him somewhat on this--that he felt it was much too
early to make any judgment about the longer-run outlook. People are still very much in
shock in terms of adjusting to the event. In his view, drawing any conclusions is almost
certainly premature at this point.

10/2/01

38

My contacts in the air cargo business, at both UPS and FedEx, say that their

companies are maintaining their normal schedules. They have not cut back at all as yet.
Volume is running somewhat below where it had been, but not dramatically so overall.
However, the express business has been hard hit. The ground business and what they call
the freight business--which is less than truckload quantities--is running about flat over
last year.
emphasized that the outlook for domestic passenger airlines
is truly dire. He said that as a consequence of the very stiff labor contracts that were
settled in stages over last year and this year before September, labor costs have increased
very significantly.

would be the first of the airlines to fail. From

looking at the financial reports, that airline already has negative net worth for the
shareholders on its books. And, of course, they’re all in junk bond status.
At current
traffic levels all of them are literally within a few weeks of running out of cash and
having to close down. So, the situation is very dire for the passenger airlines. And, of
course, we heard this morning that Swiss Air has declared bankruptcy.
I also made a new contact with a person at a trucking firm called J.B. Hunt,
which is headquartered in Arkansas and is one of the largest trucking companies in the
United States. Hunt’s business is very much at normal levels, with volume generally
what they had expected. But the company is greatly concerned about the future,
particularly the early part of next year. For the most part, buying plans for the fall are
already completed, so the inventories are moving to the stores. But there’s a very large
amount of uncertainty about what will happen early next year.

10/2/01

39

Let me divide my comments on the total economy into two parts. First, I think

it’s fair to say that very little is known at the professional level about the sentiment
question. I think back to my readings of the journal literature over a long period of
studying macroeconomics and I don’t remember ever seeing articles about consumer
sentiment except in conjunction with the sentiment surveys. There’s practically no
analysis of sentiment at a professional level. I think we can say, though, that we have
some basis for understanding the economic aspects of the current situation. It seems to
me important to focus on the fact that some major fundamental strengths were in place at
the time of the attacks. We had an environment of low inflation and very low expected
inflation. Oil prices had been moving lower and, of course, have come down further
since the attacks and that is an element of strength. We go into this situation with strong
bank capital, unlike the situation in 1990-91 when bank capital was weak. Banks can
make loans. And, of course, low short-term rates increase the margin for banks to
compensate for the greater risk in this environment. We have a federal budget surplus,
which means that the budget is not as big an issue as it might have been a dozen years
ago in terms of the nature of a federal response. We had a very large amount of monetary
stimulus already in place as of September 11th. Our economy operates with very flexible
markets. We have a resilient people. We have a very strong set of fundamentals. The
issue, I think, is how long it’s going to take for businesses and consumers to get over it,
so to speak, and to adjust to this circumstance. And we have very, very little by way of
knowing the answer to that.
From looking at the effects on the stock market of past shock events--and I
went back and examined as many as I could think of--the longest period of recovery from

10/2/01

40

a shock was after the stock market crash in 1987. It took quite a while for the market to
get back to where it had been. After the invasion of Kuwait, the market was depressed
until Desert Storm and that event tended to resolve that issue. In the current situation, we
are likely to see more shocks to come. Almost certainly there are going to be some
terrorist events abroad. Let’s pray that no more come to our own land. But more shocks
lie ahead that will possibly upset confidence.
I’m going to delay talking about our policy situation, but I think the issue there
is that we need to focus much, much more than we usually do on the confidence issue.
We need to focus on what we can do to help support confidence and stability rather than
just on the setting of the federal funds rate itself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with a quick rundown
of what’s going on in the District economy. Much of this was in the written report we
submitted earlier, although I do have some updates. Production was largely unaffected
by the events of September 11th, and that is still the case today. On the other hand,
consumer spending in the first few days following the attacks was essentially stopped in
its tracks. But reports from large retailers in the District suggest that sales bounced back
quite quickly. Now, I’m not talking about big-ticket items. This is exclusive of autos
and homes and so forth. But activity at malls--at discount stores and even department
stores--came back rather quickly to normal levels. I guess it’s also fair to say that
restaurants in the District have been surprisingly busy, at least in the last couple of weeks.
Housing activity, which had been sound, remains sound. But as I reported at the last
meeting, sales at the high end of the market certainly seemed to be slowing, and that

10/2/01

41

continues to be the case. My sense is that there is growing caution in that area and I
would be surprised if next year’s housing activity in the District came anywhere close to
the pace of the last two or three years.
For the most part, nonresidential construction activity has continued unabated.
There was, of course, a major expansion of the airport under way and that project has
slowed if not been put on hold. I don’t think that situation will go on for too long unless
people are prepared just to let the project rust as it sits there. There have been a lot of
cancellations of prospective conventions. September and October are very big
convention months in Minneapolis, so that matters a good deal. The hotels are running
with low occupancy rates and other travel-related businesses are similarly affected. The
airports that I’ve been in at least have been very quiet, although Northwest Airlines has
reported some improvement in future bookings. I’m not sure exactly what to make of
that, but the airline people seem somewhat surprised about what’s coming down the pike.
Obviously, the business community is of the opinion in general that aggressive
action both on the fiscal side and on the monetary policy side is appropriate here. I don’t
have to go very far out the door to hear somebody in the business community offer that
opinion. One other development is that in the wake of all this, we lost one medium-sized
brokerage firm that was involved in an ill-advised securities lending transaction.
As far as the national economy is concerned, in thinking about the outlook and
in listening to the staff discussion, the key word here is obviously uncertainty. I happen
to think that the near-term outlook is for more weakness than projected in the Greenbook,
but I wouldn’t put too much stock in any forecast. As many people have already said,
we’re in an environment that we really don’t know a lot about. Normally, when

10/2/01

42

uncertainty goes up, that implies to me the need for policy caution so as to avoid
significant errors. But in the current situation we can be fairly certain--or at least I am of
the opinion--that the downside risks have magnified and that the inflation risks have
diminished. In any event though, I’m not sure that economic policy is going to be key to
the relatively near-term future. I think what we need is tranquility at home and success
abroad.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Tenth District, like that for
the nation, remains sluggish. Some people might say it was mixed at best prior to the
events of September 11th. Of course since then, as we’ve heard around this table, the
anxiety and uncertainty that was already in the economy took an even greater hit and
caused the outlook to worsen noticeably, as reflected in the Greenbook as well as in our
staff and the Blue Chip forecasts.
Let me give you some data on the District. These developments are consistent
with the national news because many of the reports are from firms operating nationally.
First of all, the manufacturing survey we conducted in July was quite negative. Our
dispersion index was minus 28. When we took a look at the August survey, we became
somewhat hopeful because that negative had become much smaller, moving to minus 7.
But in September--and part of the survey was clearly done after September 11th --that
index went back to minus 16. So we saw a big switch in sentiment in terms of the
prospects looking forward.
On the transportation side, I would make a couple of points. As for the
airlines, our experience is the same as others have talked about. Boeing, which has

10/2/01

43

operations in Wichita, has announced significant layoffs. But as a side comment, Cessna,
which also operates there, has a backlog on orders for corporate aircraft. And that
backlog is growing, apparently reflecting increased demand for fractional ownership as
the desire to find alternative air transportation is starting to take hold.
Let me talk for just a minute about the trucking industry. Bill Poole mentioned
a firm in that sector. In Kansas City we also have a large nationally operating trucking
company that does a lot of shipping for manufacturing firms. We recently had a
conversation with their people, and they said the firm’s business is down markedly. It
was down noticeably prior to September 11th and since then it has only gotten worse, as
their customers have pulled back. Their comment to me was that they are now operating
at 1985 levels of business. So, they have had very significant reductions in volume and
have just announced sizable layoffs. They have about 10,000 drivers and have laid off a
significant number of them as well as staff in their corporate operations.
Looking at the railroad industry, we have a major railroad operating northsouth from Kansas City and then into Mexico. Their volumes in and out of Mexico have
dropped noticeably and their order books have dropped as well. Previous to September
11th they had initiated layoffs, and there are no signs of rehiring at this point.
As for the retail sector, like others we’ve talked to many retailers. They have
reported a fairly persistent return to the pre-September 11th pattern in terms of sales. But
the experience is very mixed as they look to the Christmas season. Some are saying
they’ve pulled back dramatically. One, as was reported in the national press, followed
through completely in their Christmas orders as their sales were up 25 percent. So we’ve
heard very mixed reports on the retail side.

10/2/01

44

Energy, which for us is a two-edged sword, is also a mix. Because prices are

down that’s good in the general sense. But it also means that we’ve seen a real drop-off
in activity in our region; it’s down about 10 percent by our estimate.
Generally, activity in our region is slower. The change in psychology is
noticeable, in terms of the effects.
Looking to the national situation and policy, I would say that we also see the
economy recovering eventually. But given the psychology and the uncertainty,
forecasting the timeline for the recovery is exceedingly difficult. I wouldn’t pretend to
have a better forecast than anyone else in this room; mine would be no better than Dave
Stockton’s, for sure.
Another factor mentioned here that I think is an important consideration is
fiscal policy. We don’t know how that’s going to evolve. Trying to pull all this together,
I would be supportive of an easing--pick the amount. I think an easing step would
recognize that at least for the next several months the downside risks are probably going
to weigh very heavily on our economy. Our experience in other instances, as people have
pointed out, is that we tend to underestimate the downside. In my view that is a real
possibility in this case as well. So I would be more inclined to err on the side of easing.
We can reverse the easing should fiscal policy be overly stimulative or should the
economy turn up, and I believe the market would understand that. I think we are in a
good position in that regard. So overall a case for easing policy can be well supported, if
that should be deemed necessary here. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.

10/2/01

45

MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. All of the available data on New

England suggest that the regional economy slowed, possibly at an increasing rate, in the
period since our last Open Market Committee meeting. Employment declined between
July and August; each of the states in our District registered a higher unemployment rate.
The value of manufactured exports declined, especially computers and electronics, and
consumer and business confidence fell substantially. But these data almost entirely
predate the tragic events of September 11th.
What feel we have for developments in the region since that time therefore
relies more on anecdotal sources than science. I certainly understand Dave Stockton’s
comment about the desire to speak less when there is little science on one’s side, but I
feel compelled to explore the anecdotal reports that we have heard. At our Bank we had
the benefit of hearing from those who attended two regularly scheduled advisory
committee meetings--our small business and our academic advisory councils--and two
regularly scheduled bankers’ forums, all of which took place after September 11th. In
addition, both before and after the tragedy, I spoke personally to several of the Bank’s
directors outside of regular meetings and to the CEOs of several large manufacturing and
financial services companies. And, of course, we had the additional post-September 11th
calls to Beige Book contacts. Several themes emerged from these interactions.
First, economic activity across a wide sample of firms and industries was
slowing even in advance of September 11th, though not all the news was bad. The strong
dollar and slowing demand had contributed to problems at many regional manufacturers,
including one large worldwide manufacturer of consumer products. The U.S. forest
product industry was reported by one contact to be on the verge of collapse, despite the

10/2/01

46

strong housing market, largely because of increased foreign competition related to the
strong dollar and excess capacity put in place in the early to mid-1990s. The head of a
regional software industry council reported on the demise of hundreds of firms in the
wake of the drying up of demand, especially for Internet-related software. But she also
reported that new start-ups were being formed as well, in fields such as wireless
communication and teleconferencing. Similarly, regional businesses in the field of
security saw the potential for some benefit in the near term, and a few had already seen a
pickup in demand. Many contacts reported a very welcome softening in labor markets
and the ability to attract technical staff easily for the first time in recent years. Housing
markets reportedly had slowed, particularly at the high end, but the slowing reflected
reductions from very high levels of activity earlier.
Second, the impact of the tragedy of September 11th was significant both
culturally and economically but at least some aspects of the economic jolt will be short
lived. A highly rated large manufacturer of airplane engines and consumer and industrial
building products commented that access to commercial paper markets had been difficult
during the week of the tragedy but that markets had more or less returned to normal, at
least for very short maturity paper. Small manufacturers and suppliers of retail goods had
experienced an immediate drop-off in demand. And bankers noted that traffic in
branches came to a halt in the days following the tragedy. By the following weekend,
however, shoppers had returned to malls. One specialty food and flower vendor, whose
business had been disrupted by a lack of airplane shipments of imported goods, reported
that sales for Rosh Hashanah broke all previous records. Families crowded his stores,

10/2/01

47

apparently in a desire both to be together and to enjoy the simple process of getting ready
for the holiday.
There were, of course, important exceptions to this impression of short-term
disruption. The airline engine manufacturer I mentioned noted that each engine is sold
three times--once as a new product and twice in the form of parts in the after-market.
With airline traffic down and likely to stay depressed, this executive thought that new
orders would be curtailed sharply and that the number of parked aircraft would swell to
perhaps twice the current number, which was already at the level of the last recession.
He also expressed some concerns about the amount of supplier credit his firm had
extended to airlines.
Another hard hit area is likely to be the New England tourism industry. The
economic slowdown had already eaten into the “leaf peeping” season, but the dramatic
decline in airline traffic, particularly from foreign countries, had brought the flow of large
buses of tourists to a halt. Reportedly there has been an increase in Eastern seaboard
tourists looking to relax a car drive away rather than an airplane flight away. But tourism
in the region and particularly in Boston remains low. The fall tourist inflow is a mainstay
to the region and its demise may involve more than short-run disruption.
Finally, all contacts saw prospects for the immediate future as more than
unusually uncertain. Members of the academic advisory group noted the difficulty of
finding a historical comparison on which to base forecasts and they debated both the
possible size and impact of fiscal stimulus. Some felt that the potential for spending on
homeland defense and on new military weapons, such as destroyers and planes, could be
considerable. A few also saw the potential for an inflationary impact from a supply

10/2/01

48

shock related to moving substantial resources to fighting terrorism, if demand for more
usual consumer products did not abate considerably. Most, however, did not see inflation
as a current worry and focused more on the likelihood of negative rates of economic
growth for two to three quarters.
In sum, shock, increased uncertainty, and turmoil, however short-lived, have
been piled onto a regional economy that had been holding on to growth by its fingernails.
It’s not a pretty picture.
Turning to the national scene, the picture doesn’t get much better. Whether
one looks at the Greenbook or the forecasts of DRI, the Blue Chip, or our Bank, the
outlook is the same--two or three quarters of mildly negative growth, a rebound over
2002 to rates of growth at about potential in 2003, and sharply rising unemployment.
Even without the tragic events of September 11th, the prospects for this year and next
would have been less positive today than they appeared in August. This was clear from
the summer’s industrial production data and employment and confidence indicators.
But sadly, the events of September 11th happened and the slowing economy
received a serious negative shock. The obvious questions are how serious and how
negative, but the answers are more than normally uncertain. We have very little data as
yet to go on and not much in the way of history to guide us. The Greenbook expects the
dip into negative territory to be relatively short and mild in nature, with consumption
never actually turning negative. That’s fairly unusual if in fact this is to be the first
recession of the new millennium. I’m forced to wonder whether we are not engaged in a
form of wishful thinking--the same process that has pushed the recovery out further in
time in our forecast at every successive meeting this year. Corporate profits,

10/2/01

49

employment, asset markets, consumer spending, business investment, and confidence all
present elements of increasing downside risk. Moreover, the confluence of weakness
both here and abroad, while not unprecedented, is not comforting either. Thus, there are
real risks that the baseline forecast has more than the normal amount of downside
potential.
Offsetting this, of course, is the likelihood of additional fiscal stimulus. Again,
questions abound. How much stimulus will be enacted, when will it affect the economy,
and how will it be seen by financial markets? The Greenbook provides a reasoned
estimate of the amount of such stimulus. But even the amount included in that forecast
seems small relative to the rhetoric coming out of Washington. In that regard, I wish I
understood better what the shape of the yield curve might be telling us about the risks
over the medium term.
The other potential offset is the degree of monetary ease. We’ve reduced the
federal funds target by 350 basis points since January. That’s a much faster pace than in
the early 1990s when it took a couple of years to implement about that same amount of
change. Moreover, 75 basis points of that easing was done over the last few weeks and
arguably has not worked its way into the economy. But with the decline in the stock
market and the widening of risk spreads, financial conditions are not as accommodative
as our degree of policy easing might imply. Earlier this year the consumer was the
mainstay of the economy, bolstered by lower interest rates, and it was reasonable to be
concerned about overdoing such low rates over the near term. Now, both consumption
and investment face the headwinds of further diminished confidence, growing

10/2/01

50

uncertainty, and falling demand. Fiscal stimulus, if properly fashioned and temporary,
can help. But at least in the near term, monetary policy should do more as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Atlanta District’s economy
continued to weaken during the third quarter even prior to September 11th. And like
elsewhere, activity has weakened further in most sectors since that time. Auto sales are
off and commercial real estate markets continue to soften. The most noticeable effects of
the attacks are being felt in Florida, which had been our region’s growth leader. As
widely reported and as almost everyone has commented already this morning, uncertainty
and perceived travel risk have hit tourism and the hospitality sector particularly hard.
Tourism spending in Florida is reportedly down by about one-third, or $20 million a day.
Disney World in Orlando has shortened its operating hours, eliminated overtime, and
reduced vending activities. Several large South Florida hotels have cut staffing by as
much as 30 percent. And the excess cruise ship capacity I mentioned in my reports
earlier this year is now sinking parts of that industry. Reflecting the decline in travel, our
largest airlines, Delta and AirTran, have engaged in different mixes of very aggressive
cost-cutting measures including job cuts, lower management bonuses, and reduced
retirement contributions. And in some instances pilots have taken voluntary pay cuts.
Employment cuts will especially affect Georgia, which may actually see some
decline in jobs in the fourth quarter for the first time since the 1990-91 recession.
Reflecting the job situation, requests for consumer credit counseling in Georgia were at
record levels in August. One of our Atlanta directors who runs a very large statewide
consumer credit counseling organization reported that appointments for counseling were

10/2/01

51

up 5 percent in September from the month before and jumped another 15 percent after
September 11th. There’s also little change in the trajectory of the District’s
manufacturing sector, which continues to contract. Investment plans reportedly are still
very much on hold until the signs of a pickup in new orders become apparent.
District auto producers reported that unit sales are around 15 to 20 percent
below plan following September 11th, even with the introduction of new incentive
programs and new models. Tennessee-based Nissan is revising down its sales and
production projections for the remainder of the year and has eliminated all overtime for
the foreseeable future. Auto parts delivery problems experienced by plants in our area
immediately after the attacks have now been resolved.
State governments now face another round of budget difficulties because of
declines in sales and income tax revenues. Reflecting the slowdown, bankers report
slowing loan demand across all business lines, some tightening of credit standards, and
some deterioration of credit quality. Finally, I’d note the unusual report from several
sources that major corporations who had made previous charitable financial commitments
have begun seeking ways to gracefully shift their gifts to next year or to pare them back
significantly.
On the bright side, retail sales and residential real estate markets are our best
performing sectors. While commercial markets continue to soften, single-family real
estate remains reasonably strong. Few significant imbalances in either residential or
commercial markets are appearing. Many companies are cutting hours for temporary
help. Wage pressures are reported to be significant only for health-care workers.

10/2/01

52

Likewise, substantial prices increases are generally limited to the health-care sector and
to liability insurance premiums, which have risen sharply of late.
On the national front, as almost everyone has said, uncertainty is now the
dominant consideration whether one focuses on financial markets or the real sector. It’s
now clear that significant slowing was evident in the third quarter even before September
11th. All things considered, I am a bit more optimistic than some that the shocks from the
terrorist attacks will be relatively less pervasive and less long-lasting, aside from the
obvious effects on areas such as travel and tourism. Having said that, uncertainty has
clearly increased and markets are expecting a further drop in our target funds rate at this
meeting. A further temporary drop in rates seems appropriate--but I emphasize the word
“temporary”--as a short-term effort to provide liquidity and attempt to reduce uncertainty.
Unlike the economic situation preceding the Gulf War, we’ve already dropped
rates eight times and significant stimulus is in the pipeline. Arguably the real funds rate
is now very low and will be approaching zero according to some measures, if we make
another large reduction today. I don’t see a clear argument for pursuing such a low real
rate policy at this time as an intermediate policy path, given the current best guesses
about the likely course of the economy, except to temper further short-term uncertainty.
Nevertheless, this does not seem a good time to add to uncertainty by not relaxing rates
further as the markets expect.
My concern about the policy path is heightened by the belief that more fiscal
stimulus than already enacted seems quite likely and will take hold about the time many
forecasts indicate that the economy will begin to grow again. Current perceptions in
some quarters seem to be that the White House, Congress, and even the Fed will do

10/2/01

53

almost anything to try to avoid a recession or a prolonged slowdown. Quite candidly,
this worries me more than a modest recession itself. For these reasons, should we move
again at this time--and I believe we should--we need to look for ways to explain that it’s a
temporary response that will likely be reversed when uncertainty declines and markets
are more normal. Absent such an explanation, I’m concerned that the policy path will put
the economy at significant longer-term inflation risk, with all the costs and difficulties
that we understand will be associated with that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Prior to the attacks, the
Third District economy had been flat. Employment continued to decline in the first two
months of the third quarter. The manufacturing sector also continued to decline, albeit at
a slower pace than earlier in the year. Retail sales remained flat. One sign of a rebound
in activity was an upturn in the pace of residential construction from a weak first quarter.
Our calls to business contacts since the September 11th attacks indicate that firms in all
industries in the region have revised downward their forecasts of sales and revenues in
light of continuing uncertainty about possible military action and a retrenchment in
spending by consumers and businesses.
Retailers have noted a resumption of consumer spending since the initial days
after the attacks but they say that store traffic and sales have not returned to the levels
experienced prior to September 11th. Contacts among general merchandise retailers
expect sales to rise only slowly in the weeks immediately ahead. Managers of local
stores of national chains indicate that corporate marketing plans for the fall have been put
on hold, at least temporarily, though fall and winter merchandise stocking levels have

10/2/01

54

already been set and are subject to only minor adjustment. But some retailers who need
to place orders now for spring merchandise are contemplating reductions from their
earlier plans.
Auto sales in the District had been slowing in the weeks before September 11th,
and in the days after the attacks they fell to levels 20 to 40 percent below same-day sales
last year. Auto dealers tell us that they will be reducing their orders to manufacturers for
at least the next month or two. Obviously, the travel and tourism industries have been
hard hit by recent events. In Philadelphia all the conventions scheduled for September
after the attacks were canceled. The conventions scheduled for October have not yet
been cancelled but attendance will be lower than normal since some companies have
disallowed air travel for at least 30 days.
In terms of employment, while many firms in the region are anticipating
slower sales only a few are considering layoffs, and most of these were contemplating
layoffs before September 11th. Much more than the usual level of uncertainty surrounds
the forecast for the regional economy. What is clear is that recent events have pushed the
projected rebound further into the future than previously thought.
Our view of the national economy is somewhat the same. The incoming data
suggest that prior to September 11th the economy had remained soft. The terrorist attacks
on the United States have probably pushed the economy into recession. These
unprecedented attacks have raised the specter of further shocks, such as U.S. military
action and more terrorist strikes. While we’ve seen some rebound in consumer spending
from the depressed levels in the days just after the attacks, there has not been a total
recovery. Uncertainty about the future will cause consumers to delay some purchases

10/2/01

55

and to cancel others. While real estate and other assets certainly have cushioned the
negative effects on household net worth, the significant fall in equity prices could result
in a substantial decline in household spending. Uncertainty and a drop in consumer
spending will cause businesses to delay capital outlays.
The economic situation abroad has also deteriorated since our last meeting, as
we heard in the staff briefing. Data suggest that these economies were weaker prior to
the attacks than we had anticipated. And though not on their soil, the terrorist attacks are
a negative shock to economies outside the United States. Thus, this country cannot look
to strong economies abroad to buoy our own economy.
Our near-term outlook is similar to that of the Greenbook. We agree that the
attacks will have a significant negative impact in the short run. However, I believe there
could be some upside risks associated with the Greenbook’s forecast for 2002. The
effects of the terrorist attacks on consumer and business confidence may fade more
quickly than assumed. Expansionary fiscal policy in combination with easier monetary
policy may have a stronger impact than assumed. Indeed, a Philadelphia staff analysis
suggests that forecasters tend to under-predict the response of output growth to
expansionary monetary policy. Thus, it is possible that the economic recovery could
begin earlier in 2002 and end up stronger than projected in the Greenbook. This would
imply that the Committee would have to be ready to raise interest rates sooner than
assumed in the baseline forecast. That said, I find it difficult to argue with the basic
outlines of the Board’s staff forecast. Philadelphia staff analysis indicates that while
forecasters significantly revised their forecasts downward in the aftermath of past crises,
forecast errors were little different during crisis periods than in other periods. So, as

10/2/01

56

much as I would like to, I am unable to say that the Greenbook forecast surely errs on the
downside. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s take a break at this stage. Coffee is next
door. Let’s return in fifteen minutes, please. Thank you.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus, will you continue for us?
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in our
District seems to have advanced at a modest pace in August but it weakened sharply in
September. Some of the anecdotal and survey information we’ve received indicates that
activity would have slowed in September even in the absence of the attacks. Of course,
we did have the attacks and they’ve had the same extremely negative impact on our
region as they’ve had elsewhere in the country, as we’ve heard around the table this
morning. Part of the drop in activity in our region might be temporary, if the terrorist
threat can be reasonably well contained.
As several others have noted about their Districts, we too experienced a big
drop in retail sales initially but in general they’ve come back to earlier levels since then.
The exception is automobile sales, which have rebounded some but not to the levels we
were seeing before the attacks occurred. In the manufacturing sector, early on there were
some supply disruptions and some disruptions in shipments to customers, but at least for
the time being those seem to have subsided. In our region as elsewhere the big hit, and
probably the more permanent hit, is to the travel and tourist industries. Tourist activity
here in Washington is usually very substantial at this time of the year and it is at a much
lower level now than normally.

10/2/01

57
With respect to the airlines,
the airline headquartered in our District, just on the other side of the

Potomac river. It was an airline in trouble--its condition was very shaky--even before the
crisis. The company has announced 11,000 layoffs and a lot of those will be in our
District. I think a good number of them will be right here in the Washington area. Also,
beyond the layoffs, the US Airways hub in Charlotte has for a long time been a
foundation for the growth and strength we’ve seen in that city over the last 15 years or so.
So there is concern about that area.
With respect to the national economy, I think the data indicated pretty clearly
that economic activity might be weakening even before the attacks. We had a run-up in
the unemployment rate and, of course, manufacturing was still contracting despite the
somewhat optimistic purchasing managers’ report we got a month ago. With wages and
home values rising, consumer spending was still holding up reasonably well going into
the crisis. But the sharp increase in unemployment and evidence that housing demand
and home prices might be beginning to soften have contributed to the deterioration in
consumer confidence that I think was evident even before the terrorists struck.
Against this background, the September 11th attacks, of course, have added to
the anxiety and uncertainty that households, business firms, and investors were to some
extent already experiencing before the attacks occurred. Those concerns showed up
initially in asset markets. The negative impact on asset markets appears at least for the
moment to be reasonably well contained under the circumstances, but obviously the level
of anxiety in those markets is still very high. With a recession increasingly likely,
consumers feel exposed to the risk of losing their jobs as well as to other risks and,

10/2/01

58

therefore, are likely to spend less and save more out of current income in order to build
their precautionary balances. And businesses, whose investment returns are now subject
to a greater degree of risk than before the attacks, will probably cut back on their
investment plans even further than they already have, at least for a time.
Barring any further attacks and resulting increase in anxiety, some of these
effects may prove temporary. As households get their precautionary balances and asset
positions back up to the higher level they may now desire, presumably they will again
begin to spend a more normal fraction of their current income. And when business firms
get to the point where they think they have sufficient liquidity to deal with the
contingencies they’re concerned about, presumably they will begin to redirect a greater
portion of their earnings to investment.
Even so, it seems clear to me that the downside risk in the near-term outlook is
significantly greater than the upside risk, at least for the time being. I don’t really see
much upside risk in this situation, and I think we need to recognize that a significant
cumulative contraction can’t be ruled out even in the absence of further terrorist activity.
In light of this risk, I think it’s worth noting that the Greenbook is projecting a
relatively mild and brief recession ending in the first quarter of next year. In my view it’s
a plausible point forecast. One reason it’s plausible is that economic policy and other
public policies at the moment are well positioned to cushion the downturn that we
currently anticipate. Tax cuts are in place; rebates have been paid out; and there’s a good
likelihood that military spending will increase. We’re likely to see more public spending
on security here at home. Perhaps most importantly though, thanks to our actions over
the last decade or more, the Fed generally as an institution--and Fed monetary policy

10/2/01

59

specifically--probably has as much credibility for low inflation as it has ever had. And
inflation expectations have been declining so far this year. This to me is the big
difference between the situation we face today and the one we faced in the early 1990s.
Consequently, I think we can probably move interest rates still lower without triggering
an inflation scare in bond markets. The question Cathy Minehan raised about what the
bond markets are telling us with regard to inflation expectations is a very relevant one.
But there are obviously other potential plausible explanations for what has been
happening in bond markets.
The Greenbook projection assumes another 1/2 point cut in the funds rate
before the end of this year. Frankly, I think there’s a strong case to go ahead and make
that move this morning. Having said that, I must say that I believe Jack Guynn made a
very good point. We have been easing aggressively. I have favored this and I’m
comfortable with it. And I would be comfortable with more easing this morning
precisely because of our enhanced credibility. But once a recovery gets under way--and
sooner or later that’s going to happen--I think we’re going to need to reverse course and
move in the other direction just as aggressively as we’ve eased. That will be necessary in
order to maintain our credibility, and in many ways I think that’s the most important
thing we have going for us in this situation. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin with autos. Last
week on an Executive Committee conference call one of our directors, a banker, reported
on a conversation with one of his customers, an auto dealer. The dealer told the banker
that over the prior weekend, September 22-23, only four customers even came into the

10/2/01

60

showroom and he had no sales at all. We, of course, were interested in following up on
that, so people on our staff called auto dealers around the District yesterday to get
information on their traffic and sales this past weekend. Comparing notes on what they
heard, the staff’s general consensus was that auto dealers were happily surprised not only
by how much traffic they had but by how strong sales were for the weekend.
Nevertheless, when asked how sales were likely to come out for the month overall, the
typical response was that sales were down about 20 to 25 percent versus a year ago.
However, and this is a point I’m going to come back to in a moment, it is very hard to
discern a trend in anything at this stage and will be until the passage of a little more time.
Another of our directors runs a company that makes pastries both for retail use
and for what they call institutional use--that is, sales to restaurants and airlines. Last
week she said that all six of her airline customers had called and cancelled all orders for
onboard service for the foreseeable future. Two of the company’s other lines are
corporate gift giving, which usually involves gifts to employees or suppliers, and
individual gift giving by retail customers. They have had strong sales in individual gifts
of pastries but a 50 percent drop in orders from corporations. So one can’t draw
conclusions about any overall trend from that.
We’ve been staying in weekly contact with representatives of Federated
Department Stores. As you know, of course, Federated reported very sharp declines in
sales immediately after September 11th. This last weekend, for the four-day selling
period Thursday through Sunday, sales were back on plan except in New York City.
Again, one cannot discern any trend from that because for the month overall sales will be
down very considerably. Our contacts were very encouraged, however--we talked to

10/2/01

61

them yesterday--by the volume of traffic and sales over the weekend. Nevertheless, they
now expect the fourth quarter to be weaker than previously anticipated. There’s not
much they can do about that. They are currently ordering for next year and they’re going
to order less for the spring than they previously thought they would.
Yesterday I received the raw data and a preliminary summary of the September
survey of the National Federation of Independent Businesses. You know how they do
that survey; through the course of the month they get responses to a lot of different
questions and then they try to distill the information and summarize it. Those data, too,
show the difficulty of drawing any conclusions about the trend. Almost half of the
responses they received were dated prior to September 11th and a little over half were
dated after September 11th. Based on the survey responses dated prior to the 11th, the
analysts would have drawn the conclusion, given the firmness in the July and August
data, that September would have marked the third month in a row of an improving trend.
They would have been tempted to interpret that as indicating that activity had seen its low
point. The data dropped off dramatically, of course, in the post-September 11th reports.
If one tried to average together the two sub-samples the results would be nonsense.
Neither period is going to characterize the month. And that’s where we are stuck. We
can’t conclude anything about the August to September data per se. We really have to
view this situation as a break in the series and try to find a new base, a new place to start
and maybe see a trend forming. But that’s going to take a little more time for any dataset.
Turning to the national economy, I have no idea what the national income
accounts numbers are going to add up to for the foreseeable future, either from the
product side or from the income side, let alone how they will break down for various

10/2/01

62

sectors and regions and so on. But I don’t think that’s really the biggest challenge we
have. A number of people have mentioned in one way or another that uncertainty is an
issue. Not long ago I thought most of the uncertainties we had to worry about involved
developments that might occur outside the United States--perhaps involving Argentina or
Japan or the launch of the euro or something else. Those concerns have not gone away
entirely but obviously uncertainties within our country have suddenly jumped to the top
of the list of things we’re uncertain about. It may well be that we will escape some
potential problems in the international arena. Maybe Argentine will not default and spark
a crisis. Maybe Japan has turned a policy corner; maybe the mark-to-market of equity
portfolios of their banks starting yesterday will not cause serious problems in their
banking industry. Maybe the launch of the euro will go well. Nevertheless, it seems to
me that we’re going to face a protracted period of waxing and waning of anxieties, with
good justification. I would not attach the term “irrational” to the anxiety. I think it is
probably very rational. But it’s difficult if not impossible to quantify, and certainly we
can’t observe it.
The Committee’s press statement of September 17th said that we recognized
that the actual federal funds rate might be below its target rate on occasion in these
unusual circumstances. I was very pleased about the inclusion of that wording and I
thought it might continue to be needed in our statements for some time. We’ve had
decisionmaking periods in our history when the greatest uncertainties were about
inflation and inflation psychology. And in those periods we found that it was especially
difficult to draw any conclusion from movements in nominal magnitudes, so instead we
resorted to paying more attention to--if not targeting outright--quantitative magnitudes.

10/2/01

63

For exactly the opposite reasons relating to the difficulty of observing inflation
psychology, I think in this period of heightened anxiety we have to think along the same
lines. If we don’t go all the way to quantity targeting I’d at least like to think about a
proviso clause as to what we’re willing to see happen to nominal interest rates, especially
the overnight interbank rate.
I don’t expect that at this meeting we’re going to change the statement that
accompanies our announcement. But the statement that the risks are weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness has become in effect a proviso
clause. It says that if we get more weak data, the FOMC may cut the overnight interbank
rate some more. If the stated funds rate target is not producing an expansion in central
bank liquidity, the monetary base, I would prefer to think in terms of our being willing to
let the rate drift lower. The one thing that we certainly would not want to see, as I was
suggesting earlier in questioning Dino, is a contraction in the monetary base. In fact, not
only should growth in the base not be negative, it should be adequate to assure that we
accommodate the demand we believe exists for base money. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dave
Stockton got us off to a wonderful start in admitting just how uncertain we are. Now we
are at least as uncertain but with an unbelievable amount of specificity about it!
What do we know about the Second District? It was weak going into the
tragedy and it is weaker now. One of the results of that is going to be a stress on the
fiscal situation of New York City. Even so, our analysis to date says that the City’s fiscal

10/2/01

64

situation will hold up; that will have some effect on the fiscal situation of New York State
as well.
We think the Greenbook forecast is as good a forecast as one could make. And
we agree with the authors that the downside risk is very considerable, especially in
coming quarters, and that we don’t know what the longer term is going to look like. The
likelihood is that the economy will snap back, as suggested in the forecast.
As regards monetary policy, I believe that we are being rewarded for the high
degree of confidence in the Fed and the greater transparency we have achieved in recent
years by the market forecasting what I at least think we clearly should do at this meeting.
I believe we would be very ill-advised to test our credibility by saying this is what we’re
doing at this meeting but we’re so certain about the future that we want to put everyone
on notice that we may tighten monetary policy sometime soon. We don’t know enough
to say that. And nobody expects us to say it. If we say things that test our credibility in
order to show our central banker virtues, I think we will lessen our central banker virtues
and certainly lessen our credibility. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As others have said, in the
short run we are facing potentially the start of a crisis of confidence both among
businesses and households, which is likely to interact with the pre-existing weak
macroeconomic environment to lead to a slide in economic activity. Both the length and
the depth of that slide are uncertain but they could conceivably be longer and deeper than
in the baseline forecast. Therefore, our challenge today is to take actions to attempt to
avoid one of the more pessimistic consumer confidence scenarios.

10/2/01

65

Even before September 11th indicators of household behavior were somewhat

troubling. Housing activity and particularly single-family starts, which had been a source
of strength, had softened a bit. Consumer confidence was also sliding even before the
attacks occurred, and that slide of confidence has certainly continued following
September 11th. Last week’s initial claims for unemployment insurance jumped,
indicating further stress for households. With more layoff announcements, especially in
the airline sector, and the likely multiplier effects for related industries, there is ample
reason to believe that last week’s increase in initial claims is likely to be the precursor to
further increases in unemployment. Against this set of incoming data, the Greenbook’s
baseline forecast of unemployment reaching close to 6 percent does not seem out of the
realm of possibility at all. In the context of such a rise in unemployment, it is unlikely
that even the few retailers that saw a return to planned performance last week can be
complacent that conditions in the household sector will support a return to a reasonable
pace of growth.
Similarly, indicators on the business sector were also mixed and negative even
before September 11th. Declines in business fixed investment, particularly in the hightech categories, continued unabated. Informal contacts and surveys of banks and other
businesses suggest that the uncertainty about the consumer response to the attacks is
feeding through to uncertainty among businesses as well. Many banks report a sharp
drop-off in demand for business loans after September 11th, suggesting that small
businesses in particular are less willing to risk capital on expanding investment spending
during this period of uncertainty.

10/2/01

66

While the auto industry is struggling to create demand by providing strong

incentives, in a survey that straddled the September 11th date, the NAPM reported that
manufacturing activity fell again in September, marking the fourteenth month of a factory
slump.
The conditions leading to a downward trajectory in the real sector have been
reinforced in financial markets. Over $1 trillion of equity wealth has been lost since
September 11th, which will almost certainly lead to a greater retrenchment by consumers.
While equity indices have declined 10 to 20 percent over this intermeeting period, fixed
income markets have not become more accommodative. As for the question Cathy
Minehan raised, I think that at least in the government sector the bond market is driven
by concerns about the budget outlook, since the TIPS market doesn’t seem to indicate
any increase in inflation concerns. In the below-investment-grade corporate bond sector,
concerns about risks seem to be the predominant factor leading long-term rates to remain
stubbornly high. Additionally, while large banks claim that they have not tightened terms
and standards on business loans since the attacks, they do admit to watching closely for
signs of deterioration. Bankers clearly understand that default risk has increased, and
they will certainly act to protect their income and capital positions as much as possible.
Unfortunately, the international sector is unlikely to add any strength to the
near-term outlook. Equity markets in almost all industrial economies have been hit by
the same reevaluation of business prospects that has affected our equity markets.
Similarly, safe haven flows from the dollar, the euro, and the pound sterling into the
Swiss franc indicate that market participants may be rethinking the short-term prospects
for a number of economies.

10/2/01

67

The most positive development from the international sector is that oil prices

seem unlikely to spike higher, which is helpful on the inflation front but indicates that the
supply and demand dynamics in that market are consistent with a future of slowing
growth globally.
Against this background, I believe that policy must respond. A number of
speakers have raised questions about the level of the real interest rate. It’s important to
note that since 1960 there have been six periods of slowdown. During five of those
periods, the real interest rate touched zero and during two of those periods it was
decidedly negative. So if we allow the real fed funds rate to drop to zero or close to it
through the decisions that we make today, that will not in any sense be unprecedented.
The markets are certainly expecting a response today. And I think to disappoint them
risks setting off a global reaction that might be difficult to control. We are, as others
have said, benefited by the fact that both inflation and inflation expectations are well
contained. It is right to point out that in the longer run we may confront a potential
interaction between a stimulative monetary policy and a stimulative fiscal policy as our
monetary policy stimulus and more stimulus from the fiscal side are both called upon to
counter the risk of further slowing in the economy. But even recognizing the challenge
that might emerge from unpredictable long-term policy interactions, I believe that we
need to set a priority today on the immediate macroeconomic challenge and the real
downside risks confronting us in the near term. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, my congratulations to
the Greenbook staff for a fine job under impossible conditions. However, as the authors

10/2/01

68

themselves are at pains to point out, this and all other forecasts today can have only a
limited credibility. This is evidenced by the quite appropriately wide spectrum of the
alternative scenarios, several of which are virtually as plausible as the baseline forecast
itself. Yet policy must be made. How are we to meet that necessity?
I felt earlier and feel today that monetary policy made its most important
contribution to reversing this cycle over the first half of the year, and I’m proud of what
was done by this Committee. Given what is already in the pipeline, together with the
possibility of somewhat lower rates, policy seems very supportive. Changes from here
on will likely play a relatively minor role compared to developments in fiscal policy,
consumer confidence, and the progress of the war on terrorism. Monetary policy was, in
my opinion, a key positive force earlier, but the focus today may be to ensure that it does
not become a negative factor in the economic equation. How could that happen?
In the short run, this may be one of those very strange times when appearance
could be the most important reality. The Fed is on the recovery team, of course. But we
must be seen to be on that team by the man on the street, both on Main Street and Wall
Street. To be so perceived will be a positive force for recovery, whereas to be seen
otherwise could be a major negative. As our nation struggles to recover from a major
trauma, surprising the markets could be an additional trauma we just do not need right
now. This condition will hopefully change soon and the day will likely come when a
policy surprise will be appropriate, but not today. Fortunately, Mr. Chairman, inflation is
most likely going to trend downward over the forecast period, giving the Committee
some further room to maneuver and time to reverse course in an orderly manner.

10/2/01

69

I believe the Committee will soon be facing two successive sets of challenges

and the sooner the better in each case. The first will be when and how to terminate this
easing cycle when the economy stabilizes. We obviously are not to that point yet. I hope
the end of our easing process will be followed shortly by the second challenge,
determining how and when it will be necessary to begin to damp the enormous amount of
stimulation that has been and will be pumped into this economy first by monetary policy
and soon by fiscal policy. I believe the Committee may be entitled to take some
satisfaction in the role policy has played in recent years, but the future will probably
prove to be at least equally as challenging as the past. What is needed today, however,
seems pretty straightforward. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found the alternative simulations
provided by the staff in the latest Greenbook to be especially useful. Given the
exceptional degree of uncertainty that we now face, the alternative scenarios help us to
better appreciate the range of outcomes. But in addition, they allowed me to easily craft
my own forecast by adding the alternative scenarios directly to the baseline subject to my
personal assessment of the probabilities associated with each. When I began this exercise
I thought that it would allow me to present to you an interesting, even compelling,
alternative to the Greenbook forecast. To my surprise--and I must say disappointment--I
found that when I completed this exercise, the alternative scenarios turned out to be
remarkably offsetting. That left me, no doubt, with the same uncertainty as the staff had,
and equally likely to be wrong, but with a forecast that turned out to be remarkably
similar to the baseline. While we face enormous uncertainty as I indicated, I think this

10/2/01

70

sort of experience adds a little to the credibility of the baseline. I did wonder a bit if the
staff might have been playing some games by offering us a series of alternatives that they
knew were entirely offsetting just to reinforce the baseline. But David Stockton assured
me that this was an accident of good fortune rather than a strategy!
I find that it’s useful in my own thinking to separate the forecast horizon into
two sub-periods. The near term covers the next two or three quarters and the remainder
is the period through 2003. It seems to me that there are two key drivers of the near-term
forecast. The first is the momentum in the economy prior to September 11th. The second
is the effect of the events of September 11th through disruptions to key industries and via
consumer and business sentiment. With respect to the momentum, some saw the data
immediately preceding September 11th as very encouraging and signaling that the
economy was poised for a rebound. Others interpreted the very same data as indicating
that the economy had at most stabilized at a growth rate not much different from zero,
and they were still revising down their forecasts.
I think there was ample scope in the data to support both of these differing
interpretations, but I was in the latter camp. And the more pessimistic interpretation
suggested that additional easing would have been justified in the absence of the events of
September 11th. In part for that reason, my point of departure for the forecast was the
alternative simulation with easier money policy.
But the events of September 11th clearly called for a downward revision to the
near-term forecast--at least to the estimate of the third quarter and the forecast for the
fourth quarter and likely into early 2002. Because a downward impetus to a considerable
degree reflects an assessment of the psychological effects of the events of September

10/2/01

71

11th, the uncertainty about the forecast is an order of magnitude above normal. But my
judgment is that over this time frame the risks are more likely asymmetric toward still
weaker growth. So I give some considerable weight, 50 to 75 percent, to the alternative
simulation of a collapse in consumer and business confidence. Having said that, the
downside risk seems to be most acute in the fourth quarter because I’m also going to give
very high weight to the alternative simulation of major fiscal stimulus. And by the first
quarter, that also begins to weigh in importantly.
There is little that monetary policy can do through traditional channels to spur
demand over this time frame. However, there might be and probably would be some
salutary effect by bolstering confidence in the future. What we do and what we say
should be designed to contribute to this end, and I think Governor Kelley made that point
extremely well.
A second consideration concerns the implications for monetary policy of the
evolution of overall financial conditions. Once again, we’re confronted by a shock that
has had direct effects both on financial conditions, specifically on equity prices, and on
aggregate demand above and beyond the effect on equity prices. Monetary policy has to
move aggressively enough to counter at least the adverse effects on overall financial
conditions before it can hope to make a net contribution to offsetting the direct effect on
aggregate demand.
Over the remainder of the forecast horizon it seems to me that the fiscal
assumptions begin to dominate the forecast, complemented by the details of the internal
dynamics of recovery as consumer sentiment and hopefully equity prices rebound. In
addition, the latter development should be reinforced by the delayed contributions of the

10/2/01

72

forces we expected to support recovery before the events of September 11th, including a
rebound in high-tech investment after a sharp and prolonged retrenchment and a return to
inventory accumulation after liquidation runs its course.
Now, beyond the nearer-term period it seems to me that the risks turn to the
upside, at least after mid-2002 and especially into 2003. My reading is that the fiscal
stimulus will be an order of magnitude above that in the Greenbook baseline, something
closer to the major fiscal stimulus simulation. Over this time frame, therefore, perhaps
the key question is what monetary policy is a good fit with the assumed fiscal stimulus.
There is a potential that an earlier and more aggressive reversal of recent and prospective
monetary easing will ultimately be called for than may be contemplated at this point.
Still, there’s ample scope for additional monetary policy easing over the near term. In
part this reflects the fact that, given the prospects of a rise in the unemployment rate to
the 6 percent range, we should now be targeting a period of above trend growth. So,
whereas before we might have thought that we needed stimulus to get economic growth
back to trend as quickly as possible, now if we ended up with something that was less
than a percentage point above trend I think we’d be disappointed. We could probably
tolerate something even stronger than that for awhile. Nevertheless, as a number have
already suggested, monetary policy will face the challenge at some point during the
second period and beyond of a timely return toward neutrality.
I think the other issue relating to the strategy of monetary policy relates to the
timing of any cumulative decline in the funds rate. Most of the bad macroeconomic news
in particular relates to higher unemployment that lies ahead and likely will extend at least
through the middle of next year. In evaluating what we do today, we should pay some

10/2/01

73

attention to how much more of a cumulative decline might be justified given the forecast
we now hold. And then we need to consider how we should spread the change out over
time so that we don’t end up doing more than we would prefer to do. In addition, we
might worry a bit about how we should signal markets about our future intentions so that
we don’t face market pressure again to move further than would be prudent. I must say,
however, that I don’t think that is really a story of today, but a story of what we do at
subsequent meetings. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’ve often spoken about the
value of confidence in economic relationships. Confidence is a variable that is a direct
term in no economic equation but is a key factor in almost all of them--consumption,
investment, employment, stock markets, risk discounts, foreign trading, capital flows, and
on down the list. The macroeconomic implications of a serious loss of confidence could
be enormous. So what is the evidence? It has only been three weeks since the attacks
and already there is a great deal of evidence that confidence is eroding. If you hadn’t
called a break, I was going to go through this list really quickly. I will still go through it
quickly but a little less so now. [Laughter] One piece of evidence is travel demand,
which is definitely down. Another is consumer confidence and Dave Stockton talked
about that. Layoffs have risen. We see evidence in financial variables--the stock market,
risk spreads on lesser-rated bonds, early signs of implied credit market volatility. There’s
some evidence that even housing demand and auto sales may be down in the period since
September 11th.

10/2/01

74

There are two indicators on which I’m not quite sure about the timing. One,

which Karen Johnson spoke about already, is the foreign sector. It’s a little hard to tell
what occurred before and after September 11th, but it’s clear that the news there isn’t
good. Another is commodity prices, which have dropped sharply. I’ve often spoken
about those before as a precursor of inflation. The staff has been persuading me that they
may be an even better precursor of output demand, but whatever the case they are down
sharply.
A last issue is the forecasts of others. The NABE took a survey of their
forecasters since the event. Eighteen out of 21 of them had a significantly more
pessimistic outlook. I’m not sure that they know any more than our forecasters, but all
forecasters seem to be moving in one direction.
This all sets up what I see as a difficult policy problem. The attacks could be a
major demand shock or a minor one, for a long period or a short period. Just how do we
respond? On the fiscal side I think there are at least two things that fiscal policy should
do. There should be expenditures for military and other security measures and
compensation for the direct victims. Whether fiscal policy ought to do anything beyond
that, I find a difficult question. But if more stimulus is required, I’d like to see it
provided in a way that doesn’t dissipate the long-term budget surplus, national saving,
and the low long-term interest rates that have been a hallmark of the recent period.
On the monetary side, I also see the need for action. Monetary policy can be
changed quickly. It can be used flexibly and it can be reversed just as quickly should
circumstances change. As a number of you have said, this latter property is very
important right now, given the massive uncertainty. The combination of short-term fiscal

10/2/01

75

easing and monetary easing I think is our best hope for keeping the economy as strong as
possible in both the short run and the long run. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Let’s move on to Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As noted in the

Committee’s announcement of two weeks ago, the terrorist attacks 

subjected an already weak economy to a further downward shock. 

Just before September 11th aggregate demand apparently was still 

being impeded by an ongoing downdraft in investment, as firms 

corrected a previous over-expansion of capital equipment, and the 

resulting decline in employment and equity prices threatened to sap 

consumer spending. As noted in the Greenbook, firm evidence that 

the downdraft was beginning to abate had not emerged and the 

economic forecast probably would again have been marked down and 

the anticipated strengthening pushed further into the future. The 

attacks themselves disrupted business transactions for a time and 

apparently have heightened concerns about the future, likely 

restraining spending even more and further delaying the resumption 

of solid growth. 

A significant easing of financial conditions would seem to be 

called for to counter the effects of the unexpected weakness in 

demand from these various sources. While such an easing might have 

little effect on the near-term performance of the economy, it would 

appropriately give added impetus to an eventual return to full 

resource utilization. When the economy ultimately strengthens, it 

seems inevitable that it will resume growth from a base of an

appreciably lower level of resource utilization than today or than you 

might have expected at your August meeting. 

Yet financial conditions have not eased appreciably since late 

August. The pullback of investors in the face of perceptions of higher 

risk and weaker spending prospects apparently has offset the effects 

of the 50 basis points of easing you put in place two weeks ago and 

the further federal funds rate reductions now built into financial 

market prices. Broad measures of equity prices have fallen 10 to 20 

percent since the August FOMC meeting and risk spreads have 

widened for all but the highest-rated businesses. Indeed, bond rates 

for many businesses are unchanged or even up considerably. In 

addition, the average value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets 

has appreciated slightly. 

With markets strongly anticipating a further decrease in your 

federal funds rate target at this meeting, holding policy unchanged 


10/2/01

76

likely would tighten financial conditions substantially. Thus, the
question facing you today would seem to be not whether to ease
further, but by how much. Market observers believe that your debate
will be between 25 and 50 basis point reductions in the funds rate.
The choice between these two would seem to depend not only on the
most likely outcome for the economy under the two alternatives, but
the risks around that modal outcome and the costs of missing to one
side or the other.
The choice of a 25 basis point easing would be justified by
concern that a larger action at this time could lead to policy becoming
so accommodative over coming months that the rebound in demand
beginning next year would be sharp enough to add to inflation
pressures before a policy reversal could contain them effectively. A
major uncertainty in the outlook is the stance of fiscal policy. Unless
signs surface very quickly that near-term economic distress is abating,
a process of political compromise by inclusion could well produce a
substantially more expansive policy than is built into the staff
forecast. When the resulting stimulus will hit the economy depends,
of course, on the nature of the programs that are enacted. As next
year goes on, however, aggregate demand could well be boosted by
the effects of expansionary fiscal and monetary policies just as the
internal dynamics of strengthening private demand take hold
following the working down of inventory and investment goods
overhangs.
Private demand also may be subject to upside as well as to the
numerous downside risks. One possibility is that a good part of the
cutback in spending in the last few weeks will turn out to be
transitory. As the nature of the countermeasures against terrorism
becomes clearer and more focused, as some successes are registered
and security in the air and elsewhere is improved, uncertainty will
narrow and some of the initial fears and perceptions of risk will
decrease, fostering a return toward less distorted economic
interactions and decisions. The rise in equity prices and decline in
risk premiums over the last week may already have reflected some
movement in this direction. Should activity rebound fairly strongly
next year, upward pressures on wages and prices are likely to emerge
at considerably lower levels of resource utilization than in the second
half of the 1990s. The slower growth of structural productivity that
seems to be in train would tend to boost unit labor costs at a time
when profit margins have already been squeezed. Slimmer margins
provide considerable inducement for businesses to pass labor costs
through into prices and are likely to mute the competitive forces that
make such a pass-through difficult, especially if, at the same time,

10/2/01

77

higher real interest rates induced by expansive fiscal policy militate
against cost-saving capital deepening.
Although markets would be somewhat disappointed by a 25 basis
point reduction in the federal funds rate target, the backup in other
interest rates and the decline in equity prices likely would be limited
by a sense that the FOMC was simply waiting for more definitive
evidence of the dimensions of the response of demand to the attacks
and was prepared to ease further, even within the intermeeting period,
should the emerging information warrant. The total amount of
additional ease built into the structure of market interest rates---now
between 75 and 100 basis points--probably would be trimmed only a
little. You may see these expectations as a reasonable assessment of
the amount of ease needed to promote a satisfactory strengthening of
the economy in 2002 and 2003. You may also see the resulting
expectations as representing a highly likely policy outcome as well
after a 25 basis point reduction at this meeting, given the possibility
of further Committee actions as employment and production decline
over the next several months.
But given the shocks to the economy and the absence of any
apparent easing in financial conditions noted at the beginning of my
discussion, the Committee may prefer a more aggressive policy action
and want to lower the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at this
meeting. The potential for inflation pressures to mount as the
economy rebounds must be weighed against the likelihood of a
prolonged period of weakness that opens up a sizable output gap.
Indeed, the baseline forecast in the Greenbook describes the latter
outcome. While that forecast assumes 50 basis points of easing over
the fourth quarter, its assessment of likely demand and resource
pressures would seem to suggest that an immediate reduction in the
federal funds rate of 50 basis points would run minimal risk of higher
inflation emerging before countervailing policy action had a chance
to be felt. And, as shown in an alternative Greenbook simulation,
stronger fiscal stimulus does not materially deflect the economy from
the disinflationary track of the baseline projection.
If the headwinds facing the economy for a time are on the order of
magnitude of those embodied in the staff forecast, a federal funds rate
that is 50 basis points lower would not be all that accommodative. In
real terms, such a rate would still be positive by many measures and
above its level in previous periods of economic weakness--for example
the early 1990s. With limited net financial stimulus in the pipeline
even under this easier alternative, recovery importantly depends on the
resiliency of the private economy as excesses are worked down and
underlying investment incentives remain in place, with an extra push

10/2/01

78

from fiscal policy. Easier monetary policy itself can’t address the
underlying uncertainties and overhangs weighing on demand, but it
can help to buoy asset prices and lower the cost of credit at least a little
relative to a smaller easing move.
Moreover, in an uncertain environment, the larger action avoids
the potential for especially adverse effects on confidence and risktaking were the Committee seen to be less aggressive than
anticipated. For this and other reasons, you may judge the probability
that insufficiently accommodative policy would accentuate a process
of progressive economic weakening that would be difficult to reverse
as appreciably larger in the current circumstances than the probability
that too stimulative a policy would intensify inflation pressures.
Saving policy “ammunition” for later could create a situation in
which much more easing is required before long to counter
cumulating weakness. Of course, anticipatory and aggressive policy
can lead to overshooting, but, by heading off worsening situations, it
also is likely to require smaller total action than does policy that
moves more gradually.
Market participants are likely to build in only a little, if any,
more easing going forward should you lower the funds rate by 50
basis points at this meeting, given the high odds they have already put
on this action. And their expectations of such a sizable move at this
meeting have not led them to anticipate a number of further such
declines in the future. The yield curve incorporates an additional 25
to 50 basis points of rate reductions by early next year followed by a
subsequent rise in rates. Financial market participants evidently
believe that you can ease aggressively and then stop and reverse in a
timely fashion. Judging from the decline in TIPS spreads in recent
weeks, the stickiness of long-term rates has been a response to more
expansive fiscal policy rather than a reflection of rising inflation
expectations as the path of the funds rate has been marked down.
Although a cut in the federal funds rate target at this meeting
would bring the cumulative change in this rate to 100 or 125 basis
points since late August, you may well see the risks to your objectives
in the foreseeable future as still tilted toward economic weakness.
Economic activity is almost certain to be quite soft in the near term,
and the Committee would probably want evidence on the likely extent
of the cutback in private demand and the impetus from fiscal policy
before it could judge that this weakness was likely to be balanced by
a strong rebound a few quarters hence.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? President Parry.

10/2/01

79

MR. PARRY. Don, I’d like to ask you and Dave a question about the chart

and table in the Bluebook on Chart 4 following page 10. We’ve talked a bit about the
equilibrium real rate as a way to measure the current stance of policy. If one believes that
the equilibrium real rate is within the range of the shaded areas, the range has gotten so
large that it leads one to believe, based on the Treasury inflation-indexed securities, that
our policy is incredibly expansive. On the other hand, if one looks at some of the lower
estimates, particularly the one based on historical data and the staff forecast, it appears as
if we’re providing an anemic amount of stimulus. I was thinking that perhaps you have
some feelings or views about what rate within this historically wide range it might be
reasonable for us to focus on.
MR. KOHN. I think the range is particularly wide because the staff forecast is
dragging down the lower end of that range. The calculated equilibrium rates that tended
to bring the range down are the ones that include the staff estimates of the restraining
effects of both the pre-September 11th and post-September 11th shocks to demand. If you
think the staff forecast is a reasonable estimate of where the economy will go--or at least
a reasonable mode of that estimate--then something toward the lower end of that range
probably is where you would think the rate is. Also, having the third-quarter inflationindexed security at a 3.8 percent real rate doesn’t reflect the most recent declines in that
rate. That rate has declined some over the third quarter and I don’t know what the
forward rate derived from that would look like if we did it today. My guess is that it
would be at least a number of tenths lower than shown in this chart. The TIPS rate
reflects people’s expectations about fiscal policy. That’s a rate derived from going out on
the yield curve, so it embodies the effects of the more expansionary fiscal policy as that

10/2/01

80

policy kicks in later next year and in future years. The elevated level is a reflection of
that steep upward slope of the yield curve, partly supply induced and partly I think
macroeconomically induced in the sense of the effects of fiscal policy over coming
quarters. But probably somewhere out later next year and in following years the
calculation would have interest rates being pushed up as a reflection of the expected
turnaround in monetary policy.
MR. PARRY. So you think the degree of monetary ease is, pick one: huge,
moderate, or meager?
MR. KOHN. I think right now it’s moderate and I--well, I won’t give a policy
recommendation! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a suggestion? Why don’t you have
Dave Stockton talk to you about this. He’s got it down pat.
MR. STOCKTON. It’s a little easier for me to answer this question because in
some sense I would look at the line on Chart 4 labeled “FRB/US model, based on
historical data and the staff forecast” as something that would approximate our best guess
as to what the equilibrium rate is. Therefore, I’d have to say monetary policy provides a
small to moderate amount of stimulus. I would hate to depress you further about this
analysis, however, by pointing out that each one of these estimates has a significant
confidence interval! The bottom edge of that shaded area is not the full confidence range
that one could have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I knew you wouldn’t disappoint me! [Laughter]
MR. STOCKTON. I’m going to stop right there.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.

10/2/01

81
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Actually, I was going to ask about what you just

discussed, so I withdraw the question in the interest of moving things along.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. I wanted to follow up on that discussion of the equilibrium real
rate because I think many of us have come to believe that information on this--if we had
confidence in it--is very valuable to our setting of policy. I applaud the research that the
staff has been doing on this subject; I think it already has provided a lot of insights and
has been very useful. I have to say, however, that I have a high degree of skepticism
about the amount of short-term variation in the staff measure of the equilibrium real rate.
I think that at this point our methodology hasn’t really allowed us to separate out very
effectively cyclical from longer-term influences. So I think the issue needs some more
thought. For one, the path of the equilibrium real rate has so much sensitivity to nearterm data that I think any estimate that is not based upon a forecast that goes out at least
five years for example--and returns to some sense of normality--has to be discounted
considerably. But I think that’s work for the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else? In keeping with the way Dave
Stockton started off this discussion, I’ll continue. I think the wide range of uncertainties
regarding what has happened and what is about to happen has been fully explored here
and I believe very effectively so. We learn a lot about the uncertainties that we face just
by listening to those who are involved in evaluating recent developments--for example,
what the individual presidents have said about what is going on in their Districts. And I
think the degree of humility that the rest of us have expressed about our understanding is

10/2/01

82

a measure of the fact that we are indeed dealing with a situation that is extraordinarily
uncertain.
The one area that has not been mentioned, which I believe requires a bit of
discussion, is the very dramatic decline that we have had in equity asset prices. We are
talking about losses in the last week or so of more than a trillion dollars in the value of
stock market holdings. What we know about this sort of phenomenon is that it has a
really significant impact. While it may be difficult to make a judgment as to the
magnitude of that impact, we do have to have some sense of what the appropriate value
of stocks ought to be or what equity premiums ought to be in the context of what we
perceive to be the long-term equilibrium real federal funds rate. The work that has been
done around here suggests, adjusted with all due humility, that the equity market is still
slightly above where it ought to be. That is not an important issue in and of itself, but
what is important is history. History suggests that markets do not go from over-valuation
to normal valuation and stay there. It suggests that markets almost invariably over-adjust
in the opposite direction. That in turn suggests to me that the notion that somehow we
are beyond any further deflation from the asset side is at least open to serious question. I
don’t pretend to say that the adjustment process needs to occur very quickly. Indeed, one
scenario could involve a very large adjustment in equity prices, a couple of years of
hiatus, and then another adjustment. Clearly, that is not a noncredible scenario. We have
seen it in the past.
All I want to indicate here is that the risks clearly are on the downside. And
without getting into more discussion on the issue, I would merely say that what we ought
to do--as I think most of the people around this table already have suggested--is to ease

10/2/01

83

by 50 basis points and retain the statement indicating that the risks are tilted toward
economic weakness. The pluses and the minuses have been fully explored, and I think
that would be the appropriate policy at this point. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I fully support your recommendation,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. I also support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. I support your recommendation. I would make just a couple
of quick comments that relate to the chart we were talking about a minute ago. One way
I looked at that was to ask the question: Going forward, which mistake do we most want
to avoid? Given the fragility and the psychology of the market, I think we most want to
avoid not appearing to be willing to take this action. So what you propose is exactly what
I want. Second, I would like to say ditto to what the Vice Chairman said earlier. I
expect--and maybe hope--that we will have to reverse this easing move. But I think the
market is already thinking about that. We don’t need to say it. And it is probably better
if our statement is shorter rather than longer. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. I support it.

10/2/01

84
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. I support the 50 basis point reduction in the target rate today.

But for the period between now and the next meeting, I think the statement that was
included in our announcement of the 17th is probably going to be needed again. As the
President said, the terrorists decided when and how this started. The United States and its
allies will decide when and how it ends. We don’t know when that’s going to be. If
there is another occasion of greatly heightened anxiety, I would hope that the Desk would
again be willing to let the funds rate trade as low as necessary to provide adequate
liquidity.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The market will assume that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I agree with the Vice Chair. Indeed, one of
the things we haven’t discussed relates to the implications of another episode. My
impression is that in such an event we will do what we’ve done in the past. We would
issue an FOMC statement at that time indicating in effect what you’re suggesting. I
prefer not to put that into the statement today. I think it complicates it and probably isn’t
necessary. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.

10/2/01

85

MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, but I would like

to add a comment. We’ve talked a lot about business and consumer confidence, and I
think the state of confidence is not independent of our own visibility. Let me emphasize
that point by assuming something contrary to fact because I think it will make the point
clear. Suppose all of us who are commonly out on the road from time to time giving
speeches and talking to the press were to withdraw from that activity? I think that would
send a very bad message to the markets. It would say that we’re terrified to fly and that
we’re terrified to talk because we might say something that would upset the markets. I
think it’s important that we be visible. We should work to resume a sense of normality.
And the message that we all agree on around the table is the one that we should be stating
publicly: The economy has excellent long-run prospects; our economy and society have
strong fundamentals to deal with the short-run uncertainties, but there is no way to
forecast what that short run is going to look like and, therefore, we’re not going to offer
such a forecast. For us to hunker down and disappear because we’re afraid of saying
something that might be wrong or misinterpreted is only going to tend to erode public
confidence.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think hunkering down was the appropriate
thing to do right after the shock.
MR. POOLE. Right, but we’re now three weeks beyond that shock.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I agree with you. There’s certainly no
need for us to change our normal practices. I do think our degree of uncertainty is higher,
but that’s the nature of the game.

10/2/01

86

MR. POOLE. Well, I just wanted to make that point clear because I feel very

strongly that we must not disappear.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I agree with that.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, could I add a comment to that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
MS. MINEHAN. It isn’t always necessary to be speaking to the press in order
to be seen as visible within the District. I’ve done more outreach than usual since
September 11th to any number of groups without appearing in the press one time. And I
feel comfortable, though I know the range of uncertainty is wide, that because of that
activity I have some feel of what is going on--much more so than if I had made a dozen
speeches. That’s because these interactions give us more information and they involve
less effort and worry than speaking to the press, with all the preparation that goes into
that. So I think it’s something that we all ought to think about carefully as we balance
how to spend our time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow. 

MR. MOSKOW. I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I don’t 

think today is the time to take a risk of adversely affecting business confidence.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. I support your recommendation.

10/2/01

87
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And finally, President McTeer. 

MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Would you proceed to read the 


appropriate text?
MR. BERNARD. You’ll find the wording on page 13 of Bluebook: “The
Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster
price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 2-1/2 percent.”
For the balance of risks statement in the press statement: “Against the background of its
long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth, and of the information
currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll. 

MR. BERNARD. 

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Minehan
President Moskow
President Poole

Yes
Yes 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes




















CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’d like to call a recess and request that the
Board of Governors meet next door to discuss an appropriate action on the discount rate
requests of the Reserve Banks.

10/2/01

88
[Meeting recessed]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As you can see in the draft press statement

we’ve distributed, we’ve adopted the Hoenig principle on these types of press releases on
the grounds that the more we try to say, the more complex the issue gets and the less
clear our actual message. I think that has worked well and we thank you.
MR. HOENIG. Oh, you’re very welcome! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In any event, this wording is very close to the
previous statement made after our last meeting. I assume you’ve all had a chance to look
at it. Does anybody have any strong objections to letting it go as it is? If not, I thank you
all very much.
Our next meeting is scheduled for November 6th. This meeting is adjourned
but we will have Don Winn as our guest at lunch to give us a review of the legislative
agenda.
END OF MEETING

