Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

August 21, 2001 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 21, 2001,
at 9:00 a.m.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Meyer
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Poole
Messrs. Jordan, McTeer, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Reinhart, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Hakkio, Howard, Hunter, Lindsey, Rasche,
Slifman, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Ms. Smith, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

2

Mr. Madigan, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Helkie, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board
of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Mr. Kumasaka, Assistant Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Ms. Browne, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Messrs. Eisenbeis and Lacker, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rosenblum and
Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Atlanta, Richmond, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Cleveland
respectively
Ms. Hargraves and Mr. Judd, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
New York and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 

August 21, 2001 


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to move approval of the minutes of the
June 26-27, 2001 meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval.
MS. MINEHAN. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. Dino Kos.
MR. KOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to the
charts that were distributed at your places earlier this morning. 1
The first chart depicts the standard 3-month cash and forward
deposit rates from early April through last Friday. As you can see, U.S.
short-term rates continued to decline over the recent intermeeting
interval. Weak corporate earnings, layoff announcements, and a Beige
Book that was perceived as downbeat were among many other factors
that affected sentiment during the period. Three-month cash and
forward rates declined by about 20 basis points over the period. Ninemonth forward rates rose immediately after the June FOMC meeting
but then declined quickly and on balance fell about 35 basis points for
the period as a whole. While the 9-month forward rate may suggest
that the market is building toward a tightening later in 2002, as perhaps
does the Eurodollar future strip, other indicators such as the 2-year
note are more ambiguous--a subject I’ll talk about later.
In the euro area, cash rates have been stable since the last meeting,
but 3-month and 9-month forward rates have continued to be pulled
lower, by 16 and 21 basis points respectively. Forecasts for the euroarea economy have been trimmed and the market is cautiously building
in some additional easing, with many market participants expecting 25
basis points of ease at the end of this month. The largest changes in
rates occurred on August 8th and 9th after the Beige Book was released
here and the ECB’s monthly report, which was viewed as paving the
way for an ease in policy, was released in Europe.
The bottom panel shows the Japanese government yield curve from
3 months out to 10 years. I’ve highlighted three snapshots coinciding
with the last two FOMC meeting dates and this past Friday, ahead of
the current meeting. The short end of the curve is below 20 basis points
1

The charts used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript.

8/21/01

2

out to 3 years, but the longer end of the curve has proved more resistant
to further prodding by the Bank of Japan. The announcement by the
Bank of Japan on August 14th that it would increase its current account
balance target from 5 trillion to 6 trillion and also raise the pace of JGB
purchases has not noticeably affected the yield curve. In fact, the
longer end of the curve is actually higher than it was on June 26th.
Turning to page 2, I’ve provided a snapshot of asset prices in U.S.
markets. All three markets--the fixed income, equity, and foreign
exchange markets--reflect a continually shifting sentiment and are
discounting a weaker outlook. The top panel shows the 2-, 10-, and 30year yields along with the fed funds target since April 1st. The entire
curve has shifted lower and the 2- to 30-year spread has steepened by
another 10 basis points, from about 166 basis points at the time of the
last meeting to about 176 basis points at the close yesterday.
I would make two points. First, benchmark long-term rates have
come down quite a bit in the last seven weeks. The 10-year is down
about 40 basis points and the 30-year is down somewhat less, by about
20 basis points. Second, the 2-year note traded as low as 3.64 percent
during this period, the lowest rate since the 2-year note began to be
regularly auctioned in 1976. By way of comparison, during 1992 and
1993, when the funds rate was at 3 percent for an extended period of
time, the 2-year rate never fell below 3.66 percent. Given the
sensitivity of the 2-year note to the funds rate, if the markets were
building toward a tightening at some point--as suggested by the
Eurodollar futures and the forward rate agreements--then one might
have expected the 2-year note yield to be higher than it is now. So, its
behavior at least raises questions about the signals being given by some
of those other indicators.
In the middle panel I’ve plotted the major U.S. stock indices
indexed to 100 on April 1st, which also coincides roughly with their
lows for 2001. As reflected in the chart, those indices rose through
much of the spring but have been coming down--and have continued to
come down in the intermeeting period--as the market has adjusted to
the weaker outlook.
The bottom panel shows changes in the trade-weighted value of the
dollar against other major currencies. The dollar has declined modestly
on a trade-weighted basis, but that masks sharper declines against some
of the major currencies, especially the yen, the euro, the Swiss franc,
and even some other currencies such as the Singapore dollar that have
been used as funding currencies in so-called carry trades. In part the
decline is probably due to perceptions about the recovery; in part it may
reflect some risk aversion. As economic activity seems to be slowing

8/21/01

3


globally, a little risk aversion may lead to a closing out of some carry
trades. And finally, some of the ongoing chatter in markets about the
Administration’s posture toward the dollar may also be a contributing
factor.
Turning to the third page, the top panel depicts the major European
equity indices, also going back to early April. They show a similar
pattern to that in U.S. markets except that the decline has been more
dramatic for European equities, especially over the intermeeting period.
In that interval most of these major indices fell between 3-1/2 and 10
percent, in part reflecting revisions in forecasts for growth as well as
weak earnings. Interestingly, though, the euro actually had one of its
sharpest rallies since its launch, moving from about 85 cents to almost
92 cents during this period for reasons that are not fully clear, given
some of the news that was coming out of Europe. One explanation
might be that interest rate differentials are finally biting. Those interest
rates have been narrowing for almost two years in favor of the euro.
The bottom panel shows the differentials between dollar and euro swap
rates. These spreads continue to decline modestly but are still slightly
in favor of the dollar.
Turning to the next page, the top panel depicts the dollar-yen
exchange rate. A couple of noteworthy events have taken place in
Japan since the last FOMC meeting. First, the Upper House elections
were held and the LDP and Prime Minister Koizumi did quite well--an
outcome that is expected to accelerate structural reforms in Japan.
Second, on August 14th the BOJ announced changes in its operational
targets, as I noted earlier. That combination would have been expected
to produce a weakening in the yen and a lift to the equity markets. In
the event, the yen actually has appreciated from about 125 to below 120
this morning and equity prices have continued their decline, as reflected
in the middle panel. The reasons for the yen’s appreciation are not
fully obvious. Repatriation and the approach of the end of the fiscal
half-year have been mentioned yet again. Another possibility is that
there may be some risk aversion kicking in that is causing some of the
short yen trades to be unwound. But it’s not immediately apparent why
the yen would be appreciating in this kind of environment.
As I mentioned, Japanese equities have continued to decline with
only a brief interruption after the Upper House elections and the BOJ’s
operational changes. The Nikkei, which was over 13,000 at the time of
the last FOMC meeting is now below 12,000 and at its lowest level
since 1984. The Topix Bank sub-index has also been falling again,
reflecting renewed doubts about the health of the Japanese banking
system. As the bottom panel shows, that sub-index is actually lower
now than it was during the 1998 banking crisis in Japan.

4

8/21/01

Turning to the last page, the chart shows monthly growth rates,
seasonally adjusted, for currency during 2001. As you can see, we’ve
had elevated currency growth in July and also in August. Most of that
is attributed to cash shipments overseas, primarily to Argentina. The
growth of currency has been running at roughly double the rates
observed earlier this year, translating into deepening reserve needs over
the past intermeeting period. Those deeper needs were met primarily
by an expansion of the permanent SOMA portfolio and by a modest
increase in the amount of long-term RPs outstanding.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign exchange operations during
the intermeeting period, but I will need a vote to ratify the domestic
operations. And I will be happy to take any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Dino? If not-VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval of domestic operations.
MR. PARRY. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. Now we’ll go on
to David Wilcox and Vince Reinhart. David.
MR. WILCOX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A reader of this
meeting’s Greenbook could be forgiven, I think, for contracting at least
a mild case of sticker shock. After all, we revised down our estimate of
growth for the current year--already half completed--by 0.4 percentage
point, and for next year by twice that much, to cut 1-1/4 percentage
points from the level of GDP by the end of next year. But rather than
casting this forecast as a big change from its predecessor, I would like
to begin today by making the case that this can largely be seen as a
status quo forecast.
Without a doubt, there has been considerable buzz in the last few
weeks about the revisions to the national income accounts and how
dramatically those revisions have changed perceptions of
macroeconomic reality. In a way, of course, that is correct. The
revised figures suggest that firms invested much less than previously
estimated during the past three years. Accordingly, capital deepening
occurred at a slower pace, and that has important implications, of
course, for growth prospects. As my colleagues Fleischman, Sichel,
and Struckmeyer outlined in their memo to you last week, we have
trimmed our estimate of potential GDP growth by four tenths this year
and six tenths next year. Obviously, a revision of this magnitude is of
enormous consequence for some issues, including assessments of the

8/21/01

5

trend rate of growth in the standard of living, the long-term outlook for
the federal budget, and the solvency of the Social Security system.
But the implications of the NIPA revisions for the conduct of
monetary policy could easily be overdone. To a first approximation,
the recent history of inflation remains essentially as previously
estimated. From that, we infer to a first approximation that the
pressures on productive resources probably were about as we had
estimated based on the previous numbers. In particular, the gap
between actual and potential GDP probably was about as we had it,
albeit with lower levels of both actual and potential output.
Previously, we had been attributing a goodly portion of the
outstanding inflation performance of the late 1990s to the acceleration
in structural productivity. Now, with the productivity boom
downgraded a notch, it can obviously do less of the work for us in
terms of explaining why inflation has stayed so low during the last five
or six years. So what explains the extraordinarily good inflation
performance of the late 1990s? The short answer is that we don’t know
for sure, but something else must have been causing inflation to behave
so well despite the low unemployment rate. Often cited candidates
include the rise of temporary help supply firms, better job matching
facilitated by the Internet, welfare reform, and reduced pricing power
due to more intense foreign competition. Before, we were in the
slightly awkward position of having no room for any of these entirely
plausible explanations to play a role. Now, there is scope for these
possible changes in the behavior of labor and product markets to be part
of the story. While we are uncertain about the precise magnitudes of
the various individual effects, we are assuming they will persist, with
the consequence being essentially equivalent to a reduction in the longrun NAIRU from 5-1/2 percent to 5-1/4 percent.
Thus, when all the dust has settled, our assessment is that you are
operating in an environment that in some ways looks very similar to the
one we saw in June: Inflation is about the same and the pressures on
resource utilization look similar. As a result, the stance of monetary
policy, as gauged by the gap between r and r*, also looks about the
same.
That said, let me now turn up the microscope and point out some of
the adjustments that we have made to our outlook in the context of that
broadly similar framework. By far the most important of these
adjustments is a further marking down of our outlook for business
investment. As you know, the data on orders for June were
extraordinarily weak, headlined by a 13 percent decline in orders for
communications equipment, not at an annual rate. As we could find

8/21/01

6


little solace either in the Beige Book or in our own informal contacts
with members of the business community, we are now assuming that
this quarter’s decline in real spending for equipment and software will
be essentially as steep as last quarter’s. We’re also assuming that the
fourth quarter will show no great improvement either. In addition, we
have turned much more bearish on the outlook for nonresidential
structures. While the commercial real estate sector seems to have
avoided repeating the excesses of the late 1980s, vacancy rates have
been rising sharply of late and we foresee several more quarters of
declining spending on nonresidential structures. This, too, seems to be
supported by the reports summarized in the Beige Book and elsewhere.
In contrast, we continue to be surprised to the upside by the strength
of consumer spending. The advance estimate of retail sales for July
was noticeably stronger than we had been expecting, and with the tax
rebate arriving in most households’ mailboxes this month and next, we
still anticipate that household spending will provide important support
to activity in the months ahead.
The only other notable modification to our near-term outlook is
mostly just a matter of timing. By our assessment, automakers have
been in the process of building more vehicles--especially trucks--this
quarter than we think they can reasonably expect to sell. As a
consequence, we think they will need to cut production significantly in
the fourth quarter. The resulting swings in production, on our
assumptions, add about 1/2 percentage point to GDP growth this
quarter and take away about 1-1/4 percentage point next quarter. We
may be off on our timing one way or the other but unless sales pick up
substantially, a sharp cutback in production from current plans
sometime in the next few months seems highly likely. And Ford’s
announcement last week--which is already built into our numbers--is
probably only the beginning.
So from a larger perspective, how should you, as the principals in
this process, audit the reasonableness of our projection? As a starting
point, I suggest that you consider three basic questions. First, do you
find our revisions to potential GDP growth plausible? We now have
the growth of potential GDP slowing from 3-3/4 percent last year to 3
percent this year and to 2-3/4 percent next year, reflecting a slower pace
of capital deepening. I should note, for those who are trying to gauge
the long-term growth potential of the economy, that on our current
outlook for business investment we would have the growth of potential
edging back up perhaps to about 3 percent after 2002.
Second, do you find it plausible that we have adjusted our forecast
for actual GDP roughly in line with the revision to potential, leaving

8/21/01

7

aside some issues of lags? Our theory in making this adjustment is that
households and firms should not be completely oblivious to the change
in the outlook. Indeed, households and firms were likely on to this
even before we were. In particular, we know that for the most part
households tie their spending to the trend in their income. And if the
trend in their income slows, then we should have a good deal of
confidence that their spending will slow as well, even if with a short
lag. We also know that businesses gauge their need for productive
plant and equipment to the pace of their current and expected activity.
And if they sense that activity is not living up to prior billing, they can
be counted on to trim their investment spending accordingly.
I should hasten to say that not everyone is as glum as we are about
the near-term prospects for real activity; for example, the most recent
Blue Chip consensus is at 2-1/4 percent for growth in the second half.
But in the face of a noticeably weaker foreign outlook, unremitting
gloom from the industrial sector, continued bad news from the tech
sector, and a steady drumbeat of negative earnings and layoff
announcements, I am a bit hard pressed to share their optimism.
Third, do you find our cautious optimism about the outlook for
inflation plausible? To be sure, as we highlighted in the “alternative
simulations” section of the Greenbook, the substantial downward
revision to the markup in the NIPA accounts appears to take away a
cushion we thought firms had to absorb future cost pressures. If firms
move to restore that cushion, the consequence could be several more
tenths of inflation as early as next year. However, the environment we
see is one of low capacity utilization, increasing slack in labor markets,
and earlier retrenchment in energy prices than we had previously been
expecting. Moreover, we believe the revised data on compensation per
hour for the year 2000 may be importantly distorted by the treatment of
options granted by employers, so we have been inclined to discount
these data. While margins clearly cannot be suppressed without limit,
we are inclined to believe that the plausible limit has not been reached
yet, and so we anticipate continued relatively good inflation
performance over the forecast period.
Let me conclude by focusing on one of the risks to the outlook that
we highlighted in the “alternative simulations” section of the
Greenbook--namely, the risk of a major stock market correction.
Contrary to my general story line that the NIPA revisions did not affect
much of interest, I don’t think that’s the case here. As you know, there
were downward revisions over the last several years to NIPA dividends
and earnings. Moreover, our analysis leads us to be considerably more
guarded in our assessment of the outlook for the trends in these series
based on the downward revised growth in potential output. That

8/21/01

8


implies that today’s level of equity prices is being carried on a shakier
foundation of fundamentals. I should add parenthetically that I think
this morning’s story in the Wall Street Journal reinforces this view,
although it doesn’t alter the validity of the NIPA accounts because, for
all their shortcomings, the NIPA accounts happen to get this aspect of
earnings reporting correct. On the whole, this leads us to conclude that
whatever our level of apprehension about the market before the release
of the NIPA data, it probably ought to be moved up a notch in light of
the new information.
MR. REINHART. Perhaps the hardest challenge confronting the
staff as we sorted through the incoming data over the intermeeting
period to prepare a forecast for the global economy was to avoid falling
into a self-reinforcing spiral of pessimism. As the forecasting process
unfolded, we marked down the outlook for economic growth abroad in
part because of weaker prospects at home. But this translated into the
expectation of both lower U.S. net exports and a weaker global market
for technological products, trimming the projection for U.S. GDP and
creating obvious implications for overseas activity. This iterative
process converged at a significantly weakened projection for foreign
economic growth relative to what you saw eight weeks ago. Still, we
think forces are in place that will foster a revival in growth, albeit a
little more delayed and to a somewhat slower pace than thought at the
time of the June meeting.
As for the near-term outlook, real GDP in the foreign industrial
countries is expected to expand at just over a 1 percent annual rate in
the second half of 2001, about 1/2 percentage point slower than
forecasted in June. We have also penciled in only modest expansion in
the developing economies of Asia and Latin America over the
remainder of the year that puts the level of their output at the end of this
year 1-1/4 percent, on average, below our projection in the last
Greenbook. Three factors mostly account for our more pessimistic take
on the pace of global economic activity this year.
First, incoming data on spending, production, and employment
have almost invariably disappointed. Output contracted in Germany
and Italy in the second quarter, and more forward-looking indicators of
household confidence and business purchasing intentions do not bode
well for growth going forward in the euro area. While domestic
spending in Canada has held up well thus far, employment is beginning
to sag. And Japan appears to have slipped into another recession. Real
GDP is also declining in the developing countries of Asia that direct
much of their exports to the global electronics market and in those
countries in Latin America with trade tightly linked to the United
States. Meanwhile, the prices of many internationally traded

8/21/01

9


commodities have continued to tumble, which is probably a sign of
falling contemporaneous demand.
That leads naturally to the second source of downward revision to
foreign growth--the marking lower of the near-term U.S. outlook.
We’ve pulled down our projection of activity abroad both because
some of the adverse effect of more slowly growing demand in the
United States falls on foreign markets and because an important drag on
our own economy--reduced demands for capital attendant to the re
evaluation of the prospects for the tech sector--is also playing out in
many other countries.
Third, it has become painfully clear that the financial crisis in
Argentina has already extracted a heavy economic toll there. Output is
contracting, unemployment is rising, and prices are declining.
Meanwhile, risk spreads remain elevated and deposits in the banking
sector are running off rapidly. Indeed, the most obvious vote of “no
confidence” in the current situation is what Dino already related--that
an estimated $4 billion of U.S. currency was shipped to Argentina last
month. Perhaps it evidences our lack of imagination, but we find it
hard to picture how the government of Argentina can extricate itself
from this situation in a manner that stanches output losses anytime
soon. And without economic growth, its poor fiscal position stemming
from its high debt burden will only look more unsustainable than it
does today, and the threat of spillovers to Argentina’s neighbors will be
that much more palpable.
After the forecast was put to bed, we received data on U.S.
international trade for June that would not lead us to alter the top-line
number we wrote down in the Greenbook but that did serve to
underscore our sense of ongoing weakness in global economic activity.
The U.S. trade deficit on goods and services, at $29-1/2 billion, was
about what we were expecting and close to the number the BEA
assumed in constructing its preliminary estimate of second-quarter
GDP. What surprised us, however, was that this deficit was arrived at
by shrinking the values of both exports and imports. Particularly of
note was the fact that the dollar value of capital goods crossing our
borders in either direction was smaller in June than in May, extending
the trend of the past few months.
While I’ve emphasized the downward revision of foreign
economic growth in the near term, perhaps the most important feature
of the outlook is unchanged. We still believe that economic growth
abroad will pick up next year to a rate not very much below that of its
potential. This growth revival may be a bit more attenuated than in the
prior few Greenbooks, but it still relies on the same four forces.

8/21/01

10

First and foremost, as David has already described, the expansion
of U.S. economic activity is expected to step up in 2002. We think that
will be associated with a large positive swing in the growth of U.S. real
imports that will benefit activity in our trading partners. Moreover,
given that the U.S. growth pickup includes a turnaround in investment,
greater demands for capital here will brighten the outlook for the tech
sector worldwide.
Second, while data on inventories abroad are spotty and unreliable,
we believe that part of the dynamics of the slowing of the past few
quarters in many foreign countries has included a production
adjustment in response to some stockbuilding that developed as demand
weakened unexpectedly. As inventories stop falling next year, that
drag on real GDP growth will be lifted.
Third, monetary policy in many industrial countries has already
weighed in to support aggregate demand going forward. We think that
most of those central banks will continue to ease and that some other
central banks will join in. In the case of the Bank of Japan, however, it
remains to be seen whether an elevated provision of liquidity, which
was announced last week, will bolster spending given that the policy
rate is already at its zero floor. The issues are more conventional when
it comes to Europe. In common with the net judgment of participants
pricing money market futures, we believe that the European Central
Bank will ease 50 basis points by year-end, as their task is made easier
by declines in headline inflation induced by falling energy prices.
Fourth, with regard to energy more generally, the price of West
Texas intermediate oil has fallen about $4 per barrel over the past three
quarters, and our forecast, following oil futures markets, holds that
another $3 per barrel price drop is in store by year-end 2002. We
anticipate that this price decline has been and will be shifting income to
those residents of the global economy who are more likely to spend it,
bolstering consumption in many countries.
Although we’re relatively confident about the existence of these
forces helping to shape a rebound in spending in 2002, their magnitude,
timing, and whether other sources of restraint will more than offset
their impetus are far from certain. Two prominent risks emanate from
global financial markets.
For one, we assumed in our projection that the real foreign
exchange value of the dollar would follow a track tilted slightly
downward. But the fact is that the dollar’s value fell more in the past
week than the decline stretched out over the next six quarters in our

8/21/01

11

projection. This recent downdraft might be the first sign of a risk factor
that we’ve fretted about for some time--that foreign investors’ appetite
for adding to their holdings of U.S. obligations will wane. But the
foreign exchange market has given us false signals before, so we have
treated this latest stepdown as evidence of greater odds on a downside
risk rather than as a reason to pull down our baseline forecast. To get a
sense of how events may unfold should that risk materialize, we
included an alternative simulation in the Greenbook in which the
dollar’s broad real value drops nearly one-quarter by early next year.
From a U.S. perspective, the resulting ratcheting higher of foreign
relative to domestic prices encourages exports and pulls down imports
to add about 3/4 percentage point to GDP growth in the first half of
next year and twice that amount in the second half. The impetus to
inflation is even more striking, with core inflation running 1-1/2
percentage points faster by the end of next year. The chief risk to the
global economy is that this relative price change off-loads some of our
ongoing weakness to our trading partners. With the nominal interest
rate already at zero in Japan and the fiscal deficit a source of concern,
Japanese policymakers may be poorly positioned to counter such
imported weakness and, unless the stronger euro emboldens the ECB,
European policymakers may not be willing to do so.
As another risk, our Latin American outlook assumes that the
fallout from problems in Argentina will be relatively contained to that
nation’s immediate trading partners and other Latin countries reliant on
international capital markets. That assumption was based on the logic
that global investors have seen this coming and that the IMF’s stand-by
arrangement with Brazil will ring-fence that country. But part of
Argentine officials’ bargaining strategy of late has apparently been to
elevate expectations in the market of the size of a package in order to
put pressure on the international financial institutions. If either less
new money is forthcoming than those encouraged expectations or what
comes fails to cover Argentina’s subsequent reserve losses, then the
scope and severity of contagion may be more than we’ve built into the
Greenbook. I don’t have a simulation to point to mainly because it
didn’t seem like a productive use of our large-scale macro models, as it
would be highly nonlinear and especially dependent on market
sentiment. That concludes our presentation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues? President Parry.
MR. PARRY. David, you mentioned three considerations that we might want to take
into account as we look at the forecast. The second was that the variability in aggregate supply
gets translated pretty much on a one-for-one basis into the variability in aggregate demand. I

12

8/21/01

must admit I was a little surprised by that in the sense that although current short-term prospects
for earnings and for income are likely to affect demand, I believe that permanent income also
plays some role. If that’s the case--if there are more permanent influences--in terms of aggregate
demand, wouldn’t there be less of a response than a one-for-one change?
MR. WILCOX. Let me make two comments on that. First of all, I made an oblique
reference to the issue of lags. We translate a downward shift in the trend in incomes to consumer
spending with a lagged response of a couple of quarters. We think it takes households a little
while to catch on to this change. We brought down potential GDP growth by 0.4 percentage
point this year. We think about half of that lower potential growth this year translates into a
reduction in actual GDP growth. For next year we took potential down by 0.6 percentage point.
And by that time we believe the adjustment process is far enough along so that households will
begin to recognize a softening in their income prospects, and indeed in their permanent income,
and that will be incorporated into their spending. So we feel that over that kind of time horizon
it’s realistic to build changes in the fundamental tenor of income into the growth of consumer
spending.
MR. PARRY. Permanent income as well?
MR. WILCOX. Yes.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No further questions? Who would like to start our
Committee discussion? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The overall economic picture in our
District has not changed markedly over the last several weeks. Manufacturing activity continues
to decline, although perhaps at a bit slower pace than earlier. The key issue, of course, as

13

8/21/01

highlighted in the Beige Book summary, is whether the weakness in the manufacturing sector is
going to spill over into other sectors of the economy. I don’t think we have any very conclusive
evidence regarding that in our District. I read a book recently that talked about a tourist at Fort
Sumter asking a guide why so many Civil War battles were fought at national parks [laughter] so
I’m very skittish, even more so than usual, about ascribing causality. However, retail sales have
weakened in our area in recent weeks, in contrast to the national data, and it seems reasonable to
me to speculate that at least some of this weakness reflects the softness in manufacturing. And
the problems from high-tech manufacturing and related industries clearly are contributing to
what appears to be a growing weakness in commercial real estate and commercial construction
activity in parts of our District where high-tech activity is concentrated, such as Northern
Virginia and the Raleigh-Durham area in North Carolina.
We don’t see in our region any definitive indication that manufacturing is bottoming
out yet, but there are at least a few straws in the wind. I have a contact in a sizable trucking
company that is based in Richmond but does a lot of business with the furniture manufacturers
and others in the Carolinas. His firm does a large volume of business and it’s broadly spread,
and I think he’s a reliable source of information. He tells me that his customers’ shipments have
been stabilizing most recently and that several manufacturing operations in the Carolinas are
telling him that conditions are at least not getting any worse. Elsewhere, revenues in District
service industries other than retailing continue to grow at a healthy pace, according to the
monthly service sector survey we do. And residential sales and construction activity are holding
at their recent high levels.
So to summarize on the District, we have not seen a lot of change except perhaps some
negative spillover from manufacturing to other sectors of the economy. But there is a glimmer

8/21/01

14

of an inflection point in manufacturing, to use a phrase that Jeff Lacker coined the other day.
The Greenbook forecast for the national economy has an inflection point of its own.
The forecast calls for the decline in the rate of real GDP growth to end in the second quarter and
for growth to reaccelerate gradually this year and next year. There are obviously significant
downside risks in this forecast, and David has noted a number of them. One is the projected
return of business investment to at least a moderate upward trajectory next spring; it could take
longer. Consumer spending could be significantly weaker than projected for any number of
reasons, and all the downside risks in the domestic outlook obviously are compounded by the
cumulating weakness in the international economy.
But in my view there are also some modest signs of improvement. The retail sales
report for the month of July, released recently, got my attention. I think it’s quite positive when
one digs down into the details. It’s only one monthly report to be sure, but it is at least consistent
with the idea that the reduction in energy prices--or the anticipation of declining energy pricesand the significant monetary stimulus already in the pipeline may be shoring up household
spending. Elsewhere, manufacturing activity as measured in the industrial production index was
flat last month after a long series of monthly declines. Even when one abstracts from the strong
motor vehicle production, what is left is a decline but a smaller decline than we’ve seen for a
number of months. Job markets are still softening but overall the July report suggests that they
may not be softening quite as rapidly as had been feared earlier. And all of these developments
are reinforced by the continuing strength in residential construction.
The current view in financial markets, as reported in the media at least, seems to be
that a bottoming out in the economy is now further out in the future than most people had
thought several weeks ago. The recent information I just cited suggests that the gradual upturn

8/21/01

15

in the economy, as projected in the Greenbook, is actually a little more plausible now than it
might have been at the time of our last meeting, or at least it seems that way to me. The
implication of this for policy, in my view, is that the economy could turn up sooner rather than
later, although that’s certainly not a sure thing. And if it does, with unemployment still relatively
low and the real funds rate quite low, we may need to reverse course promptly and remove some
of the stimulus that is currently in the pipeline. Historically, this has always been a very difficult
thing for the Fed to do. So I think we need to begin to prepare ourselves as well as the public for
this possibility, in the absence of a marked further weakening in the economic outlook. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. At each of our recent meetings I’ve expected better news next time,
and each time the news has been disappointing. The slowdown is now a year old and shows few
signs of coming to an end. Monetary policy easing began almost eight months ago. Fiscal
policy has now eased and tax rebate checks are in the mail. More recently, we seem to have
escaped a worsening of the energy crunch. These three major factors--monetary stimulus in the
pipeline, checks in the mail, and improvement in the energy outlook--should help to produce a
turnaround but there is scant evidence that they have started to do so yet. Monetary policy
probably has helped to cushion the decline, which has proven to be worse than expected.
Three special sources of strength in the Eleventh District used to be high-tech
manufacturing, trade with a booming Mexico, and energy. High-tech manufacturing is in a
serious recession. The Mexican economy is declining. And the energy boost seems to have
peaked out, luckily. Texas employment growth, which had exceeded the national average in
nine of the past ten years, has weakened sharply in every region and sector of the state, but most

16

8/21/01

sharply in the technology centers of Austin and North Dallas. Because of energy there is
continued moderate growth in the Houston area, however. The decline in Mexican
manufacturing, especially along the border in the maquiladora plants, is being felt in Texas
border towns.
In the energy area, rig counts both in Texas and the nation are below their July peaks.
About 80 percent of drilling is for natural gas, for which the price has declined below $4 per
thousand to around $3 now. That is still somewhat high by recent historical standards but it is
back close to its more usual relationship to the price of crude oil. The mood remains dark in
most technology sectors, but some anecdotal comments are beginning to be more positive in the
semiconductor industry. The U.S. semiconductor equipment book-to-bill ratio has risen
modestly since hitting an all time low of 0.36 in April.
At the national level, the Greenbook forecast and the GDP revisions tell us that not
only is the current economy getting worse but so has the past. Neither the past nor the future is
what it used to be. [Laughter] And the risks to the forecast seem mostly to be on the downside.
The main positive in the Greenbook was the slightly improved outlook for inflation over the
forecast period, and I’m not very confident about that. One way to look at the situation is that
more slack in the economy will produce less pressure on prices. But another way to look at it
includes the possibility that supply may be cut back faster than demand, a reversal of the
disinflationary consequences of rapid output growth in the late 1990s.
Based only on the state of the economy and its near-term prospects, a large policy
action is called for today. But it’s a closer call when we consider the lags and the degree of
stimulus already in the pipeline. As for the directive and the bias statement, I don’t know
whether it’s better to speak softly and carry a big stick or to be more diplomatic and say “nice

17

8/21/01

doggy” while looking for an even bigger stick. If the bias statement and the press release
weren’t already written, I’d say it’s going to be difficult to write them this time. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was! President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On balance the Seventh District
economy has not changed significantly since my report in June, but most reports now seem
somewhat more pessimistic than before, at least about the near future. Overall activity has
remained quite sluggish and that has been disappointing for many businesses that had expected,
or at least hoped, that some evidence of an upturn would be visible by now. The expected
improvement in the economy seems further in the future than when we met in June. In fact, most
business people we talk to do not expect a significant recovery in manufacturing before next
spring. There are few signs that capital spending is about to pick up and there’s growing concern
about how long consumers can continue to prop up the economy.
Manufacturing has been our weakest link for about a year now. While some key
manufacturing industries have made substantial progress in working down excess inventories,
overall production remains very weak. The light vehicle industry is somewhat of an exception;
on average inventories are now in good shape. Production nationally has been trending up
somewhat since January and capacity utilization is up to 88 percent, about as good as it gets in
the auto industry. Of course, even this industry is not out of the woods, as David Wilcox
mentioned earlier. So far this year, substantial incentives have been needed to keep light vehicle
sales at high levels, and industry contacts indicate that sales have been soft so far in August.
And more generally, they expect sales to be lower in the second half than in the first half of the
year. In addition, incentive spending is not expected to change much, and that means profits will
continue to be squeezed.

18


8/21/01

Most firms are still attempting to reduce costs and are being very cautious about
capital spending. Indeed, the outlook for capital spending is poor in a large number of industries.
For example, no recovery is in sight for heavy truck sales. The steel industry has little incentive
to increase capital spending, given the significant excess capacity and the lack of pricing power.
The gypsum wallboard industry is also plagued with over-capacity despite the fact that the robust
housing market has helped keep shipments strong. And high-tech remains an area of special
weakness, with most observers indicating that it will be some time before the overhang can be
worked off.
One piece of good news came from the paper industry where demand for cardboard
boxes improved in the last few weeks. But our contacts emphasized that the improvement really
has not lasted long enough to discern a turn. Consumer spending and housing activity are still
holding up reasonably well in our District, although many retailers have become less optimistic
about the future. Reports indicate softer consumer spending in the Midwest than elsewhere in
the country, amid signs that individuals are becoming more price conscious. Discounters and
value-oriented retailers seem to be the most aggressive in trying to capture the tax refund
business. While sales results are still rather sketchy, it appears that those retailers are the ones
that are benefiting the most. Even as the tax rebate checks trickle into the economy, many
retailers continue to lower their sales expectations for the fall and for the winter.
Our housing markets remain relatively robust, although some contacts are skeptical
about how long such resilience will continue. We’ve had scattered reports of reductions in
asking prices for some higher priced homes in Chicago, although these prices are still above
year-ago levels. And I’ve become increasingly concerned about potential overbuilding in this
sector, given the tremendous amount of residential construction near and around downtown

19

8/21/01

Chicago. So far, however, the housing numbers have remained at high levels and homes that are
priced right continue to sell quickly, often with multiple bidders.
Things are not quite so rosy on the nonresidential construction side. Office vacancy
rates have continued to increase in many areas as demand has slowed. The REITs tell us that
large firms with leases coming up for renewal are consistently cutting back their office space
requirements. With these trends visible nationwide as well, there has been a significant adverse
impact on the office furniture industry that is concentrated in western Michigan. This industry
expects to see the sharpest drop in shipments since records were first tallied in the early ’70s.
Since the slowdown began, our labor markets have eased somewhat more than they
have in the nation as a whole. District employers are still reporting that it’s less difficult to hire
and retain workers in most areas and that wage pressures have subsided further. Total payroll
employment in our five-state area has been below year-ago levels for two months now,
something we haven’t experienced since the end of 1991. However, the latest Manpower
Survey, which will be released publicly next Monday, August 27th, shows a small pickup in the
hiring intentions of Midwestern employers for the fourth quarter, which may indicate that the
worst is over for our region. The national index declined slightly further, however, taking it to
its lowest level since the end of 1993.
Turning to the national outlook, like many of our business contacts we think the
pickup in economic growth will be delayed further. We still believe the second quarter will be
the worst of this cycle, but growth this quarter looks to be quite anemic as well. In particular,
another substantial decline in capital spending should largely offset the positive effects of the tax
rebate and consumer spending. We continue to think the most likely scenario has growth
returning to its potential by the second half of next year but we certainly can’t rule out a worse

20

8/21/01

scenario. As our business contacts keep repeating, consumer spending and housing activity may
falter before the inventory and capital spending adjustments are completed. The outlook for
world growth has deteriorated, signs of economic instability are evident in parts of Latin
America and Asia, and the international situation could erode further. For the long term, I
remain somewhat concerned about inflation, but for now the risks still seem tilted decidedly to
the downside.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the economic climate in the Twelfth District has turned
negative as the high-tech downturn has intensified and spilled over into other sectors. During the
three months ending in July, District employment contracted 0.3 percent at an annual rate for a
net loss of about 19,000 jobs. Downsizing among technology firms was especially pronounced.
Between May and July, employment at high-tech manufacturers and business service firms
combined fell by about 8 percent at an annual rate, substantially above the pace of contraction
during the first four months of the year. The intensity of the cutbacks among District technology
firms has begun to drag down employment growth in other sectors. Employment contracted in
construction and also fell in shipping, trucking, and warehousing during the three months ending
in July. And job gains in retail and wholesale trade have slowed to an anemic pace. The general
impact of the technology-driven downturn is evident in the District’s high-tech centers. For
example, the San Francisco Bay area has lost almost 35,000 jobs in the past four months, as both
tech and non-tech employers have scaled back. Employment in Portland and Phoenix also has
contracted in recent months and job growth in Seattle has slowed substantially. In general, the
technology-driven downturn has dramatically altered the regional pattern of growth in the
District this year, with last year’s fast-growing areas either contracting or moving laterally.

21


8/21/01

Turning to energy markets, cooler temperatures, sluggish economic activity, and
continued conservation have reduced electricity usage in California in recent weeks, easing the
demand and supply imbalance that has plagued the state for most of the year. Better market
conditions and lower natural gas prices have resulted in wholesale spot electricity prices of
around $50 per megawatt hour in mid-August, well below the $200 average recorded for May.
While lower wholesale prices generally are good news for California, the declines are not likely
to reverse the trend in retail rate hikes that took effect in June. A number of factors will keep
those rates up. The California Department of Water Resources, which currently is purchasing
electricity for California’s major utilities, needs the revenue to cover past costs and what have
turned out to be relatively high prices on long-term contracts. And the public utilities want
assurances that retail rates will allow them to recoup past losses in addition to covering costs
going forward. Right now concern on the part of utilities over the adequacy of the current rate
structure is holding up the issuance of $12.5 billion in revenue bonds meant to repay the state for
the billions of dollars the Department of Water Resources has spent on electricity this year. At
this point, it looks as if the bonds will not be issued before October or even November. Given
the delay in issuance, cash flow constraints likely will lead the state to issue revenue anticipation
bonds. The state controller has indicated that these bonds, which would be issued after Labor
Day, could amount to $5.7 billion.
Turning to the national economy, the industrial output and retail sales reports for July
may raise a glimmer of hope that the economy is beginning to turn around. However, it seems
fair to say that the recent data taken together show few, if any, signs of a pickup in activity. Our
best guess is for growth of around 1 percent in the current quarter. After that, several factors
should operate at about the same time to stimulate faster growth, including the stimulus from

8/21/01

22

monetary policy and a tax cut that has turned out to be timed almost perfectly. We should have a
better idea of how much of an effect it is having on consumer spending by our next meeting. In
addition, the substantial turnaround in energy prices this year should help to promote a pickup in
activity.
For next year our forecast, which like the Greenbook assumes no further change in the
funds rate, shows real GDP growth increasing to more acceptable rates of around 3 percent. Of
course, there are some notable downside risks in the economy, having to do especially with
consumer spending and developments abroad. Overall, our forecast would leave labor and
product markets about in line with their average long-run utilization levels and there would be
little upward or downward pressure on inflation next year. We are looking for inflation in the
core PCE price index of just below 2 percent both this year and next. While it’s obviously good
that we don’t appear to be facing rising inflationary pressures, I think it’s also worth noting that
the current period of slow growth could be completed without the kind of reduction in inflation
that often accompanies such periods. This outcome would be disappointing since I certainly
would like to see a further modest decline in inflation over time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, what a difference six weeks
make! Or maybe I should say what a difference one additional month of data and some revisions
of past data make. You will recall that New England’s headline economic data had been a bit
better than those for the nation as a whole, though anecdotes from regional businesses had been
turning increasingly gloomy. That gloom seems now to be justified. With the state and regional
employment data that were released last Friday, the region looks considerably different, with
levels of employment declining month to month and year-over-year growth at a fraction of its

23

8/21/01

long-term trend. The unemployment rate also tipped up from month to month by 0.3 percentage
point. Add to that the escalating costs in the Boston metropolitan area and the fact that the
anecdotes have turned from gloomy to almost ugly and we have a region that no longer appears
to be Teflon coated. Where is the downturn occurring? In the usual places--primarily
manufacturing, particularly high-tech manufacturing, though retailers also describe consumer
activity as anemic.
Several themes run through our discussions with manufacturers. First, most in the
high-tech arena are convinced now that the turnaround is not likely to come anytime soon. Some
firms don't expect a resumption of "normal" activity, however that is defined right now, until the
second half of 2002. In the face of weak demand and no signs of a pickup, the emphasis is on
reducing costs. Even the unusual firm that continues to do well is being much more cautious on
the cost side. Businesses of all sizes are putting enormous pressure on their supply chains.
We've heard this before but demands for price concessions reportedly have accelerated.
The second theme has to do with IT spending. Almost all high-tech manufacturers
noted that one major reason IT spending will pick up only very slowly is that many companies
are quite a ways from growing into the infrastructure they already own. Also, obsolescence is
being carefully managed. Desktops, once obsolete in two years, can be left in place for five
years. One of the Bank's directors referred to this as a lack of “killer apps.” That is, in the face
of slow demand, considerable IT investment already in place, as well as cost pressures, the new
technology that will drive new spending has yet to surface and may well be greeted with some
skepticism when it does.
Finally, among both large and small firms the availability of bank credit has become a
concern. Even when firms have found financing in the bond market not much of a problem,

24

8/21/01

they’ve seen credit market difficulties impact partner companies and joint ventures and have
experienced difficulties in renewing their own revolving credit arrangements. Big firms with
lower credit ratings are reportedly shut out of credit markets and smaller healthy firms are facing
higher rates.
There are a few brighter spots in the region. Residential construction and real estate
markets have held up well, albeit with some deterioration at the high end of the market. In
addition, labor market tightness has eased. This seems to be helping area firms keep costs in
check, as there is much less upward pressure on compensation. Firms that are still hiring say
they are able to be much more selective; it is easier to get new hires, and the recruits are of better
caliber.
Turning to the nation, I think it is possible to read the current economy in two ways.
First, some data may be in the process of plateauing. Employment levels seem to be declining at
a slower rate. And perhaps some comfort can be taken in the single month of flat, not declining,
industrial production. Consumer sentiment is hanging in there, as are residential investment and
consumer spending. Businesses are continuing to work on increasing productivity largely by
reducing costs, and they have reacted to profit pressures by digging in, not by raising prices.
Indeed, at least one source of cost pressures, energy prices, has provided some relief already and
should continue to do so going forward. No one knows when high-tech spending will pick up,
but one gets the sense that a huge premium is being put on using existing capital to its fullest,
which augurs well for future productivity.
Looking back over the postwar period, it's unusual to find two or more quarters of
GDP growth at more than 1 percentage point below potential without a recession occurring either
immediately or one or two quarters later. Arguably, one of the only times such a period of slow

25

8/21/01

growth was followed by an enduring pickup was in the 1994-95 period, the so-called “soft
landing.” With the monetary ease now in place and whatever more is needed and the tax cut as
well, this period may turn out to be a similar landing--perhaps not so soft--prior to the takeoff of
business investment. It may be that the economy, and particularly the consumer, will continue to
muddle through until then.
Certainly that's what the Greenbook expects, as does the Boston Fed’s forecast. Our
forecast dynamics may be a little different in regard to the stability of structural productivity and
the level of the NAIRU, but the overall forecast is remarkably similar. We anticipate slower
growth this year than we had expected earlier, a gradual return to growth near potential--growth
at 3 percent or maybe a bit lower by year-end 2002--with an uptick in unemployment not as large
as in the Greenbook projection, and easing inflation. This isn't a bad outcome. In fact, again
historically speaking, it would be unusually positive. But such a forecast does require some
confidence in the more positive readings of the situation that I just delineated.
Obviously, the other way to read the current situation is to focus on the worsening
profit situation. Unless relieved by slower compensation growth and damped energy costs, profit
pressures do not bode well for the stock market, business investment, or job growth. If
consumers are hit by rapidly rising joblessness, all bets are off on housing, auto sales, and
consumption of services, as a slowdown of manufacturing spreads and becomes a wider
slowdown, and economic history repeats itself. Moreover, the other dark cloud--the external
situation, with slowing growth and regional crisis conditions--cannot help matters. As I said, the
issue is how much credibility one gives to the muddling-through hypothesis. I come out on that
side, but I think it's a close call. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.

8/21/01

26


MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I’ve commented before, and it continues
to be the case, the District economy for the most part is moving in lockstep with the national
economy. The District’s economy has slowed further, I would judge, but the slowing hasn't been
sharp. As for labor market conditions, reported job vacancies are still considerable but they are
shrinking, and meanwhile layoffs are increasing. The weakness is most visibly concentrated in
the manufacturing and mining sectors, and participants in those sectors are not expecting any
material improvement until sometime next year.
Both housing and nonresidential construction activity in our District remain healthy
and positive at the moment, although I think the seeds of some slowing are clearly visible now.
Vacancy rates in commercial space are rising. So while there is a lot of current activity, the
rising vacancies will weigh on prospects for future projects. And while homebuilding activity
and sales also remain healthy, at the upper end of the market the pace of sales is clearly slowing.
As has been the case for several months now, consumer spending and tourism activity
are at best mediocre. One exception, where things are a little better, is apparel sales. Why that's
the case, I’ve been unable to determine. But people in that business seem to be pleasantly
surprised with the sales they've been experiencing.
One of the two bright spots in the District is the energy sector which, of course, has
benefited from price changes. The other is agriculture, where--in parts of the District that have
not been plagued by drought--farmers clearly are going to get both good crops and better prices
than they had earlier expected. And we are hearing some scattered reports about spending on
durable goods by producers in those sectors for which prospects are looking up.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I don't know that I would use the term
glum, but I find myself in substantial agreement with the Greenbook forecast. I believe that real

27

8/21/01

improvement in the pace of economic activity is still some time off and I think the improvement
is likely to be anemic, at least initially, when it occurs. I'm hard pressed to identify any
significant positive surprises in the latest batch of macroeconomic data that we have received.
And the international situation is worse than I had anticipated earlier both because growth abroad
seems more sluggish than I had expected and because the recent decline in the dollar raises at
least a yellow flag in my mind. I agree that it's too early to reach any firm conclusions about
what that might portend but it does suggest to me that we should be paying at least some
attention to developments on the international front.
I've commented before and I think it's still the case that the inventory correction
process has a ways to go. As best I can judge with the benefit of hindsight, we clearly had a
capital spending bubble that has now collapsed. And that's not something that monetary policy
is inherently well positioned to deal with.
If I wanted to be a bit more positive--and I think there's something to this--there may
be reasons to believe that consumer spending will hold up as long as the rise in unemployment
from this point is not too drastic. In that regard, I take some comfort in what's going on in the
housing market. Sales of both new and existing homes have been quite healthy for a long period
of time and, after all, the purchase of a house is a long-term commitment that people are willing
to make. Now, this may involve some asset reallocation, and obviously interest rates are
favorable. Nevertheless, the fact that people are willing to undertake those kinds of long-term
commitments at the pace that has prevailed in recent months is a development I view as positive.
Finally, I am comfortable with the Greenbook's relatively favorable inflation outlook.
But in my view, what we now know about both productivity and compensation suggests that the
profit outlook is clearly negative.

8/21/01

28

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Last time I reported that the head of my
regional economics group had suggested that it looked as if it was going to be a “bummer of a
summer.” Unless you’re a homebuilder in our region, he was about right. I'm finding it harder
and harder to find just the right adjectives to describe the degree of slowing that we are
observing in our area. While I had hoped to be seeing at least a few more positive signs by now,
the overall situation is not materially different than at the time of our last meeting.
Let me highlight a few recent developments. One strikingly common story now
emerging to explain what is keeping sales growth at least modestly positive can be summed up in
one word--discounting. All the anecdotal reports on retail sales, auto sales, tourism, hotel
occupancy, cruise bookings, and airline traffic indicate that deep discounting is being used to
bolster sales, with obvious implications for prices and profitability. Let me cite just a couple of
examples to underscore that point. Hotel rooms in Orlando near Disney World can now be
booked for $40 a day. Delta Airlines senior executives tell me that while deep discount leisure
traveling is holding up well, there is a substantial drop-off in business travel, which combined
with higher energy prices compared with 1999 and 2000 is causing their negative returns.
Trucking firms are reportedly engaged in cutthroat competition, slashing mileage charges to get
freight business. And concern is now being expressed that a significant number of trucking
company failures seems all but certain. Of course, retailers and auto dealers have been resorting
to sales discount programs and rebates to liquidate excess inventories.
We are also getting more and more reports that companies are cutting perks and other
discretionary expenses to protect profits. Cuts are even hitting executive entertainment. Some of
you may know that bird hunting is one of the longtime favorite sports of good old boy executives

8/21/01

29

in the South; it’s a favorite executive ritual when it comes to entertainment. One of the preferred
places to go quail hunting is a plantation in Florida that caters to executives of Fortune 500
companies. Occupancy rates at that plantation typically run 98 or 99 percent and reservations are
booked a year in advance. Cancellation rates for repeat customers usually are less than 6
percent. But this year I'm told that cancellations have nearly doubled to 12 percent and are
reportedly coming from cutbacks by steel and chemical industry executives and their guests. Of
course, those two segments have been among the poorest performers and those industries have
been particularly adversely affected by the appreciation of the dollar.
While it's true that growth has slowed, it’s also true that growth is decidedly more
uneven across industries and among different states in our region. Florida's economy is both the
largest and strongest and Georgia is holding its own, while Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama,
and Louisiana are suffering. Tennessee is experiencing another year of very serious budget
problems and the governor and the legislature can't agree on a budget again this year. Someone
recently remarked in frustration that Tennessee is fast becoming the Argentina of the United
States.
The District continues to see contraction in technology jobs. This has resulted in
additional commercial lease space coming back on the market, adding to an already excess
supply. Manufacturing firms continue to cut jobs; and this is especially hurting Mississippi,
whose economy is more manufacturing dependent than other states in the District.
Finally, there are indications that our aggressive policy easing moves have had very
little impact on business investment spending. At the same time, companies such as Delta
Airlines and some of our trucking contacts indicate that they have not curtailed their investment
plans significantly in terms of canceling orders for new planes or vehicles. In fact they say they

30

8/21/01

are using this period of slow sales to accelerate the retirement of older equipment, which
suggests to me that the existing stock is becoming more efficient. A similar story holds for
utilities in the Southeast, whose investment plans have not been affected so much by rates;
however, they have accelerated the phase-out of older plants. More utility capacity is being
brought into place than is warranted by prospective new demand, reportedly because regulatory
constraints are less than in the West.
Not all is bad, however. Besides the relative strength in single-family housing, we’re
beginning to pick up some hints--and I emphasize that these are only hints--that the decline in
activity may have begun to bottom out. Some bankers, for example, are reporting that their older
and more traditional customers are beginning to consider new spending and are making inquiries
at least about the possibility for additional funding.
On the national front, it's easy to become impatient waiting for our previous policy
moves to have their desired effects. One has to be concerned about the uncertainty regarding
where the forecasted rebound in GDP, which as others have said is being pushed back to the first
and second quarters of next year, will actually come from. Clearly, with capacity utilization
continuing to fall, investment--except perhaps investment in new power generation--is unlikely
to make a sharp rebound. Nor does a rebound in inventory investment seem imminent. It’s also
hard to imagine a sudden spurt in consumer spending, which is already reasonably healthy
relative to the underlying fundamentals. Finally, given the slowdown abroad, much of which is
itself a fallout from the pause in our own economy, we can’t expect much help from the foreign
sector. My conclusion is that the risks remain on the downside. The recovery appears to be
more gradual than we had hoped and is not likely to be led by any one particular sector.
This brings me to my policy concerns. The near-term outlook is still not pretty and a

31

8/21/01

good case can, and I’m sure will, be made for further easing. At the same time, I think a good
case can be made for patience and caution. I remain bothered by the rapid growth in the
monetary aggregates, which is not fully explainable. And I believe that we have already put
sufficient liquidity into the system to support sustainable consumer demand and to bring the
economy back to a desirable growth rate without too much inflation risk. But my fear is that
we’ll get trapped into following an implicit policy rule that says we’ll keep cutting rates until the
real economy turns around.
That is not what I believe we should do for two reasons. First, as we have all
reminded ourselves as well as others, monetary policy is a blunt instrument. Accordingly,
succumbing to the temptation to try to adjust problems in one segment of the economy--in this
case high-tech and other business investment--may in fact over-stimulate other sectors, causing
additional imbalances to appear. I interpret the surge in home prices over the last year as an
indication that consumers’ liquid funds have been shifted toward that sector.
Second, I’m also concerned that a lower federal funds rate and considerable liquidity
in the banking system have added to the high proportion of loans leveraged by housing collateral.
This lending has been stimulated by the perceived high value of homes and the lower rates on
home equity loans. Lowering rates further may simply encourage more home equity lending and
more sub-prime lending to marginal borrowers most at risk to lose their jobs should the
downside risks in the economy materialize. In short, I believe there is real risk of putting too
much ease in the system. And I fear, as others have already suggested, that circumstances may
make it difficult to reverse course quickly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As the economy transitions from a

8/21/01

32

period of unacceptably slow growth to a more reasonable pace of activity, we should expect to
see the data shift from predominantly bad news to a mixture of some positive and some negative
observations on the state of the economy. This ought to be true at both the regional and the
national levels. I can report that this is what has characterized our District over the last couple of
months. But the ratio of good news to bad news is not improving as quickly as I had hoped.
When we met in May, I was able to report a slowly improving condition in the Third District.
Since then the news has been decidedly mixed and indeed less positive than expected. Our June
indices of economic activity remained flat in Pennsylvania and turned down in New Jersey and
Delaware. Our business outlook survey of manufacturers in our region, which had improved in
June, retreated in both July and August. The indices of new orders, employment, and the
average workweek all took a turn for the worse this month, while the index of shipments showed
only a slight improvement but remained negative.
Our manufacturers continue to pare inventories and they do not see the inventory
correction ending soon. They expect to continue cutting inventories over the next six months. In
contrast, our survey of retailers and other non-manufacturing firms shows that they have
successfully worked off any inventory overhang. Yet they remain vigilant in their ordering to
avoid a return to excess inventories. In a special question, we asked our respondents to what
extent the high value of the dollar had affected their businesses. Almost half of the firms
reported that they had been hurt by the dollar’s strength, and 18 percent said significantly so.
Labor market conditions in the region have weakened somewhat. Payroll employment
edged down in the second quarter in the three states in our District. The unemployment rate
moved up but remains below that for the nation. Retail sales, excluding autos, were flat in July.
Residential real estate markets remained active, although the sales of both new and existing

33

8/21/01

homes have been running below last year’s pace. Our bankers report that residential mortgage
refinancing activity remains at a fairly high level and that they are actively seeking new business
borrowers among well-capitalized firms. Loan quality remains relatively good.
The mixed news has caused people to re-evaluate their expectations about the future.
Optimism about the outlook has turned down a bit, with business contacts anticipating slow
improvement at best during the rest of the year. Our staff’s view continues to be that regional
economic growth will pick up somewhat toward the end of the year but that the pickup might
come later than previously thought.
Our view on the national economy is similar. Manufacturing remains weak as does
the broad technology sector. Neither situation is likely to improve soon. By contrast, the
housing market remains robust and consumer spending remains moderate to good. And there are
signs that labor market conditions have stabilized. The recent data revisions help reconcile some
of what we see in the economy: The substantially faster growth of labor compensation than
previously thought helps to explain the ability of consumers to continue spending; and the
downward revision of profits helps to explain the retrenchment in investment.
On the downside, the economic situation abroad has deteriorated since our last
meeting. In many places in the world, economic conditions are proving to be more problematic
than expected and clearly less conducive to a world recovery than I would like. Given the
interdependent nature of our economies, we must remain cognizant of these external factors and
their possible implications for U.S. economic activity going forward.
We know that we should only now be feeling the first 100 basis points of easing we
put in place in January, given the lags in the effects of monetary policy. It’s too soon to see the
effects of the additional 175 basis points that came later in the year. Likewise, the fiscal stimulus

34

8/21/01

is only now beginning to come on line. Tax rebate checks started arriving in July, with further
tax cuts to come later. This plus the fact that the data come in with a lag suggest that it’s not
unreasonable that the indicators are giving us a mixed view of the economy at this point. That
said, I must admit that midway through the third quarter I would feel more comfortable if I could
point to some definitive positive signs that a turnaround in the economy is under way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District’s economy continues weak.
Manufacturing remains in a slump in our area. According to our Bank’s most recent
manufacturing survey, activity declined again in July, moving well below year-ago levels.
Inventories were also down substantially and a significant fraction of firms said they plan to
continue reducing inventories over the next six months. One bright spot is that the capital
spending projections did not deteriorate further.
Consumer spending held steady in most of our District, as it has elsewhere in the
nation. I continue to hear that consumers are becoming increasingly value conscious, though, so
discount stores are enjoying the stronger sales at the expense of other retailers. Residential
construction remains stable. Home sales are solid in most of our cities, although inventories of
unsold homes are creeping up. Throughout the District there is weakness in the demand for
high-priced homes, though, and that is telling in some areas, particularly Denver. Commercial
real estate is showing signs of softening further. Office vacancy rates continue to rise in both
Denver and Kansas City, as businesses in both cities cut back on their expansion plans. There is
still a substantial amount of construction in the pipeline but the surge in vacancies is causing
developers to have some second thoughts.
The energy sector remains a bright spot in our District. Even with the recent easing in

35

8/21/01

oil and gas prices, the rig count grew again in July. Labor markets have eased further. Layoff
announcements remain high, although they have come down a bit from earlier in the year.
Reflecting the sluggish economy, inflationary pressures continue to subside in our area. Only
one of the employers we contacted said that it had granted above-normal wage increases
recently.
As mentioned earlier by President Stern, conditions in the farm economy have
improved. That sector has been helped not only by some price increases but also by the recent
package that was approved for aid to the farm industry. Our projections now show that farm
income on the national level will increase about 9 percent this year, so some spending should
accompany that.
Let me turn to my views on the national outlook. It is noteworthy that while we
continue to adjust our outlook--both the value and the time horizon--our staff as well as the
Greenbook staff still see as the most likely outcome that the economy should strengthen toward
potential over the next few quarters. Therefore, it strikes me that the issue is: Do we continue
with the current easy policy or do we ease further at this time? I say policy is easy as we might
measure it, using monetary growth and the real fed funds rate compared to the equilibrium
natural rate that has been estimated. I would add that from what I can tell, our last generation of
experiences suggests that it takes about four to five quarters from the start of an easing period for
the easing to have an impact that we can see in terms of GDP growth.
This suggests that we are probably on track toward eliminating the cyclical
weaknesses that now exist. But in our view of the outlook, we obviously have some rather
serious risks. The incoming data are clearly mixed and it’s hard to do nothing when the data are
mixed. I would add that the foreign sector is weaker--and weaker than many had anticipated-

36

8/21/01

and that most certainly adds to the downside risks for us to consider. I think all this is
complicated to a degree by the difficulty of separating out the structural factors in our economy
that are weak--and will stay weak regardless of our short-term monetary policy--from the
cyclical factors. So in some ways our difficulty today is to determine whether we are being--if I
may use this term--cyclically correct. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, a note on agriculture: Corn crops in
the region are coming in very strong, as evidenced in the last couple of weeks by roadside signs
offering a dozen ears of fresh picked corn for 50 cents. I thought that was a real bargain until I
went across Lake Erie to Ontario and saw outside a store large crates of corn with a sign that said
“Free fresh picked corn. Take all you want.” [Laughter] I don’t know what the purchasing
power parity of this means!
A year ago at this time we were hearing more quickly about weakness in the area that
we serve than I think was the case in other parts of the country. That may have been a reflection
of the rising energy prices; we are very energy intensive in many ways in a lot of our sectors and
industries. And other factors were at work, certainly in the case of metals. I didn’t go back to
check but I don’t recall that our Beige Book description of conditions in the District was as
negative as what I was hearing from directors and advisory council members at that time. But
this time I did look at our Beige Book to compare it with the reports I was getting from our
directors and advisory councils, and it seemed a bit out of sync. So at the beginning of August I
sent a letter to all current Small Business Advisory Council members and to about 15 or so
former members who are in manufacturing companies and nonresidential construction to try to
get a sense of their views. All of the responses were coming in last week and we also met then

37

8/21/01

with our directors. The assessment of conditions in the District by these contacts was not as
negative as our Beige Book report. Certainly, portions of manufacturing in the District are still
weak. Some of the big companies like Timken and Diebold are still reporting weakness. But a
lot of the smaller firms are not. Outside of metals, the tone was much more upbeat than what I
had been hearing.
We contacted every motor vehicle assembly plant in the District, including those for
trucks, as well as every parts supplier and asked: “How does it look, coming into the second
half?” Ford is very weak--Ford kept several plants idle, mainly those producing commercial
vans and minivans--but the rest are strong. Toyota and Honda are running flat out, well above
last year; and both GM and Chrysler are operating at levels above last year and they remain
optimistic. So at least from our District’s perspective, the motor vehicle sector doesn’t look as
negative as the Board staff is assuming in its forecast.
Because of the articles I mentioned last time about the corrugated box industry being a
leading indicator, we also contacted 14 corrugated box suppliers in the District and asked how
things look. Those that supply mainly consumer product companies in the District, such as
Proctor and Gamble, are doing quite well. Those that supply motor vehicles or metals-related
industries or tech firms are not doing nearly as well, and certainly not as well as last year.
Construction is still strong in our region. Residential construction, of course, is very
strong everywhere, but our contacts in the nonresidential sector say that public works and
utilities also are continuing to expand. In Kentucky our contacts report about a 5 percent
increase for the first half of the year versus a year ago. In Western Ohio and Indiana,
nonresidential construction is up 15 percent from a year ago. Our contacts noted that multi
family housing--well, that does get into residential--was especially strong, up 40 percent. But

38

8/21/01

they say it's the health-care sector that is providing them with a lot of new contracts. As for
other nonresidential construction, such as highway and bridge construction, several companies
say that their problem is just a matter of getting labor to fulfill their contracts. Mostly their
complaints are about the lack of skilled labor to operate the type of construction equipment that
they are now employing.
A producer of air curtains in Western Pennsylvania informed us that July was the best
month in the company's history by a big margin; both domestic and foreign demand has been
strong. We also contacted a company that produces controls for industrial motors and supplies to
firms throughout the United States as well as around the world. Their story may be more a
comment on technology and what's in store for future capital spending rather than just general
business. Our contacts said that for the first half of the year their business was up over 30
percent versus a year ago. They attribute that to the fact that they implemented an e-business on
line ordering system that has allowed them to increase their productivity since the beginning of
2000 by about 25 to 30 percent across all product lines. They say that 80 percent of their
operations now involve orders that are coming in on-line for just-in-time delivery. They have
been able to decrease their prices across product lines by 7 to 10 percent while increasing their
profit margins and they have been expanding their workforce because of the strength of their
business. Their expectation is that they won't be able to sustain all of this because they expect
their competitors to implement these same kinds of technologies and close the gap that they
believe they now enjoy.
Companies that supply equipment for the health-care sector say they are doing very
well, as are those that are involved in large, highly automated, and very expensive coal mining
equipment. The problem for the latter is getting labor to work the very sophisticated coal mining

39

8/21/01

machinery, some of which cost $5 million per machine. Business for a company that produces
titanium parts for the aerospace industry is up 25 percent versus last year. And their sales of
parts to the medical industry--knee joints and that sort of thing--are up 20 percent. That firm has
five openings for machinists but no qualified applicants. Pittsburgh Plate Glass sales to the
aerospace and housing sectors are strong but sales to the motor vehicle industry are weak.
The retail sector had been very negative but turned better in early August. Some of
our directors--especially from Federated and other retailing companies--were very bearish. They
are hopeful now that the back-to-school sales are going to be better than they had planned for
coming into the second half of the year.
Representatives from the school districts in North Ohio in particular said that they have a
lot of unfilled teacher positions as the back-to-school period arrives--school started last week in
our area of the country--and they cite aggressive recruiting of Ohio teachers by California
schools as one reason. In response, Ohio schools are going to recruit in India. [Laughter]
On the inflation front, tuition is up 9 to 10 percent at almost all of the public colleges and
universities in the District. We might be able to justify some of the increases in medical care
costs as quality improvements, but I doubt that’s true in higher education. [Laughter]
On the national economy, midway through this third quarter it now appears that from a
broad GDP perspective, the second half is going to be slower than had been hoped at the
beginning of the year. But it’s notable that two very important sectors of the economy, housing
and motor vehicles, have been considerably stronger than had been expected at the start of the
year. Moreover, employment has held up better than expected. The unemployment rate is lower
than had been feared. And what appeared to be a dangerously destabilizing situation in natural
gas and electric power six or seven months ago has eased dramatically. Even the current account

8/21/01

40

deficit in the first half came in much smaller than expected. Now, it is true that inventories
plunged much more dramatically than had been expected, but that's not necessarily a bad thing.
We were told that steel inventories are down dramatically because of a 25 percent drop in
imports.
The biggest miss in most forecasts was in business fixed investment, the same
category that accounted for the tendency of forecasters to underestimate the strength in the prior
expansion. Risks outside the United States seem to have intensified; Argentina, Japan, and even
the euro area are all considerable risks. And there is no doubt that events will occur to which we
will have to respond. But the solutions to those developments in advance of their occurrence are
not going to be influenced by whether the U.S. overnight interbank rate is a little higher or a little
lower. There must come a time when we have to demonstrate confidence that with patience the
magic of the marketplace will again produce bigger GDP numbers. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Second
District economy has weakened further recently, while both finished goods inflation and input
cost pressures have continued to recede. Much of the weakness is still concentrated in
manufacturing, but other sectors have shown signs of slowing as well. In July, private sector
payroll employment was virtually unchanged in New York State but fell at roughly a 2 percent
pace in New Jersey. We can't really allocate that between Tony Santomero’s part of New Jersey
and my part of New Jersey, so I think we tend to double cover it, but that's the fifth straight drop.
While manufacturing has sustained the steepest job losses over the past year, weakness in both
June and July was fairly broad-based across industries. Even the construction industry, which
had been an engine of job growth, has shed jobs at an annual rate of roughly 5 percent since

41

8/21/01

peaking in March. Disconcertingly, employment in New York City's critical financial services
sector has now declined for four consecutive months, with virtually daily headlines of very largescale reductions in staff.
Retail sales were described as sluggish in June and July, though the heat wave in early
August boosted sales of air conditioners, swimwear, and other hot weather merchandise.
Retailers continue to report a weak pricing environment, with most of our respondents indicating
that both selling prices and merchandise costs are flat to lower. While retail wage pressures
reportedly remain subdued, contacts continue to note fairly brisk escalation in health benefits and
utilities costs. The Buffalo area in New York State is particularly weak. And Siena College’s
survey of New York State residents, which tends to be reasonably accurate, reports that
consumer confidence fell sharply in July both upstate and in the New York City area, more than
erasing the gains in May and June. July’s level is the lowest in the survey’s 2-1/2 year history.
Construction and real estate activity have been mixed. The commercial sector remains
sluggish and pockets of weakness have emerged in the residential segment, but the tone remains
rather positive, considering that. Manufacturers and purchasing managers report that business
conditions weakened in July, while price pressures receded. New York City hotel occupancy
rates and room rates fell significantly in the second quarter from a year ago. A lot of tourists
continue to come to New York City but they don't seem to be spending as much or staying as
long as previously. Inflation in the area receded in July, mainly due to a downturn in energy
prices, and it is about on a par with the national average. Bankers report steady loan demand,
rising delinquency rates, and tighter credit standards. Conditions appear to be somewhat more
favorable in the residential mortgage segment of their business.
On the national level, we think the near-term outlook is for sluggish growth at best.

42

8/21/01

We expect that third-quarter growth could be about 2 percent, but that's putting a lot of faith in
the monetary policy easing in the pipeline and in the checks coming from the U.S. Treasury.
With little data so far for the quarter, there is certainly a very great deal of uncertainty about this
short-term growth outlook.
Longer term we expect, as does the Greenbook, that the outlook will brighten some,
with GDP growth rebounding to over 2-1/2 percent in Q4 and in 2002. We have taken a first
look at 2003 and it looks as if growth will remain at about the same pace into that year. That will
put growth below what we believe is potential, so the unemployment rate will rise. We think it
will go up to about 5 percent by the end of 2002. We have a rather benign forecast for inflation.
We expect the PCE deflator to be about 2-1/4 per cent in 2002 and to drop down to about 2
percent in 2003. So those who are looking for a minor improvement in inflation may just have
their wish fulfilled.
In the short term we think that the downside risks are quite severe and that there really
is a significant risk of a recession. Weak household consumption and aggregate demand raise
the possibility that the inventory correction will last longer and that business investment will
decline even more than we currently expect. Moreover, weakness in foreign economies could
exacerbate that situation. We could have a vicious circle that produces a recession in the near
term and in the longer term a continuation of the sluggish economy we've seen over the past
year. On the other hand, the combination of monetary easing and fiscal policy could have a
greater than expected impact, resulting in a surge in aggregate demand. However, we think that
prospect is very much less likely.
Let me talk briefly about the international situation, particularly about two areas, Asia
and Argentina. You may have noticed in this morning's paper that Chinese Premier Zhu was

8/21/01

43

making a tour of southern China. You may remember that Deng Xiaoping announced a major
change in policy in China by a tour of southern China. I think the most significant thing that
Premier Zhu said is that the Chinese should do anything to improve their exports. Now, if true-and he tends not to say things that he doesn't mean--that could very well be the last thing that is
needed for non-Japan, non-China countries of Asia. China does not really compete very much
with the rest of Asia on tech exports, but tech exports in that area are already decimated.
However, the Chinese can clean everybody's clock in every other area of exports because the fact
is that they can bring their prices down to wherever they want them to be and are able to compete
at any price level. They simply have to move a factory 500 miles farther into interior China and
pay close to nothing for the cost of labor. So that plan, if carried forward, is a rather frightening
prospect for the already weakened economies of Asia, the former “tigers.”
On Argentina, by chance in my State Department years in the mid-1960s I was in the
office of regional economic policy and one of the countries I was supposed to look out for was
Argentina. So it's a place I've known reasonably well for almost 40 years. I think a crisis in
Argentina is likely to be significantly different from most crises. If it would remind us of
anything, it would be closer to what we’ve seen in Indonesia. The reason is this: The currency
board was not brought in by President Menem because some economics professor told him that it
was an important piece of economic theory. He brought it in because he inherited about 5,000
percent annual inflation. His predecessor had to leave office early as soon as Menem’s election
was certified. So Menem brought in the currency board because he realized, as a brilliant
politician, that he had to import discipline in order to get Argentina functioning. But he engaged
in a kind of wishful thinking in hoping that at some stage the economic stars would align
themselves so that Argentina could get out of the convertibility arrangement and the peso would

8/21/01

44

strengthen. Well, that never quite happened. My concern is that if the present regime collapses,
which it well might, we're not going to see a Brazilian-type situation where the currency
undergoes a significant devaluation and the social situation manages itself reasonably well. I
fear that we will see something that is truly chaotic, with rioting in the streets and a very
unpredictable outcome in the congressional elections in October.
Now, one of the things that Argentina is extraordinarily good at is blaming other
people for its problems. In the course of the last week they’ve already set the stage for that.
According to the economics minister, people in Washington have been espousing default and
devaluation for Argentina. The fact that that isn't true is not enormously relevant. And if we
have a really good-sized problem in Argentina, I think it is likely to have a much bigger effect on
the world economy than the size of the Argentine economy would indicate--rather as Russia,
with a GDP the size of Norway, did in 1998. To me the real downside risk is that, despite the
greatest possible intentions of everybody involved to help Argentina yet again, if it is deemed not
to have worked there will be questions--in this background of a very weak economy--about the
quality of the financial/economic leadership in the world. Now once again, that would probably
be a bad assessment. There's nothing wrong with the quality of economic management in the
world. But with this very weak economic climate, if that perception were real, I think we could
have some very chaotic financial markets. Of course, that is not something we can anticipate
through monetary policy. However, I think what we ought to do with monetary policy today is
rather clear. And in the very short period ahead, I believe we could have some very serious
damage control requirements coming our way. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the Committee is faced with

8/21/01

45

the question of whether or not to accept and adopt the Greenbook's baseline forecast, which
frankly, given where we are starting is a relatively attractive forecast. It points to a return of the
economy to its downwardly revised potential growth for the forecast horizon, with PCE inflation
remaining contained. Optimists--indeed some people at this table--have already pointed to some
tentative signs that the economy has bottomed. One of those relatively positive signs is the trend
in first-time claims for unemployment benefits, which have fallen below 400,000 for four
consecutive weeks. Others have pointed to homebuilding, which as measured by housing starts
rose at the fastest pace in 17 months. It is true also that retail sales came in surprisingly strong
when adjusted for falling gasoline prices. And our own IP data can be and have been read by
some as indicating that industrial production has begun to stabilize.
Unfortunately, I do not think any of these data, particularly given the fact that they are
only one month’s worth, have been sufficiently strong to be indicative of a bottoming much less
a likely return to more robust growth. They are certainly not strong enough to give us much
comfort or to support the view that we should do nothing at this meeting. An outcome such as
the baseline is actually more hope than reality at this stage, and in making policy I think we
would be well advised to put significant odds on an adverse outcome for aggregate demand,
particularly capital spending. Some of the evidence in that direction includes our own Beige
Book, which indicates ongoing weakness, as well as the staff’s forecast, which was again revised
down in the face of weaker than expected incoming data. Though consumer spending has been a
bastion of strength, as others have noted, mounting job losses and a declining stock market
performance could indeed threaten to weaken consumer behavior. The profit outlook is certainly
not yet firm, which indicates that business investment is unlikely to return to robust growth in the
near to intermediate term and indeed may weaken further. While businesses have

46

8/21/01

opportunistically liquefied their balance sheets, the demand for loans is off, again suggesting that
businesses sense no need to invest for an upturn in future demand. And our earlier concerns
about weakness overseas are clearly starting to materialize, in part due to weakness here and in
part due to the general high-tech retrenchment that is influencing a large number of economies.
In my view the forecast of a turnaround overseas is again based more on a question of what
should be as opposed to what appears likely.
In the face of all this weakness and the sense that the risks, at least in my mind, are to
the downside, some have argued that we should probably do nothing. There could be a number
of reasons adduced for not responding to the recent data, which have been weaker than we
expected, or for not responding to the downward adjustments in the forecast. One of those
reasons is that policy works with long lags and we might be stoking the fires of future inflation.
We cannot be complacent here, but for the risk of future inflation to become an immediate and
overriding policy concern today we must believe that one of two states is going to emerge.
The first of those states is that the economy is going to rebound so quickly that we’ll
be unable to adjust policy, which would imply either that we won’t be able to read the incoming
data or that we won't have the fortitude to respond to them. I think both of those things are
unlikely. The second state that would warrant favoring no policy action today is that we are
worried that the labor market tightness we have seen is not likely to abate and we believe that
inflation is going to rise even in the face of below-trend growth. Now the extreme version of this
view is so-called stagflation. I think we've had only one case of stagflation, and that one case
was driven by a surprise increase in oil prices. So it seems that we are unlikely to face great
stagflation risks because I believe we’re unlikely to get a surprise on the oil price front or any
other shock that would throw the economy way off in terms of creating pressures for a sudden

47

8/21/01

uptick in inflation. A third risk is that inflation might pick up gradually over time. At this stage
that seems to me far less of a policy concern than that weakness itself will become more
widespread and longer lasting.
Now, there is a second school of argument against responding to the incoming data and
the downward revision in the forecast. That second school of argument says that frequent rate
changes add to uncertainty and that our accompanying statements create a negative psychology.
In fact, I think markets have built in an expectation of a Fed easing today and I believe the
uncertainty would be greater if we didn't respond to the incoming data than if we moved forward
and reduced rates. I would also say that--rather than adding to consumer malaise--honest
statements of a central bank, even if they are not reassuring, build credibility far more than
would a false sense of optimism. So I think it's quite important that our statements reflect reality
as we see it and the risks as we understand them.
A third argument that has been adduced against lowering rates at this meeting is that
reducing rates over-stimulates a few sectors. Again, this is plausible; in fact, it's true. It reflects
the fact that interest rate adjustments clearly work through their impact on interest-sensitive
sectors. When we raise rates, housing is hurt; when we lower rates, housing is helped. By
influencing asset prices and activities in interest-sensitive sectors, we influence the entire
economy. We should not refuse to act because we do not like the transmission mechanisms of
monetary policy. If we were to follow that approach, we would obviously be tying both hands
behind our backs.
I believe the final argument against adjusting rates at this meeting is that we may in
fact find that rates are too stimulative and thus that we are over-stimulating the economy. In that
regard we should recognize, as we think about the range of the estimated equilibrium real rate,

48

8/21/01

that the actual equilibrium real rate would gradually go down as the economy weakens. So the
degree of stimulus actually starts to decrease if we keep rates unchanged in the face of a
weakening economy.
Let me conclude by saying that in my judgment the baseline forecast is a hope more
than a reality, the risks are certainly to the downside, and the arguments against moving rates
down at this policy meeting strike me as far weaker than the arguments in favor of moving them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm going to offer a few bits of anecdotal
information that complement things that have already been said, but I will try not to duplicate
what is already on the table. My UPS and FedEx contacts both reported that much of the world
is not doing very well, though they were both fairly optimistic about Europe. My UPS contact
said that from January to June UPS business in Europe had grown at double-digit rates. Growth
was slowing down a bit now, but they still expect it to be positive. My FedEx contact reported
that Europe was the one area where growth continued; he also reported double-digit growth in
exports out of Europe and business within Europe. And he was very optimistic that growth in
FedEx business was going to continue at an 8 to 10 percent rate in Europe. Both companies are
trimming capital spending somewhat. My UPS contact said that major cutbacks are taking place
in the airline industry in general and that cargo segments were being cut. From Taiwan to the
United States and from Japan to the United States, capacity is being cut. Both companies
reported a significant amount of substitution away from the premium express business into the
more standard shipping business, which would be consistent with efforts all around to
economize.
My contact at Wal-Mart said that his company’s preliminary experience with the tax

8/21/01

49

rebates was that about 25 to 30 percent of the checks cashed at Wal-Mart--Wal-Mart is cashing
those checks at no charge--are being spent on the spot at the stores. He also noted that Wal-Mart
finds labor market conditions still tight for sales associates. Obviously, that is a minimum wage
or slightly above minimal wage position, and apparently the easing of the labor market in the
higher paid occupations is not showing up at all in the market for sales associates. He said it's
just as difficult as it was a year ago to hire people. Retention is up, but they still have problems
filling vacant positions. I thought that was rather interesting. He also emphasized the pressure
that Wal-Mart sees from health-care costs; those costs are going to be up 20 to 22 percent this
year and the increase may be worse next year. He noted that one development in that area is the
spread of legislative restrictions that make it more and more difficult for firms to apply
restrictions on pre-existing conditions. So the companies that have relatively generous healthcare benefits are finding what I guess might be called “adverse selection” against them. People
who know they have pre-existing conditions will try to gain employment in those firms.
On a more general note, for me the issue today is not whether substantial monetary
stimulus is in place. I'm convinced that it is. The question is not whether that stimulus is going
to have an effect, but when. I think it's a timing issue. I've been interested in the fact that
longer-term interest rates have not come down, or have come down only in the last week or two.
The ten-year rate is still essentially where it was in December. It’s very easy, using the ten-year
strips, to decompose that rate into various maturities. So I put together a table showing the 0 to
2-year part of it, the 2- to 5-year forward rate, and the 5- to 10-year forward rate. Let me just
read you a few numbers. In August of last year, the 5- to 10-year forward rate extracted from the
strips was 5.6 percent. At the end of December, it was 5.6 percent. As of Friday, it was 6.0
percent. The 5- to 10-year maturity has been hanging up there fairly high. What has happened is

8/21/01

50

that the decline we’ve seen in the 10-year rate is due almost entirely to declines in the 0 to 2-year
part and maybe somewhat to declines in the 2- to 5-year part.
Now, what does one make of a situation where the 5- to 10-year forward rate is
unaffected by all that has gone on in the last year? Incidentally, before I try to speak to that
question, let me say that a lot of our ideas about the lags come from experiences where the
longer rates do follow the short rates to a very significant extent. Looking at the historical data,
over a six-month period every percentage point drop in the federal funds rate generally will be
accompanied by a drop in the 10-year rate of about 30 or 35 basis points; that's the average
experience. So one of the reasons why we’re perhaps not seeing as much result as we might
expect is that a lot of the effect typically is coming out of housing. Housing remains on a high
plateau and mortgage interest rates really haven't come down since December. There was a
substantial decline last year but not much this year.
I interpret the maintained level of the 5- to 10-year forward rate--whether it's high or
not is a different matter--as reflecting a market conviction that the longer-run growth potential
for the economy has not been affected by the events of the last year. The market view is that we
are going through a period of adjustment. And after all, this is a position that many people
around this table have stated. We have helped to reinforce that conviction. Whether it's right or
not, we don't really know. But I think there are lots of reasons to be optimistic about that.
If that view is correct, I think it's logical to expect that the demand for the
technological equipment that is necessary for achieving productivity gains is going to have to
resume. That demand is going to resume because otherwise we’re not going to get the
productivity that is implied by this outlook for the economy. There was over-expansion in that
industry and there are some backlogs to be worked off. But most of that equipment has a rather

51

8/21/01

short useful life. A normal depreciation period for a PC is three years or something like that. So
the backlog is going to be worked off and that demand will be coming back.
Suppose that view--our outlook and my interpretation of the market’s outlook and why
the 5- to 10-year forward rate remains as high as it is--is not correct and potential growth in fact
goes back more toward the dreary levels that we had from, say, 1972 to 1995. If that happens,
then we’re going to end up with a lot more inflationary pressure than we currently anticipate.
The reason is that we’re not going to be getting the productivity growth and there’s a lot of
inertia in compensation and wage processes.
I just offer those ideas. But I will emphasize that the recent behavior of the long end
of the market relative to the short end is a very, very unusual experience. If you look at the data
from the Korean War on--just put some columns on a spread sheet--you will convince yourself
that this is a very, very unusual period. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few meetings ago I made the
comment that the economy was susceptible to chronic and acute risks--the chronic risk of rising
inflation and the acute risk of recession. The comment drew some chuckles and people told me
afterwards that they liked the analogy. The only problem is that now, with the wisdom of
hindsight, my statement doesn’t look so good because the recession risks are also proving to be
chronic. For some months now both official and private forecasters have been projecting that a
turnaround in demand growth is imminent, that the economy will recover, and that economic
growth will get back on track. While there have bright spots this year, for the most part that
turnaround just has not materialized. Overall conditions seem roughly as weak now as they did
earlier in the year, despite significant expansionary doses of both monetary and fiscal policy and

52

8/21/01

a cut in energy prices. The forecast recovery has been pushed back and pushed back again; it
always seems to be just around the corner but never quite here. No doubt at some point there
really will be a turnaround, but our patience is being severely tested.
We’ve talked about these points of weakness for several meetings now and there’s no
need to belabor the issues. Probably the most serious question is the profits outlook. Until profit
expectations recover, it’s hard to see a strong turnaround in business investment. Indeed, the
staff showed yesterday that the profits outlook for technology shares in the S&P index has
dropped so rapidly that that portion of the S&P is again showing high price-earnings ratios,
possibly foreshadowing more declines in stock prices.
The international sector is also growing increasingly worrisome. There seems to be no
demand growth driver anywhere in the world. The standard international forecast does show a
recovery. But the main source of future strength--if we can call it that--in the world economy
seems to be that the United States has such a high income elasticity for imports that if our
economy recovers, it will pull up demand for our trading partners. One can be forgiven for
considering this a rather weak reed.
The steady beat of disappointing news is taking its toll on expectations--so much so
that the Beige Book got lots of play in the press a couple of weeks ago, with reports that
economic malaise was beginning to spread from manufacturing to sectors such as office space,
trucking, and shipping services. In some sense these reports were not all that remarkable; after
all, slowdowns would be expected to spread. But the negative expectations have become so
pervasive after these reports that the Beige Book had much more impact than it normally does.
Even the GDP revisions had an impact. As David Wilcox pointed out earlier, the GDP revisions
did not change inflation or the output gaps, so there was no first-order impact on monetary

53

8/21/01

policy. But the BEA did write down growth in recent years, taking a big slice out of both capital
investment and profits. The profits change could indirectly cause problems on the demand side,
given the prevailing weakness in profit expectations. The investment change hurts on the supply
side, lowering the capital deepening component of productivity change and estimates of potential
growth over the next few years. This is not, to be sure, a true structural productivity change
because the alteration was due to capital put in place, which we already knew was cyclically
weak. But it’s still disappointing to see this productivity growth spurt that we all took such pride
in being partly undone with new data.
Let me say a word about lags; a few of you have mentioned those. Lags for monetary
policy are long. They are also variable. It strikes me that at this time in this cycle it becomes
very difficult to read exactly where we are in the process of monetary lags. Long rates--and this
is similar to what Bill Poole just said--actually went down last fall before we started lowering
short rates. So if the drop in long rates was going to have some effect, it should be working
through the system already. Another channel through which monetary policy works is the dollar.
And as was reported earlier, the dollar hadn’t really gone down until a couple of weeks ago. The
third channel is equity markets. If anybody knows how to interpret the equity markets, please
come forward and say your piece! So I think that the question of exactly where we are in this
monetary lag cycle is after all rather complicated. I think the notion of just saying “Well, we
started lowering rates eight months ago, so the effect ought to be coming through now” is at best
oversimplified. On the fiscal side, we have talked a lot about the tax cuts. But there is an
offsetting factor involved because a lot of states have gotten into fiscal difficulties as a result of
the developments that are going on throughout the country and some states are actually raising
taxes, offsetting the Federal tax cut.

54


8/21/01

There are still bright spots. Housing has been consistently strong. Price-earnings
ratios on most stocks have been reasonably stable. Consumption, as has been noted, has held up
well. The turnaround could still be right around the corner. Moreover, in my view this has not
been a time of policy mistakes. Monetary policy, as I think most of us would agree, has
followed roughly the proper path, getting rates down early and significantly. But given the
prolonged slowdown--which any day we might begin to call chronic--there does seem to be a
need for a monetary booster shot. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. The previous Greenbook projected some strengthening in growth in
the fourth quarter and a recovery to growth near trend and to a level of output near potential in
2002. And I believe there was a sense of agreement that if the forecast stabilized, that forecast
provided a strong case for holding policy unchanged after last meeting’s move. On the other
hand, the pattern this year has been a continuing series of downward revisions to the forecast,
followed by additional easing moves in an effort to restore the earlier forecast for 2002. So the
first questions I asked myself as I prepared for today’s meeting were: “Has the forecast
stabilized?” and “Is the forecast for 2002 still lined up to a reasonable approximation on trend
growth and full employment?” The answers will help me to assess both the need for further
easing and the room to maneuver--or the threat of overshooting in easing further.
This assessment, however, is complicated, as David Wilcox noted in his presentation,
by the NIPA and productivity revisions. The outlook context for monetary policy decisions in
my view is best viewed in terms of growth in actual output relative to potential and in terms of
utilization rates. From this perspective, the growth rates for 2001 and 2002 in the Greenbook
forecast were marked down just about in line with the staff’s downward revision to trend growth,

55

8/21/01

thereby virtually replicating the previous Greenbook’s projections for the unemployment rate
and inflation. So if the story is still that forces are in train that will move the economy to
recovery and that the recovery will put the economy near full employment and trend growth next
year, it’s hard to see the need for further easing or the room to maneuver.
But to tell the truth, the story doesn’t feel entirely right. There remains a tension
between the evidence of persistent weakness in the incoming data and the story of recovery. The
question we face in each forecast round is how many quarters lie between the data and the story.
And what we end up doing again and again is inserting one more quarter that looks more like the
previous weak quarters--in this case it’s the fourth quarter of this year--before we get a
transitional quarter or two on the way to trend growth. At the very least this pattern suggests that
there are significantly asymmetric risks on the downside.
In assessing how much easing is appropriate and whether we have done enough,
another consideration is important. Declines in the federal funds rate have little or no direct
effect on aggregate demand but are an instrument for encouraging a more accommodative
overall set of financial conditions, as the lower short-term rates pass through to lower longerterm rates, to equity prices, and the dollar. In fact--and this is an issue that President Poole and
Governor Gramlich have just commented on--long-term rates did not fall from their levels at the
time we began to ease, at least until very recently. Furthermore, equity prices are significantly
lower and the dollar is higher.
I asked the staff to run some simulations with the FRB/US model to assess the effect
of the cumulative easing on overall financial conditions. First, they began the simulations in the
first quarter of 2001 and they held the real federal funds rate constant in the baseline forecast. In
the alternative scenario, they imposed the path of the funds rate in the Greenbook through 2002.

56

8/21/01

They ran the alternative scenario under two assumptions. In the first case, they assumed the
historical regularities for pass-throughs to longer-term interest rates, equity prices, and the dollar.
In the second, they constrained the latter variables to follow their actual paths through the last
easing. The results indicated that, assuming historical regularities, there would have been
virtually no effect on real GDP through the second quarter. But real GDP would have been a
percentage point higher by the end of this year and more than 3 percentage points higher by the
end of 2002. However, given the actual paths of financial variables, the level of real GDP would
be only 1/4 percentage point higher at the end of this year and 1/2 percentage point higher by the
end of 2002. That is, instead of providing a powerful stimulus, the easing only about offset the
restraint coming from declining equity prices and the appreciation of the dollar, leaving little net
stimulus from overall financial conditions.
The problem with this simulation experiment is that it fails to give the Fed any credit
for the decline in interest rates in the second half of 2000 in anticipation of Fed easing in 2001.
So the staff then redid the simulations beginning in the third quarter of last year. By August of
last year, the federal funds futures indicated the absence of expectations of any change in the
funds rate over the next year. The decline in long-term rates that followed reflected expectations
of subsequent Fed easing. This approach counts the decline in long-term rates in the second half
as part of the stimulus from the cumulative easing. But the benefits of the lower long-term rates
were more than offset by the effects of the decline in equity prices in the second half of last year.
So in somewhat of a surprise, to me at least, on net financial conditions have actually become
more restrictive rather than more stimulative if we begin the accounting from mid-2000.
From the standpoint of monetary policy strategy, this raises the question of whether
and how monetary policy should be adjusted for variations in the pass-through from the funds

57

8/21/01

rate to broader financial conditions, episode by episode. If we make our policy judgments on the
basis of the forecasts, this adjustment would naturally occur. But it does raise a cautioning note
about guidance from outcome-based policy rules that in effect are calibrated off average pass
throughs.
At any rate, this analysis suggests some tension in the forecast. We all point to
monetary policy as one of the forces promoting recovery and yet the analysis shows that at best
we may be running in place. To be sure, it also suggests that our aggressive easing has prevented
what otherwise might have been a slide into recession. However, the recovery in the Greenbook
must be based not on improved financial conditions but on other forces in play--for example, the
effects of lower energy prices, more stimulative fiscal policy, or perhaps more importantly the
natural forces for recovery that follow the end of the inventory correction and the end of the
retrenchment in high-tech investment.
While I worry, therefore, whether we are on the path to recovery, I also worry about
overshooting as well. It seems to me that the dynamics of expansion suggest an upward
instability to growth. In the dynamics of cyclical swings in growth, it’s not that the economy
returns to trend growth after a slowdown or recession and stays there, but it naturally moves to
above trend growth. Therefore, once a recovery is under way we may face the twin challenges
of moving monetary policy back to neutrality in a timely fashion and contending with abovetrend growth at a time when inflation is a bit above at least my long-run target and the economy
is already operating at close to capacity. Further easing today will undoubtedly complicate that
adjustment. But the failure to see traction from our moves to date and the resulting downside
risks encourage taking some risk of overshooting today and leaving to tomorrow the task of
returning to neutrality and avoiding the inflationary consequences of any overshooting.

58

8/21/01

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usual, by this time our discussion has
thoroughly dissected and evaluated the economy, and little remains to be added. So please
indulge a short-timer for a few concluding ruminations.
First of all, it’s necessary to acknowledge, as almost everyone here has, significant
disappointment in the data that have come in over the intermeeting period. The main driver of
this slowdown, capital overhang drying up capital expenditures, looks no better. The inventory
correction, to my great surprise, drags on still. The world economic outlook looks even more
bleak, with political and financial tensions threatening to exacerbate the situation further.
Although housing somehow continues to levitate, recent auto sales may be hinting that the
consumer is tiring, which could become a serious concern.
Not everything is negative, of course. Industrial production and labor market
conditions may be stabilizing. The tax rebate checks are flowing, Fed easing should be kicking
in, inventory balance is coming into view, and energy prices are falling. Nevertheless, on
balance one must be concerned. At the last meeting, there was speculation that the balance of
risks might be moving toward symmetry. At that time, I expected to be firmly in that camp by
today. While I am indeed edging in that direction, I’m not ready yet to drive down the tent pegs
and settle in. I’d like to, but I just can’t.
Shifting the subject a bit, two strains of recent media comment strike me as
wrongheaded. First there has been the suggestion that monetary policy isn’t working. Have
these people given any thought to what this economy might look like today if policy had not
changed this year? If anything, I’d suggest that policy has worked more quickly than usual and
precisely where it was needed most, shoring up consumer and stock market confidence. And

59

8/21/01

now the traditional lagged impact of policy should start to be felt.
Second, one is already starting to hear complaints that a recovery will be weak when it
comes. Here again I wonder if our critics have pondered the implications of a strong rebound?
Given the very high absolute level of activity that we have even today, I hope and expect that the
recovery will be moderate. An early boom beginning from here would lead quickly to major
new problems.
Mr. Chairman, in my view monetary policy is not part of the economy’s problem
today. And going forward, I see monetary policy as having only a marginal role in the solution.
At the first of this year a strong policy response was critical and I’m proud of the way this
Committee responded at that time. But now I feel that if we visibly but modestly support the
natural forces of recovery and remain patient, we can be most effective.
Let me conclude where I began. Obviously, on balance things are still weak. But I
continue to believe in the mantra of recovery initiated by tax and interest rate cuts and rebalanced
inventory positions, aided by lower energy costs and now, perhaps, a somewhat lower dollar.
But we cannot ignore our serious investment collapse, a very dangerous world situation, and the
possibility of a tiring consumer. What really concerns me most of all is that we must remain
concerned at a time when we expected to be relaxing a bit. It’s just possible that we may have
problems ahead of us that we do not yet see. At any rate, we’re not out of the woods yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Coffee is available.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s turn now to Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As many of you remarked at the
Committee’s June meeting and again today, the special characteristics
of the current slowdown are shaping the appropriate course of monetary
policy and its likely effects.

8/21/01

60

In particular, the major driver in this slowdown seems to have been
a re-evaluation of the profitability of new capital equipment--especially
high-tech equipment. In these circumstances, lower interest rates are
likely to cushion the resulting decline in investment demand only very
partially. Importantly, though, policy easing works through the
household sector, with lower interest rates bolstering asset prices and
wealth and giving more direct incentives to spend by reducing the cost
of acquiring houses and household durable goods. Policy action may
also help to maintain consumer confidence. Judging from the prices of
houses and from activity in housing markets, and from the well
maintained pace of consumer durable purchases, in this regard to date
your easing actions are indeed having much of their predicted and
intended effects. And lower interest rates undoubtedly are keeping
equity prices from falling much more as earnings disappoint. By
bolstering household spending, policy is laying the foundation for a
recovery in capital and inventory investment, working indirectly
through multiplier and accelerator mechanisms.
But some of the characteristics of the current episode do suggest
that the 275 basis points of policy easing so far may not produce the
same degree of strengthening in aggregate demand, at least for a time,
as a movement of similar size might have in the past. It is not that
policy has been ineffective--that you are “pushing on a string.” Rather,
declines in interest rates have been operating against some powerful
and unusual forces of restraint. The re-evaluation of capital
profitability seems to be producing a larger and more persistent
decrease in investment spending than in most business cycles. And the
large revisions to expected profits are reducing equity prices despite
lower interest rates. Moreover, because high-tech production is spread
widely around the world, so too has been the drop-off in demand,
output, and equity wealth. With other economies also threatened, the
dollar has not depreciated in response to policy easing so that foreign
economies have not absorbed any of the weakening in demand in the
United States through the exchange rate channel. Finally, because
household spending was never substantially depressed, stocks of houses
and consumer durables probably have not dropped below desired
levels. This implies that the recovery in spending once the economy
starts to firm may be less ebullient than usual, since it will lack the
extra push from the so-called pent-up demand from households often
seen in the past.
In these circumstances, the federal funds rate may need to be lower
for longer than you might have anticipated to produce a return to
sustainable growth at around the economy’s potential.
These unusual restraining forces are partly impounded in our

8/21/01

61


measures of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, which as a result
have declined appreciably over the last year. Hence, a portion of the
decrease in the federal funds rate has been necessary just to keep policy
from tightening relative to this yardstick. But our measures of r* in
general do not reflect the full extent of these restraints on spending.
The equilibrium rate we have been estimating is a medium-term
concept--the real federal funds rate at which the economy eventually
will produce at its potential after temporary shocks have worn off.
Thus, temporary shocks, such as atypical asset price movements or
weak investment relative to its longer-term trend, tend not to be
embodied in some or all of the measures we use. If those shocks are
large or persistent, as they seem to be at this time, real rates will need to
be held appreciably below the range of estimated equilibrium rates for a
while to foster satisfactory economic performance. Moreover, you may
have reason to believe that the true range for r* is lower than that given
in the Bluebook. Most of those estimates rely on the staff’s judgment
about the NAIRU. If unemployment rates appreciably below 5-1/4
percent are sufficient to contain inflation, the equilibrium rate will be
lower and the gap between it and the current real funds rate
correspondingly smaller.
A policy that eases substantially and leaves the funds rate well
below the estimated equilibrium is not without potential risks and
drawbacks that a number of you also noted at the last meeting. Some of
you regretted the degree and frequency of variation in the federal funds
rate adjustments. You were concerned, in part, that wide swings in the
policy instrument would themselves create uncertainty and unsettle
markets. But, appropriately calibrated, changes in the funds rate act as
shock absorbers, cushioning the effects of real-side disturbances on
aggregate output and prices. And the larger the shocks, the larger the
necessary movements in your policy instrument. To be sure, policy can
be excessively activist, accentuating business cycles by reacting to
perceived shocks that in practice ebb quickly or by being insufficiently
forward looking. But the most serious problems have occurred when
policy has been too sluggish--destabilizing the economy and financial
markets by allowing inflationary or deflationary tendencies to cumulate
because the central bank acted too little. This is a major lesson that
your predecessors took from their experience in the 1970s and that
many observers have drawn from the tepid response of the Bank of
Japan in the early 1990s to the bursting of the asset bubble.
A potentially more troublesome concern raised by having the real
federal funds rate well below its equilibrium level is whether policy can
be tightened in a timely enough manner to forestall the emergence of
higher inflation. In the current circumstances, inflation pressures that
might be difficult to head off could arise were demand to strengthen

8/21/01

62

very considerably before long or costs begin to push up prices even in a
relatively weak economy. Other things equal, the wider the federal
funds rate gap, the greater this risk would seem to be. And balancing
this possibility against the possibility that the weakness in the economy
could be deeper or more prolonged than anticipated or than needed to
keep inflation in check would seem to be at the nub of your decision
today.
The staff forecast could be seen as describing a rough balance
between these two possibilities, at an unchanged stance of policy. In
that forecast, policy is accommodative enough to get growth in GDP
back to the rate of increase in its potential by next year, with the help of
fiscal stimulus, lower energy prices, and the inherent tendency of
aggregate demand to expand at its longer-term growth rate. As Dave
Wilcox emphasized, though projected growth of actual output has been
revised down appreciably in the forecast, so too has been the growth of
potential, leaving the output gap and the inflation outlook not much
different than in the June Greenbook. While the result is a small
margin of excess capacity in the labor markets in the second half of
next year, with unit labor costs already having picked up, some slack
may be needed insurance to counter the price pressures associated with
the more rapid trend in compensation, the recent slowing of structural
productivity growth, and the consequent narrowing of profit margins.
Core PCE inflation is held about constant in the staff forecast, at a rate
a little above that of 1998 and 1999. In your own forecasts last month
for the semiannual monetary policy report, Committee members saw
much stronger growth and lower unemployment rates than did the staff.
Especially if that differential continues to prevail, the Committee may
see further easing as incurring enough additional risk of building
inflation pressures toward the end of 2002 to offset the added assurance
it would give of a reasonable rebound in growth earlier next year.
However, keeping rates unchanged may require more confidence
in the forecast--your own or the staff’s--than the Committee has at this
point. You eased at your last meeting, partly on the assessment that
more weight should be put on the reality of near-term weakness than on
the projection of longer-term strength. Continuing and persistent
shortfalls in actual growth, even relative to downward-revised
forecasts, may have reinforced that assessment, arguing for another 25
basis points of easing at this meeting. In effect, the anticipated pickup
in the economy is starting from a lower base. Moreover, a number of
elements in the current situation could be seen as suggesting that the
risks of further shortfalls in economic activity in the next few quarters
are greater than the risks of higher inflation later next year. Data and
anecdotes on capital spending have yet to indicate any abatement in the
pace of weakening in this sector or to allow a confident projection of

8/21/01

63


just how far the decline in investment will go. As Vince pointed out,
revisions to growth in foreign economies, like those for the United
States, have been one-sided. And consumption is threatened by the
effects of softening job prospects on confidence and by the possibility
of a further drop in equity prices if earnings expectations continue to be
pared. Indeed, late last week, announcements of disappointing earnings
and sales caused a further appreciable decline in equity prices and a
widening of risk spreads in credit markets.
In light of near-term weakness, the Committee may see any
potential inflation pressures as sufficiently far into the future to allow it
to detect early signs that growth was accelerating or prices picking up
and take timely steps, even after further easing. This seems consistent
with market assessments of your likely actions and their outcome.
Market participants have built further near-term easing into the
structure of interest rates but also tightening next year. That turnaround
apparently is seen as occurring soon enough to keep inflation low,
judging from the results of surveys of inflation expectations or from the
relatively modest level of longer-term inflation expectations derived
from Treasury securities, which in fact have been declining of late. In
that regard, both market participants and economic forecasters appear
to have marked down their outlooks for growth and inflation in the last
month, largely in response to the unexpected weakness in demand and
more moderate inflation. The resulting drop in interest rates and the
exchange rate should help to cushion the effect of lower equity prices
on economic activity. Keeping the stance of policy unchanged at this
meeting would tend to lower equity prices further and raise bond
yields--a result the Committee might not want to see unless it were of
the view that market participants had reacted inappropriately to the
developing economic situation.
Given the tenor of the incoming information, with economic
activity falling short of expectations and projections of growth revised
downward, the Bluebook writers assumed that you would judge the
balance of risks as still tilted toward economic weakness, even if you
left policy unchanged at this meeting. At some point in the future,
when the Committee sees the risk of near-term weakness as balanced
by the risk of higher inflation over the longer term, it would presumably
want to shift its balance of risk statement and explain its reasoning in
the announcement. One path to that point would be a final easing that
was perceived to put policy in a sufficiently accommodative posture to
throw the risks into balance. Alternatively, the Committee might retain
its assessment of unbalanced risks for a little while even after it stopped
easing because it was not yet confident that threats of added weakness
had abated sufficiently. This latter sequence would be consistent with
your behavior in 2000 when you were concerned about inflation. In

8/21/01

64

effect, by the summer of last year, you still saw the risks as pointing to
higher inflation, but not by enough to warrant changing the stance of
policy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me get started.
I think it's fairly evident, certainly in retrospect, that we are seeing an absorption of
very large capital losses throughout the economic system. I don't know whether one would call
this a structural adjustment, but it certainly is not what we have embodied in our standard postWorld War II econometric models. It's a different sort of phenomenon and it’s clearly being
engendered by a set of forces that are largely without historical precedent in the post-World War
II period. This does not mean that we're looking at the type of severe business cycle contraction
that the economy experienced on occasion in the pre-World War II period, but in many respects
the process of adjustment is similar to that in the earlier contractions. As a number of you have
indicated, the current weakness is obviously concentrated in the capital goods markets and to a
very substantial extent it stems from a downward adjustment of long-term earnings expectations.
I suspect that the declines in those expectations are really quite modest. What I believe has
happened, as I think I indicated at the last meeting, is that the uncertainties with respect to the
change in the outlook have fostered a significant rise in risk premiums in the capital goods
markets. This essentially means that the hurdle rate that is required to induce a capital
expenditure has increased. Indeed, one can talk in terms of a firm’s refusal to invest its cash
flow unless the return is realized in, say, 14 months or to change its PCs every year when the
latter can obviously remain functional for three or four years. Nothing has happened in the last
year to alter underlying conditions except a change in judgments. The PCs haven't changed.
The technologies underlying the infrastructure of expanding information systems haven't
changed. And indeed all the evidence that we have today suggests that our previous conclusions

8/21/01

65

about the outlook for capital investment are still basically true, namely that firms have a long
way to go in exploiting the total available capital investments that offer significant above-hurdle
rates of return. What has happened is simply a fundamental shift in the general degree of
confidence. In the same sense that expectations were very clearly overdone on the upside, they
are being underdone, if I may put it that way, on the downside; and that will continue to be so
until the normal cycle, not of the business environment but of human psychology, runs its course.
One could argue with some obvious evidence, and indeed a number of you have so
argued, that economic conditions have deteriorated since our last meeting, and I think that
assessment is accurate. But the economy clearly has not collapsed. The fundamental evaluation
of the behavior of the economy is still basically the same, and as in the early spring the concerns
about a false dawn remain. Indeed, we are looking at aspects of that even today.
As you may recall, I indicated at the June meeting that corporate earnings were going
to be a particularly difficult technical issue in the nearer term. The problem is related to the fact
that in June security analysts were estimating a double-digit increase in third-quarter per share
earnings, seasonally adjusted not at an annual rate, and that estimate was just not credible. The
only question was the mechanism by which a downward adjustment would start to emerge.
Frankly, it emerged a little differently from what I had expected. I thought that the second
quarter was pretty much locked in. After all, by the end of the month, with the information
technology systems that firms now have in place, they knew pretty much what their earnings
would be with one exception. It's called end-of-quarter adjustments for which there is very
considerable discretion. Looking out into the third quarter and seeing less than enjoyable
prospects for earnings, firms decided to move some of the bad news into the second quarter. As
a result, they reported a very fairly dramatic decline in second-quarter earnings stemming from

66

8/21/01

downward revisions at the very end of the quarter that were not credibly based on real events.
After all, it's not as though we are still in the old quill pen days where business firms were three
weeks behind in their bookkeeping.
There has been, of course, a very dramatic downward revision in expected thirdquarter earnings. But because second-quarter earnings were revised down, we still have a
significant seasonally adjusted increase in expected earnings per share as estimated by the
analysts for the third quarter. Those earnings forecasts still have some distance to go on the
downside. What is presumed to be a lead indicator of near-term earnings, the so-called profit
warnings coming out of the companies, is showing fairly significant evidence that further sizable
downward revisions are in the mix. I think one of the key reasons why, I believe quite
appropriately, the Greenbook projects capital investment to continue soft in the second half is
that, as history tells us, the chances that investment spending will turn around quickly are fairly
remote until we get a turnaround in cash flow. It's not an issue of taking out the overhang in
capital investment. I think business firms are in the process of doing that; they may even have
done it to a very large extent by now. But we have to project that capital spending will fall
below sustainable levels, and indeed in a sense build up some backlog. Markets never go from
over-extension back to normal. I can’t recall any case where that has happened, yet our forecasts
always tend to project that it will happen. And when we get close to where we think it is about
to happen we realize that it's not turning around because the over-adjustment on the downside
has not yet occurred. In a sense this is not a business cycle issue; it's a human cycle issue.
The data, of course, are not as bad as the psychology. Indeed, looking at the profits
data, a part of the problem in the national income and product account numbers, which are a lot
weaker than the data in the S&P 500, is the fact that those data are reflective of what companies

8/21/01

67

must report to the IRS. This means that the value of exercised options is reported as
compensation of employees and a reduction in pretax profits. In standard FASB accounting,
that's not the way they do it; and by that accounting standard, firms have higher earnings
numbers. The IRS numbers, by including the very large dollar value of exercised options, have
added a big chunk to the reported compensation of employees and have taken out a big chunk of
profitability in recent years. Obviously, the value of options is now a rapidly depreciating
number. In that sense we are going to see compensation per hour slow down significantly, and
we will also see some modest buoyancy starting to occur in the underlying earnings figures, for
no matter what companies say, they know that stock options are a game that's being played. And
they know that they can't hedge the stock option exercise effectively because the cost of a
derivative to hedge against an option grant is usually a fairly hefty sum of money. So what they
have been doing in effect is going short on the value of their stock options, and doing that has
been very expensive for a lot of companies. But implicitly it is going to help them or has helped
them in this cycle. In sum, I think the profit figures probably are unduly depressed at this point.
Moreover, with the energy costs coming down but the contract costs of energy still somewhat
higher than the spot prices, there is a delayed effect in the impact of high energy costs on profits.
Now, I'm not about to say that we will soon get a recovery in profits. I find that
prospect exceptionally unlikely and the reason is that there is no pricing power in markets across
the nation. I would suspect that when this whole episode is over we will have a lower rate of
inflation, even in the PCE consumption deflator. As I look at the pricing structure, I see very
little evidence that discounting is coming to an end, as other members have pointed out, and
perhaps that is helpful in the sense that it has been a factor buoying household consumption.
It is household consumption or household demand more generally that clearly is the

8/21/01

68

source of strength holding this economy together. In this regard I think the evidence is
increasingly persuasive that the capital gains realized on the sale of homes are inserting a fairly
significant amount of purchasing power into the economy. Indeed, such gains appear to have
been enough to significantly offset the negative effects of the decline in equity prices on
consumption expenditures. The more I look at the data, the more I am persuaded that the
deflationary effect of lower equity prices is concentrated in the capital goods markets. And the
lower implicit rates of return that those prices capture are reflected somewhat less than I think we
would have anticipated in the household sector. And, as best I can judge, that is wholly a
reflection of the fact that the propensity to consume out of realized capital gains on homes
appears to be significantly higher than it is on both unrealized capital gains on homes and capital
gains in general on equities. This strikes me as a reason for viewing as important the support
that housing is providing to the expansion. I suspect that without that support we would be
observing much lower levels of economic activity.
The liquidation of inventories continues apace. The rate of liquidation has not slowed
appreciably. It does fluctuate from month to month. The book value data are questionable, but
alternate ways of estimating inventory change essentially confirm that the rate of liquidation is
significant. However, inventory-sales ratios are holding up because the rate of decline in the
consumption of industrial production is about in line with the rate of decline in inventories.
In sum, with foreign economies clearly weakening significantly, we are in a situation
as best I can judge where the economy is being held up by household demand, which fortunately
is running somewhat better than I think many of us would have anticipated. The press reaction
to the July retail sales figures I thought was quite startling. When we take out sales of gasoline
and motor vehicles, those retail sales figures were really strong, yet the press played them as

69

8/21/01

tepid. With personal consumption expenditures higher in July, third-quarter expenditures should
rise even if they do not go anywhere in August and September. So, insofar as I can judge, the
key source of support for the economy is coming from the spillover out of housing into
household demand. Of course, strength in new construction of homes is helpful, but I believe the
more powerful force on total GDP at this stage is the turnover of existing homes that engenders
realized capital gains.
I believe we have some distance to go before we get out of this period of weakness. I
think our forecasts at this stage essentially reflect hope. We do not yet see any evidence of the
beginnings of a turnaround. It's not that the economy is falling apart; it is not. But economic
conditions are continuously eroding and we get that sense in anecdotal reports from around the
country. A possible exception is Jerry Jordan’s select sample! Clearly, if GDP is still growing at
a 1 percent rate, we inevitably will find that a large number of companies are doing very well
and that would not be the case were we experiencing a minus 5 percent rate of decline in activity.
The widespread anecdotal reports that I am exposed to do not contain very many straws
suggestive of an upturn, but that is the way the economy looks at a cyclical bottom. In fact, if we
go back and look at previous bottoms, we will find people saying exactly what I have just said.
Indeed, a necessary condition for a bottom is the exhaustion of negative psychology that sets the
stage for an upturn in optimism.
I believe we will eventually get the projected upturn. I don't think that the Greenbook
forecast is wrong by any means. For example, the weekly chain store sales data look quite
impressive. The data that we got this morning do suggest that the tax rebates are being spent.
And if they are being spent, and we know there are $36 billion of rebates, then they’ve got to
have a positive impact. Even so, the recovery is likely to be a long process, and the presumption

8/21/01

70

that the upturn will occur very quickly is in my view just a total misreading of the underlying
adjustments to capital losses that are occurring. They are by no means completed, and I don't
think we can get a vibrant response out of this economy until these capital losses are reasonably
fully absorbed. And because activity in many sectors of the economy is already at relatively
high levels, the extent of the recovery cannot be large. Remember, the motor vehicle and
housing sectors are still experiencing well above normal levels of activity, certainly for this stage
of the cycle. So I think the process of adjustment still has a long way to go.
While the outlook remains subject to a good deal of uncertainty, I do think as many of
you have suggested, that the appropriate policy at this stage is to move the federal funds rate a
notch lower. A 25 basis point reduction strikes me as appropriate. If we were to go 50 basis
points, our action would alarm everyone to an extent that I don’t think we can fully appreciate at
this point.
I thought the reaction to the latest Beige Book was very interesting. Ordinarily, the
market tends to view the Beige Book in terms of its implications for policy, whether the Fed is
going to move rates one way or the other, and that's it. This time it was different. The markets
took this Beige Book as evidence that the Fed is a credible institution. Our sources were saying
that the economy was softening and there was some spillover from the weakness in
manufacturing to other sectors. We accepted what they said, and the markets in turn believed
what we have been saying. For the first time in quite a while, that credibility is based on what
we have done. The credibility of our organization is crucial, and as I said were we to go to 50
basis points today I think we would alarm everyone.
I do think that the risks remain obviously weighted toward economic weakness, but at
some point we are going to have to stop our easing process. As I said at the last meeting, my

71

8/21/01

suspicion is that we will be stopping when the markets in effect are telling us to stop. That will
show up, for example, when the Greenbook forecast of a recovery actually begins to materialize
--when we distinguish between a forecast and reality. What we need is some real evidence that
the capital goods markets are bottoming, that profit erosion has stabilized, that we are seeing
signs of an upturn instead of still further negatives whenever we evaluate what individual
companies are doing. Instead of getting that, we would start to get reports that say the results
this week are mixed. I haven't seen a mixed report in a very long time. I’m referring
incidentally to surveys that the staff makes periodically of about 6 to 10 companies on a rotating
sample basis. The day that such a report comes in and indicates that these results are mixed will
be the first sign I would take that something is happening. But I would say at this point that the
real-time surveillance of the economy, especially with what is clearly an acceleration in the
deterioration abroad, is one that says we have not as yet completed our easing process. So, I
would put on the table a reduction of 25 basis points with the risks weighted toward economic
weakness. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I concur with your recommendation, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, for me the policy choice is a close call. While I can
support the proposed easing, I do think there are some reasonable arguments for leaving the
funds rate unchanged at this time. First, there appears to be a consensus--supported by our
outlook, the Greenbook, and even the lower 10 percent of the Blue Chip panel of forecastersthat there already is enough stimulus in the pipeline to produce a significant pickup in activity in
the next year or so. Second, although I certainly hope you are correct in your expectation that

8/21/01

72

the inflation figures may turn out a bit better than most forecasts indicate, there is a chance that
the current period of slow growth will end with little or no reduction in inflation. So we might
be missing a chance for a little opportunistic progress on inflation. Third, we will know quite a
bit more by our October meeting, especially about the effects of the tax rebate. So an argument
can be made that we should wait for more information. While I’m concerned about these
considerations, I do support a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate as some insurance against
additional downside surprises for economic activity. I also would prefer to retain the balance of
risks statement weighted toward economic weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I agree with both parts of your recommendation, for
a 25 basis point cut and the balance of risks toward economic weakness. You mentioned that if
we did a 50 basis point cut, it would scare people. I would add that if we did zero, I think it
would have the same impact. In my view this is a time when consumer confidence and business
confidence are extremely important to the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you. My interpretation of the course of policy is consistent with
what Don Kohn said at the outset. That is, as best I can judge the situation, we’re trying to prop
up components of aggregate demand that are interest-rate sensitive until the inventory correction
process runs it course and until conditions and attitudes change in a favorable way for capital
spending. I don’t think that’s an unreasonable policy and it’s probably the best available policy.
As I’ve indicated before, I’m concerned about the lags and what they mean for our
future course of action. But let me add that I’m not opposed to a quarter point reduction in the
funds rate at this stage. I won’t get into the lag issue at any great length except to say that I

73

8/21/01

believe we are going to have to change course and adopt at least a policy of stability before
there’s totally persuasive evidence that the economy is reaccelerating in a major way. I say that
not because I think we’re going to be reluctant to change course when it’s appropriate but
because of what I would call the recognition lag. It’s very unlikely that the evidence will
accumulate in such a way that it will be entirely convincing that it’s time to stop easing policy.
My experience with these situations in the past is that the evidence comes in mixed for an
extended period of time, so we’re going to have to make the best judgment we can as that
happens. In addition, if we think about the timing of the published data--the anecdotes, of
course, may help--we won’t know if the economy has rebounded until well after the fact. Let’s
suppose, just for illustrative purposes, that the economy really starts to reaccelerate in the first
quarter. Well, we won’t get all that much data on the first quarter until well into the second
quarter and the data are unlikely to be convincing until well into the third quarter. So I’m
concerned about that recognition lag going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just want to say that I think our techniques of knowing
where we are have improved a great deal.
MR. STERN. Well, I sincerely hope you’re right but the proof is in the pudding.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well said! President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I can support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I think your proposal is just right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.

74


8/21/01

MS. MINEHAN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I have had
concerns similar to President Stern’s and possibly others around the table that we won’t quickly
recognize when the economy has turned around and that policy will be too easy too long. But
given where we are, it seems to me that policy needs to be a little easier in order to provide the
appropriate level of support. I was struck by your comment that virtually the whole world
economy is supported by consumer spending and the residential housing markets in the United
States. It’s a powerful thought and one that occurred to me as well. So I am in favor of this
move but I think we need to be very careful going forward for all the reasons that President Stern
mentioned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, if you’ll forgive a personal note, let me make a
couple of comments here. After our meeting in June, where I supported a quarter point reduction
in the funds rate, one of my FOMC colleagues came up to me and said “Gee, you’re really
changing stripes. Where is the old inflation hawk I used to know?”
MS. MINEHAN. That was actually me!
MR. BROADDUS. And that’s a fair question. But the answer I would give to the
question is that I can remember when the Committee did not have full credibility. A lot of us
were saying then that if we could ever achieve credibility, that would give us greater flexibility
to move the funds rate in the short run in conjunction with changes in economic conditions.
And, of course, now I think we do have considerable credibility. And with the downside risks
still quite substantial, as you and others have mentioned, I think we need to take advantage of
that credibility. To say the same thing a bit differently: Unlike the situation in a number of
earlier postwar episodes, we don’t need a recession to contain inflation or inflation expectations

75

8/21/01

at this point. We may have a recession ultimately or we may not. But if we do, I think it’s
important that the Fed not be perceived as contributing to it--or worse, actually causing it. So
I’m not ready to disappoint market expectations today. Therefore, I agree with you and I favor
going ahead with the expected quarter point reduction. If we don’t, I think it would be a big
surprise and quite disruptive.
Having said that, there isn’t any doubt, though, that the real funds rate is not very far
above zero. And if the economy is near a bottom--and here is where I might disagree with you a
bit because it seems to me that there’s at least some mild evidence that it could be--I think we
need to be prepared to reverse course if necessary and to begin to tighten policy.
But more to the point--and this is really the main point I would make--I think we need
to prepare the markets and the general public for that possibility, which I don’t think we’ve done
adequately to this point. There are lots of ways to do it. One way would be to go ahead and drop
the rate a quarter of a point at this meeting and go to a symmetric directive. However, I agree
that that would be pushing it. Nevertheless, I do believe that our statement, which is now an
increasingly important signal of what we may be doing down the road, should indicate clearly
that there’s at least a possibility that the easing cycle may now be approaching an end. Our
objective ought to be to try to preempt as much as we can the quick development of market
expectations of yet another rate cut at the next meeting, so that we’ll have greater flexibility at
that meeting. So I would hope that our statement this time might have some language like that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, at this stage the preliminarily statement does
two things, both of which it did the last time: One, it mentions how much we have reduced the
rate since the beginning of the year; and two, it eliminates any notion of an intermeeting move.
But also remember that what we did most importantly last time was that we cut the funds rate by

76

8/21/01

25 basis points and not 50. And I think that set the pace. Clearly, at the point we see the picture
becoming mixed--when the data cease to indicate weakness almost across the board--that’s the
first sign that the bottom is being hit. We’re at least a meeting away from that, maybe two; we
really don’t know yet. But I do think that we have to be clear that there is a bottom to this. I
agree with that.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, if I could comment. I think by
saying that we’ve reduced the funds rate by a total of 300 basis points and by continuing to take
out any notion of an intermeeting move, the financial markets will interpret the statement in
exactly the way you want.
MR. BROADDUS. I think that helps, Bill. But given the level of the funds rate now,
I think an additional phrase might be prudent. I’m not sure I’m selling this to anybody here!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I agree with
those who think that down the road--in a few quarters or maybe a year--having moved the funds
rate down today might complicate our problems. But I think we have to do it. I would also
underline something Don said, namely that right now we’re in a position where both r and r* are
dropping. So we’re really not getting as far out of balance as it might seem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Given my views of the economic
outlook and the risks that we observe, I think both parts of your recommended policy are correct.
So I support your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.

77


8/21/01

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I can support your recommendation. I think the
arguments for another modest easing move have been made around the table. I would say that I
--and I suspect others who have offered some arguments on the other side at the June meeting-had revised those arguments coming in today’s meeting. I wanted to make the same point,
though, that Gary Stern, Cathy Minehan, and Al Broaddus made. And that is that I’m not
comfortable yet, even with your response to Al, that we have quite figured out our exit strategy.
We need a way to convey that, not only internally but externally, before we have to do too much
explaining. Al, you made a sale with me! I don’t know whether the answer is a phrase in the
statement or what. But if we continue to ease and continue to have the balance of risks statement
the way it has been, I’m not sure how we will get off that treadmill as quickly as I suspect we’re
going to want to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the market is going to take us off the treadmill.
MR. GUYNN. I hope that’s the way it’s done.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, if we could actually arrange it, that would be the
ideal way. In other words, the ideal way would be that we don’t shock the market but that
suddenly we get the federal funds futures rates flattening out because the data are beginning to
look better. And at the moment I see nothing to prevent us from doing that. Goverrnor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, like some others, I do worry a bit about the adjustments
that will become necessary as the economy begins to recover on the other side of our current
problem. But I support your recommendation. I think it’s right for today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.

8/21/01

78


MR. JORDAN. Thank you. First, I’ll make sure that before the next meeting we do
get not only some mixed reports but also some strong reports! [Laughter] Some of my Bank’s
directors have turned from being very bearish two or three months ago to saying, “Wait a minute,
things are starting to improve.” So I’ll make sure you hear some of those reports, too.
I associate myself with some of the comments of Jack Guynn, Al Broaddus, and Gary
Stern. I, too, worry about the concerns they mentioned. But I also believe the risk is high that an
external event will materialize that will require us to respond. We’re going to have to respond to
it from wherever we are, and we may have to respond very aggressively. So I’d rather have
some more dry powder to be used because there’s nothing that a little adjustment in our domestic
policy can do to alleviate the situations external to the United States that we view as most
threatening. And I don’t see that small adjustments in our policy stance are likely to be very
helpful in turning around the psychology within the United States. I think your analysis is right
about capital spending; it will start to improve once the risk starts to narrow. So how do we get
from where we are to that process where the risk premium starts to narrow and we return to
business as usual? I don’t know, so I too worry about an exit strategy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I think the proposal you put on the table is quite
reasonable and I would support it. Let me make a couple of comments. I do think our policy is
accommodative right now and it will become more accommodative with this move. But in my
view it’s not just the markets that are nervous and uneasy. Main Street is also nervous and
uneasy. Your proposed action serves to address that to an important degree and, therefore, I am
supportive of it. I do agree with those who are concerned about the lags and about our ability to
reverse course at the appropriate time; that isn’t a science but in part it involves our recognizing

79

8/21/01

when to do so. We have to trust that we’ll be able to do that at that time. So I’m very supportive
of your recommendation at this point.
One thing I have to say, with due deference to Al Broaddus, is that I do not want an
expanded statement. I argued hard for the statement to be shorter and I think it should stay that
way. In my view the market has to recognize our stance by our actions and by what is happening
in the economy--that is the best way to get the message across--and to react to that information at
the appropriate time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before we take a vote, since the press statement is a
relevant part of the decision here, I would ask the Secretary to distribute copies of the draft. Let
me just say that what was done is as close to a de minimis change from the previous statement as
we could come up with. Michelle, did you provide the wording of the last statement as well?
MS. SMITH. Yes, the proposed language is shown, with strike-outs indicating
changes from the previous statement.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, so we can actually see the changes from the
previous press release. We took President Hoenig’s advice, as you can see.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. He’s a very important fellow.
MR. HOENIG. I’m flattered.
MR. MCTEER. Excellent.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Amen!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, then we can vote on the 25 basis point cut and
the risks toward economic weakness. Will you read the directive language, please?
MR. BERNARD. This language is on page 15 of the Bluebook. It’s a little hard to

80

8/21/01

find but it comes after Chart 3, which has the blue-shaded section in it: “The Federal Open
Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds
rate to an average of around 3-1/2 percent.” The balance of risks statement for the press release
reads: “Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic
growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue
to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the
foreseeable future.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll, please. 

MR. BERNARD. 

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Minehan
President Moskow
President Poole

Yes
Yes 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes




















CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will recess briefly so the Federal Reserve Board can
meet on the discount rate. The reason we’re going into recess, as you know, is that this press
statement presupposes a discount rate action that has not been taken. So until that’s assured we
cannot adjourn. May I ask the Board members to go into my office? Hopefully we’ll be back
shortly to confirm an action on the discount rate.
[Recess]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Board of Governors accepted discount rate requests

81

8/21/01

from seven banks. This meeting then is adjourned upon confirmation of the date of our next
meeting, which is-MR. BERNARD. October 2nd.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. October 2nd. As you are aware, that is an interesting
day, which may or may not be devoid of conflicts for other than monetary policy reasons. We
are monitoring the situation fairly closely and if we need to make any adjustments in the meeting
date or location we, of course, will be in contact with all of you immediately.
MR. FERGUSON. Mr. Chairman, you said meeting dates and location. I presume the
date would stay the same but the location might change if circumstances warrant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would assume that. I amend my remarks
accordingly. Shall we go to lunch?
END OF MEETING

