Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee 

November 6, 2001 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 6, 2001, at 9:00 a.m.
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 

Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman 

Mr. Ferguson 

Mr. Gramlich 

Mr. Hoenig 

Mr. Kelley

Mr. Meyer 

Ms. Minehan 

Mr. Moskow

Mr. Poole 

Messrs. Jordan, McTeer, Santomero, Stern, and Stewart, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 

Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 

Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 

Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 

Ms. Johnson, Economist 

Mr. Reinhart, Economist 

Mr. Stockton, Economist 

Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard, Hunter, Lindsey, Slifman,
and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ettin and Madigan, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Research and
Statistics and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors

2


Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Kamin and Whitesell, Assistant Directors, Divisions of International
Finance and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Cox and Goodfriend, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, Messrs. Rolnick
and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Dallas, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York, Minneapolis, and Cleveland
respectively
Mr. Thornton, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Robertson, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Rudebusch, Senior Research Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 

November 6, 2001 


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes of our October meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Dino.
MR. KOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to the charts that were handed
out this morning. 1/
The top panel of the first page depicts U.S. and euro-area cash and 

forward rates. U.S. 3-month cash rates, the solid red line, declined about 1/4 

percent since the last meeting, while 3-month and 9-month forward rates 

declined by similar magnitudes as the string of data released reinforced 

expectations that policy rates would continue to be reduced. In the euro area, 

cash rates fell about 12 basis points but 9-month forward rates fell by more than 

1/4 percentage point, widening the spread between cash and forward rates. The 

rate movements reflected reactions to weak data for the euro area as well as 

heightened expectations that the total amount of easing to come from the ECB 

would be larger than had been previously anticipated. 

This morning’s two-week refinancing operation by the ECB was 

under-subscribed by about 25 billion euros and the operation actually drained 23 

billion euros, as banks expecting to be able to buy cheaper funds after this 

Thursday’s ECB meeting did not have much demand for 2-week money. 

Overnight rates moved to about 4 percent after the operation’s results were 

announced. 

The bottom panel provides three snapshots of the Japanese yield 

curve in 2001--for February 28th, August 14th, and November 2nd. Broadly 

speaking, the curve continues to exhibit a very flat trajectory out to three years 

and then steepens for maturities beyond that out to 30 years. Rates at the very 

long end have stayed near 2.5 percent, reflecting both a premium for the longer 

maturity and the lesser market liquidity of bonds beyond 10 years. But the long 

rates perhaps also reflect worries about the prospect of significant government 

debt issuance, which may be necessary to finance a cleanup of the banking

sector. 

____________________
1/ Charts used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript.

11/6/01

2

Staying with the Japanese markets for a bit on page two, the top panel
shows the 5-year Japanese government bond (JGB) yield and the 5-year yen
swap rate since January 2000. The middle panel depicts the 10-year JGB and
swap rates for the same period. In both, the spread between the swap rate and
the JGB yield trended near 25 basis points in early 2000, then began to narrow in
late 2000 and early 2001 as yields started to fall and rates at the short end
approached zero. By the summer, the 10-year differential went to zero and was
even negative on some days. The 5-year differential narrowed a bit later and is
now also near zero. So bank obligations in a country with known banking
problems are being priced as substitutes for government credit. One
interpretation would suggest that the market is already presuming that Japanese
bank risk is sovereign risk. Another explanation can be found by looking at the
flows that are creating this relationship. Japanese banks have been very large
buyers of 5- and 10-year swaps. That is, they are receiving a long-term fixed
rate and paying a short-term floating rate, which lately has been near zero. That
is functionally similar to buying a JGB and financing it in the short-term repo
market. The sellers of these swaps reportedly have been foreign commercial and
investment banks. Japanese banks have added to their swap positions rather than
purchasing more JGBs because of a preferential accounting treatment.
With small probabilities that short rates will move higher any time
soon, the situation probably does not pose near-term concerns. But Japanese
banks do have a stake in spreads staying tight and, given that the banks are also
large holders of JGBs, in rates remaining low. Ergo, one quickly gets into the
circular logic of the situation. The possible need to clean up bank balance sheets
may force the government to issue more bonds to finance that endeavor, which in
turn will raise yields and inflict losses on banks holding large JGB positions and
large swap positions as well.
As for the markets’ views on the state of Japanese banks, the bottom
panel graphs the Tokyo stock exchange composite index and the bank sub-index.
Both are down substantially since January of 2000. Interestingly, the bank subindex has had its greatest underperformance in the last 12 months, precisely
during the time that swap spreads began to narrow.
As we go through the next three pages of charts, I will briefly review a
number of asset price relationships in major markets in the eight weeks since
September 11th. The top panel of page three indexes the dollar’s exchange rate
against the euro, the yen, and the Swiss franc since August 1st. Despite the weak
data on the U.S. economy, the dollar is back to levels where it traded in midAugust, having recovered from the post-September 11 losses against both the
yen and the euro. It is still somewhat lower against the Swiss franc. The middle
panel graphs implied volatilities, which have continued to come down to around
10 percent, compared to 12 percent in mid-August and 14 percent in midSeptember.

11/6/01

3

Another vantage point into the seeming tranquility of the foreign
exchange market is through risk reversals. This is an options trade that reflects
whether market participants are willing to pay an added premium for protection
against the risk of a rising dollar, in which case dollar calls are expensive relative
to dollar puts. Alternatively, in the case of trying to protect against the risk of a
falling dollar, dollar puts are favored.
Immediately after September11th the marketplace bid up dollar puts,
but since then this indicator--quite unusually--has moved to absolute neutrality
for all three major currency pairs. The optimistic view is that market participants
believe that exchange rates have achieved something of a sustainable
equilibrium. Probably the more plausible explanation is that there is a lack of
conviction among traders about the likely course of exchange rates. That
hypothesis is also supported by anecdotal evidence in that there has been a
pulling back of risk-taking in the foreign exchange market.
On page four, the top panel depicts a number of the major global
equity indices since August 1st, but re-indexed to their closing levels on
September 10th. In general, the major indices have moved in a correlated fashion
back to pre-attack levels.
The middle panel graphs selected major emerging market indices.
With the exception of the Argentine Merval index, most have recovered but not
as much as the indices of developed country markets. There appears to have
been more discrimination among emerging markets and between emerging and
developed markets. Unlike the calm prevailing in the foreign exchange markets
and despite the recovery of stock prices, implied volatility--at least as measured
by the VIX in the bottom panel--has gone sideways at between 30 and 35 percent
since the last meeting, but it is still somewhat elevated relative to historical
patterns.
As shown on page five, spread relationships in fixed-income markets
tell a similar story. Spreads continued to widen on higher risk assets, such as
debt of emerging markets, as seen in the top panel. The high-yield spread has
stayed relatively flat since the last meeting, but it has also remained at elevated
levels despite the rally in equity markets. In contrast, spreads have actually
narrowed for better quality obligations, such as agencies and swaps.
Interestingly, the rising tide did not lift all boats in the investment-grade
corporate sector. The spread in A2 corporate issues widened slightly. But even
there, one needs to consider that absolute yields for A2 paper declined modestly.
Moreover, the market absorbed a massive amount of supply, including that
coming from several issuers who were refinancing maturing commercial paper
and willing to pay the premium spread in order to get the deals done. Finally, at
the short end, the implied volatility on near-term Eurodollar contracts has again
been rising recently, pointing to some lingering uncertainty at the short end.

11/6/01

4

Turning back to the government yield curve, the top panel of page six
depicts the benchmark on-the-run issues in yield terms along with the target fed
funds rate since August 1st. Until the middle of last week the pattern of recent
months persisted, with gradually falling yields--especially at the short end--and
thereby a steepening of the yield curve. The Treasury’s refunding announcement
last Wednesday, which included plans to revise the buyback program and to
suspend issuance of the 30-year bond, surprised the market in its timing and for
that matter also surprised the Treasury in the extent of the market reaction.
Yields fell sharply on Wednesday and Thursday as traders rushed to close out
short positions in their trades, whereby they had been long the 2-year note or
similar duration paper and short the 30-year bond. By this morning the long
bond yield was at 4.86 percent or almost 40 basis points lower than the closing
yield on the day before the Treasury’s announcement.
The bottom panel depicts yield curves for A2 industrial corporate
bonds, Fannie Maes, swaps, and Treasuries as of September 10th and as of
November 2nd. In general, the pattern observed in the Treasury yield curve has
spilled over to the other curves as well. Since September 10th, interest rates are
generally lower and yield curves are steeper.
Moving to the commercial paper market, the theme there is that the
year-end has come early to that market. The top left panel graphs the spread
between 30-day A1/P1-rated paper and A2/P2 around year-end for three recent
years. The 1997-98 period, in blue, was typical of many years until very
recently. The black line depicts last year’s sharply widening spread and the red
line represents the current spread.
The top right panel shows the same set of relationships for 90-day
paper. The trends are similar, though last year’s widening began later and the
size of the widening probably was influenced by the suddenness with which the
California utilities had difficulty rolling over their commercial paper. This
year’s widening began soon after the events of September 11th. The
downgrading of several corporations has reportedly made some managers
unwilling to hold A2/P2 paper at year-end for window-dressing reasons, but
many other fund managers have become unwilling to hold any A2/P2 paper
under any circumstances. The wider spreads have been necessary to draw in new
buyers, such as European institutions, to pick up the slack. Still, the A2/P2
sector has contracted by nearly 50 percent this year in terms of the amount
outstanding.
The bottom panel shows the spread of 90-day A1/P1 commercial
paper to 3-month Treasury bills on the left and A2/P2 paper relative to 3-month
Treasury bills on the right. These two graphs indicate that the widening of the
A2/P2 spread, at least so far, is strictly a matter of deterioration in the A2/P2
sector. Of note is how well the A1/P1 sector is holding up, with issuers able to
sell paper at a cost of only 10 basis points or so more than Treasuries.

11/6/01

5

Finally, the last page depicts the relationship between the rate for 

general collateral (GC) in the repo market, the so-called “specials rate” for on-

the-run securities, and the incidence of fails to deliver. The top panel graphs the 

GC rate in blue and the 5-year specials rate--that is, the rate to finance the on-

the-run 5-year security--in green. The gray bars at the bottom represent the 

volume of fails reported by primary dealers for that security. The interest rates 

are all daily, while the volume of fails is collected weekly; the number represents 

the volume of fails on the reporting date. 

The bottom panel has the same set of information for the 10-year note. 

The specials rate can be volatile from day to day, as dealer financing needs 

change. The upper boundary is the GC rate, which roughly tends to track the fed 

funds rate. The lower boundary is zero. When a security is very scarce, the cost 

of financing that security can fall to or near zero. But if dealers who are short the 

issue cannot borrow the paper, a fail will result. More cynically, a dealer can go 

short the issue and not deliver, knowing that with the specials rate so low there is 

almost no financial penalty to the fail. 

While the fail situation in the aftermath of September 11th garnered a 

lot of attention and was extraordinary in its size, securities at times do go on 

special for extended periods of time, so a spike in the volume of fails is not that

unusual. For example, as seen in the bottom panel, in May of 2001 the scarcity 

of the 10-year issue led to a surge of fails until the May refunding was 

completed. 

I want to make two points here. First, as short-term rates have come

down, the GC rate has come down as well. Second, the amount of elbowroom

for the specials market to move around has decreased. The rate doesn’t have to 

move very far from the GC rate to get to zero and create a situation that can lead 

to a rise in fails. Thus, even without future incidents of the kind seen on 

September 11th, in a low interest rate environment there is the risk of more 

instances where fails accumulate, at least for short periods of time. 

Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign exchange operations in the 

intermeeting period. The temporary swap facilities with the ECB and the Bank 

of England both expired without being renewed in mid-October, and the amount 

of the swap facility with the Bank of Canada reverted to its normal size. 

I will need a vote to ratify domestic operations, and I’d be happy to 

take any questions. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will the emergence of fails in the order of magnitude
we’ve been seeing lately impair the market structure in any ongoing way that should concern us?

11/6/01

6


MR. KOS. I don’t think so. The cash market continued to function normally. There did
not seem to be a spillover into the cash market. That might have occurred if the on-the-run/off-the
run spreads had widened, but we did not see that. The problem remained a back office problem that
did not spill over into the front office. Of course, there is the risk that that might happen at some
point but thus far it has been contained to the back office.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yet the Treasury reopened the 10-year due to obvious
concerns about-MR. KOS. That’s right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What was the Treasury worried about other than fails? On
the face of it, fails seem to be a disruption to the normal market process. If fails are benign, why
does anybody really care all that much?
MR. KOS. I think it’s the risk that I mentioned--that if the back office gets clogged up,
then it affects how the traders behave.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Has that ever happened?
MR. KOS. I can’t think of an instance when it has. In 1998 we had a different situation
where liquidity was an issue, and on-the-run/off-the-run spreads widened then. But I can’t think of
an instance where we had that kind of spillover problem because of fails. Again, that was a risk that
the Treasury was contending with, and I think it is the reason they made the decision that they did.
MR. REINHART. Historically, Mr. Chairman, the Treasury has been concerned that an
environment in which investors are not sure they actually will receive the security they purchased
may turn off some investors. As Dino pointed out, during the time the fails were occurring some
foreign central banks were not making their securities available in the market because they were on
the receiving end of fails too. They’d lend the securities out but weren’t getting them back. So they

11/6/01

7

decided not to participate in the market because they in particular like the orderly receipt of their
securities. I think the Treasury’s argument is that if fails continue for a protracted period, then at the
margin at least some investors will pare back their participation in the Treasury market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was slightly distracted, Dino, when you were explaining
why it is that the Japanese banks are willing to take the lower yielding 5-year swaps rather than
JGBs. Did you say it was for tax reasons?
MR. KOS. There’s a preferential accounting treatment for swaps relative to JGBs; the
latter go on their balance sheets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean in terms of their capital?
MR. KOS. In part I think for reasons related to capital. Also, a bank may be influenced
by not wanting to balloon its balance sheet, which is published. The Japanese accounting authorities
are looking at changing that preferential treatment because the Japanese banks are using it as a
loophole. The swap is designed to be what they call a macro hedge--that is, it is designed to hedge
assets--and it can be excluded from the balance sheet. However, as the Japanese accounting
authorities see it, the banks are using these swaps to hedge liabilities, which more or less turns the
intent of the rules on its head. So the accounting authorities have been looking at this and thinking
about whether to close that loophole. There is some pressure on them to continue to keep that
loophole open, and I think the banks are waiting to see how the Japanese accounting bodies will rule.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I’d like to add a comment. However the
accounting authorities rule, the situation is clearly one in which the Japanese banks are taking a
massive interest rate risk at a time when they have enough risks in the portfolio. And this practice
involves an additional risk that they should not be taking. Wearing my Basel Committee hat, I have
been trying to bring that to their attention with absolutely no positive result.

11/6/01

8

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any negative results?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. No, they just continue to ignore that risk.
Essentially, anything that will produce some additional earnings, however great the risk, is a risk that
the banks are willing to take. And as Dino pointed out very well, if the Japanese government has to
start issuing more government bonds in order to bail out the banking system, whatever is
accomplished by putting in additional capital could easily be reversed by the hit the banks will take
on the interest rate risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. In looking at a whole range of spreads--on-the-run, off-the run, bid-ask
spreads, and risk spreads on different kinds of paper--could you characterize the state of the markets
in recent days, relative to, let’s say, just before the terrorist attacks?
MR. KOS. Well, in terms of how the markets are functioning, I think they are functioning
fine. In terms of how market participants are discriminating among risks, I would have no reason to
second-guess the assessments they are making. They seem to be putting in a greater risk premium
on high-yield assets and on debt of emerging markets. So, to the extent that they are viewing the
economic outlook as being weaker than had been the case, they are putting in a higher risk premium
to those kinds of assets, which seems to be rational.
MR. POOLE. Right. But the spreads that would indicate how the market itself is
functioning, such as bid-ask spreads, are back pretty much to where they were?
MR. KOS. I don’t recall that there has been any meaningful widening of bid-ask spreads
in the fixed income markets. And the on-the-run/off-the-run spread has not moved very much. So
those indicators are not pointing to problems with the functioning of the markets.
MR. POOLE. Okay.

11/6/01

9


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further comments or questions? Mr. Vice Chair, would
you make your usual motion?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I move approval of the domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. We now move on to
Dave Stockton and Karen Johnson.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my remarks at the last 

meeting, I said that if we were pressed to net the various risks to our projection 

of real activity, we saw greater downside risks in the near term and greater 

upside risks further out. The data we have received over the past month seem to 

have supported that view. We are now showing a much sharper contraction in 

real GDP into early next year than was incorporated in our previous projection. 

But, by the spring, we anticipate a stronger recovery. Partly on the thought that 

the more pronounced near-term weakness in the economy will spur additional 

action by Congress, we have built a more stimulative fiscal policy into this 

projection. That added stimulus, along with stronger equity prices and a slightly 

lower assumed federal funds rate, underlie the upward adjustment to our longer-

term forecast. 

So, how weak is the economy likely to be over the near term? As we 

noted in the Greenbook supplement on Friday, the October labor market report 

led us to mark down further the projected contraction in real GDP in the current

quarter from about 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate to 3 percent. And with output 

and incomes weaker now, there will likely be some spillover in the form of 

further declines in demand early next year, leading us to revise down our first-

quarter drop in real GDP to about 1/2 percentage point. 

Even before receiving the October employment figures, we had been 

impressed by the exceptional weakness of the manufacturing sector; sharp 

inventory liquidations appear to be continuing this quarter, and the contraction in 

capital spending is intensifying. Moreover, reports have suggested that the 

service sector is softening noticeably. 

The concerns raised by those developments were certainly reinforced 

by last Friday’s employment report. Private payroll employment dropped nearly 

440,000 last month, aggregate production worker hours fell 0.7 percent, and the 

unemployment rate rose 1/2 percentage point to 5.4 percent--all weaker readings 

than we had expected. To be sure, some of our miss on employment was in 

industries that have been directly affected by the events of September 11--for 

example, airlines, travel, and hospitality. We had cutbacks in these areas spread 

out over the next few months, and we may have just gotten those cuts sooner 

than we had anticipated. But the declines were deep enough and widespread 


11/6/01

10

enough to make us reluctant to offset any of that larger drop in coming months.
The bottom line is that we see the labor market report as signaling a greater nearterm contraction in activity.
That certainly seems to be the case in the manufacturing sector, where
the sharp drop in factory hours and the reduction in temporary help jobs--many
of which are supplied to the goods-producing sector--indicate that the rate of
decline in industrial production is steepening this quarter. October IP could be
off around 1-1/2 percent for the month, setting up a possible double-digit annual
rate of decline for the fourth quarter.
Those cutbacks in production are in large part a reflection of the
ongoing efforts of businesses to pare inventories. As a result of those actions, as
well as the surge in auto sales, we are projecting a substantial inventory
liquidation of $80 billion at an annual rate in the fourth quarter. Still, not much
progress has yet been evident in reducing inventory-sales ratios.
The reason, of course, has been that final demand also has been
weakening, especially the demand for investment goods. The falloff in new
orders for capital equipment in September was stunning. As with all of the
statistical reports for September, there may be less signal than usual in these
data. But it is difficult for us to see how these readings could be pointing to
anything other than a very steep drop in equipment spending in coming months.
Indeed, the revision that we have made to investment spending accounts for a
large fraction of the downward adjustment to our current-quarter forecast.
As you know, we incorporated a substantial hit to business and
consumer confidence in our September projection--a feature that we have
maintained in this forecast. Thus far, we feel quite comfortable with that
assumption for the business sector. The cutbacks in employment, production,
and capital spending have been swift and sizable. And our business contacts,
who have been gloomy most of the year, have turned decidedly more so this fall.
However, I think it would be fair to say that there is still a large
question mark about our assumption of a considerable sustained deterioration of
consumer confidence. To begin with the obvious, at the same time that payrolls
were being slashed by more than at any time in the past twenty years, sales of
new motor vehicles soared to near-record levels. In our view, that surge has
been induced by temporary incentives, and a payback is in store late this year
and early next year--an outlook that largely appears to be shared by the
automakers. But these developments could give one pause about our story.
Moreover, while we have seen significant deterioration in measures of
consumer sentiment, the declines have not been as large as we had been
expecting. For now, we are sticking with our assumption that recent events have
shaken consumer confidence and that there will be an unusual degree of restraint

11/6/01

11

on household spending over the next few quarters. But that outcome is far from
a sure bet.
We have now come to that familiar part of my presentation, where I
recite for you the catechism of recovery. It should sound familiar because
neither the questions nor the answers have changed all that much since last
March. What ends this period of pronounced weakness and what will restore the
economy to a more vigorous growth track? If it’s any comfort to you, I did have
our crack research staff examine the historical record, and they confirmed for me
that there have been no instances, at least in the United States, of recessions that
never ended. [Laughter] So, I am reasonably confident that, with your
indulgence, if we stick with this story long enough, it should eventually come to
pass. However, when is another matter. In our view, the basic elements appear
to be in place for an upturn in activity by the spring.
The inventory liquidation will end, and even its abatement will
provide support to production and incomes; in our projection, the runoff
proceeds throughout much of next year, but it becomes a progressively smaller
drag on real output. Much the same can be said for the capital spending
adjustment. We do not expect an upturn in spending before the second half of
2002, but the significant negatives from this sector diminish as businesses better
align actual and desired capital stocks and as sales prospects begin to improve.
The risks to this aspect of our projection remain considerable. As we
noted in our report to the Committee in June, econometric models of investment
spending leave a great deal to be desired. Consequently, it is difficult to use
these equations with confidence to gauge where we are in the adjustment
process. We do, however, have pretty good company here. The businesses that
purchase and produce capital goods have failed to foresee the extent of the
weakness in capital spending that has emerged this year. If excessive optimism
lifted capital spending above the fundamentals in recent years, it seems possible
for excessive pessimism to depress spending below the fundamentals for a time.
We have built a bit of that effect into our forecast through an assumed weakening
of business confidence, but the retrenchment in spending could continue to be
more pronounced and more persistent than we have allowed for.
While the risks remain large, our best guess is that the inventory and
investment adjustments will largely play out over the first half of next year, and
will do so in an environment that receives considerable support from
macroeconomic policies. By our estimates, the real federal funds rate is
noticeably below its equilibrium value, suggesting to us that monetary policy is
calibrated to produce above-trend growth once the transitory drags on spending
wane.
Fiscal policy, too, is an important part of the story. We have
substantially increased the size of the fiscal stimulus package assumed in our

11/6/01

12

forecast, and that added stimulus shows through to the top line of our projection.
Two salient questions are: Will it happen, and will it be as potent as we are
anticipating? I recognize that reading the newspapers in recent weeks might
raise serious doubts about the likelihood of passing a sizable stimulus package,
and gridlock is certainly within the realm of possibility. But, we believe that,
with the full dimensions of the downturn becoming increasingly apparent, efforts
will resume to reach a compromise.
The precise composition of any package is very uncertain, and we
make no claim of special insight into how the political process will unfold. We
took a stab by combining elements that have appeared palatable to both sides in
the debate. We assume another round of tax rebates will be paid in the first
quarter to those that did not fully participate in the last round. We built in
additional spending for extended unemployment insurance and increased
subsidies for health insurance for the unemployed. We also are assuming
increased spending for infrastructure and security. Finally, we incorporated a
three-year temporary tax incentive for investment that allows an immediate 30
percent expensing of qualified equipment and software expenditures; this is the
provision incorporated in the House stimulus bill.
All told, our revised fiscal package adds nearly a percentage point to
growth of real GDP in 2002 and about 1/2 percentage point to growth in 2003.
Tax rebates are paid out early next year and are assumed to be largely spent in
the first half. By the middle of 2002, we expect the expensing provision to
provide an appreciable lift to equipment spending. As we noted in the
Greenbook, because the provision is temporary, we expect the effect on
investment outlays to be larger than if it were permanent. One reason is that the
budgetary cost is lower, and there should be less offset through higher interest
rates. Moreover, the temporary nature of the incentive will cause businesses to
pull forward purchases that would have been made after the provision’s
expiration.
We have heard the argument that investment incentives, such as the
one we have incorporated into the projection, will not be effective in a period
when the demand for capital goods has been so weak. Quite frankly, we do not
find this argument very convincing. To be sure, for some firms, tax incentives
will not forestall further cuts in their capital budgets. But even with the steep
declines that have occurred in capital spending over the past year, businesses
have still purchased nearly $1 trillion of equipment. So there must be many
firms that are on the margin for some categories of capital outlays and for which
the expensing provision will induce additional spending.
There are, however, plenty of other good reasons for second-guessing
the staff forecast on this issue. In building the effect of the tax provision into our
forecast of E&S spending, we have assumed only a muted effect in the first half
of next year. In our view, there will be only a small penalty to be paid for

11/6/01

13

waiting to take advantage of the provision until a bit more clarity develops in the
economic outlook. In our forecast, clearer signs of improvement should be
apparent by next spring, at which point we project the stimulus from the
expensing provision to mount. This timing was largely a judgment call, and
either a quicker or a more delayed response seems possible.
One small side effect of demand stimulus that occurs through an
investment incentive--such as is incorporated in this forecast--is that it raises
capital deepening and productivity growth for a time, with consequences for the
inflation outlook. Along with a somewhat higher projected value of the dollar,
these positive supply influences offset a slightly lower path for the
unemployment rate, leaving measures of core price inflation on a modest but
more noticeable downtrend by 2003.
In sum, the risks surrounding our economic forecast remain wide, but,
in our view, are two-sided. Rising equity prices, a steep yield curve, and soaring
motor vehicle sales might be pointing to a fundamentally sounder economic
outlook than we presented in the Greenbook. On the other hand, last Friday’s
employment data capped a long string of very weak reports on the economy and
could be signaling that businesses are prepared to act aggressively to cut
production and shed workers. In these circumstances, households will be
vulnerable to a bout of deepening pessimism and significant spending restraint in
coming months.
On that cheery thought, I’ll turn you over to Karen Johnson.
MS. JOHNSON. We revised down our forecast for growth of real
output abroad once again in this Greenbook. In part, we were reacting to the
information received over the intermeeting period about production and spending
in foreign economies. In part, we were recognizing that more pronounced
weakness in the U.S. economy in the very near term implied more of the same
for many of our trading partners. We now estimate that real GDP contracted at
an annual rate of about 1/2 percent during the third quarter and expect that a
similar outcome will be recorded for the current quarter. This projection of
prolonged contraction in our average measure of foreign real output reflects
widespread negative growth among the developing countries during the second
half of this year. Among the industrial countries, recession in Japan is ongoing
while the picture elsewhere is mixed: Real output appears to have turned down
in Canada, to have become stagnant, at best, in the euro area, but to have
continued to show a bit of resilience in the United Kingdom.
In constructing this forecast, we struggled with the need to specify the
intensity and duration of the downturn abroad. The Greenbook baseline paints a
picture of a global economy that is sluggish in the first half of next year and has
clearly begun to rebound by the second half. Although we can identify the
factors that we think will lie behind this path, we would be the first to admit that

11/6/01

14

picking the turning point requires a crystal ball rather than an economic model.
In addition, news since the Greenbook forecast was finalized reinforces the
downside risks to the baseline.
Our forecast calls for improvement in the developing countries to be
evident early in the new year. For many Asian emerging market economies, this
outcome will depend importantly on an end to the deterioration in the demand
for high-tech goods and the beginnings of a recovery in production in that sector.
It will depend as well on continued robust expansion in China, one of the few
countries or regions in the global economy that has not shared in the widespread
slowdown. Stability in global oil prices at recent lower levels will help, along
with supportive macroeconomic policy in some of these countries.
The widespread recovery of foreign activity during 2002 depends
critically on the rebound that is projected for the United States. Simply put, we
are counting on the range of direct and indirect linkages--through which the
slowing of U.S. growth over the past year imparted downward pressure on the
rest of the world--to transmit positive spillovers. Strengthening of the U.S.
economy will boost confidence, support asset prices, stimulate demand for
exports from our trading partners to the United States, and contribute to a
recovery in investment spending. For the major industrial countries, domestic
policy stimulus of varying amounts is in the pipeline. Since their respective
peaks, official lending rates to date have been lowered 300 basis points in
Canada, 150 basis points in the United Kingdom, and 100 basis points in the euro
area. We are expecting another 25 basis points soon by each of these three
central banks, perhaps later this week in some cases, and a further 25 basis points
by the ECB sometime in the first half of 2002. Fiscal stimulus was injected
during 2001 in Canada, the United Kingdom, and several of the major euro-area
countries. We expect some additional expansionary measures during 2002 in
Canada and the United Kingdom, where surpluses allow more room for
maneuver.
Two spots in the global economy--Japan and Argentina--are especially
troubled by problems that are largely, but not entirely, domestic. The latest
releases of economic indicators paint a bleak picture for real economic activity in
Japan. And we see little in the prospects for either monetary or fiscal policy that
could spark a turnaround in spending. The supplementary budget that now
seems on track for passage in the Diet soon will provide a partial offset to what
would otherwise be a large contractionary impulse from fiscal policy. But we do
not see the measures now planned as up to the task of preventing further declines
in real GDP during the first half of 2002. By the second half of next year, we
have projected an anemic return to positive growth as private investment
spending stops falling and stabilizes and as exports swing from declining to
increasing. Both of these developments depend importantly on a general
recovery in the global economy, including in the high-tech sector.

11/6/01

15


The situation in Argentina is evolving as we speak. The chaotic
events of last week have brought into the open the prospect of a sovereign debt
restructuring that now seems inevitable. The scope and terms of such a
restructuring are slowly being proposed. Spreads on Argentine dollardenominated sovereign debt spiked above 2500 basis points yesterday, as the
market price of the widely watched bond that matures in 2008 fell to nearly 40
cents on the dollar. Deposit outflows from Argentine banks, where pesos and
dollars still exchange one for one, have risen over the past week or so and
shipments of dollar currency from U.S. banks to Argentine counterparts have
again jumped.
Two “events” appeared to accelerate the downward spiral of the
ongoing Argentine crisis last week. One was the apparent failure of the de la
Rua government to reach agreement with key provincial governors over the
dispute about revenue sharing between the provinces and the federal
government. Some compromise is needed in order for the government to
achieve its stated fiscal objectives. A second bit of “news” was the statement by
an IMF official during a press conference that acceleration of the planned
December disbursements of IMF funds to Argentina was not being considered,
thus quashing widespread expectations that those funds would be distributed
shortly. Late in the week, Argentine officials apparently felt the need to
announce something, so President de la Rua made a statement on Argentine
television that included some minor reforms of the tax and pension systems
aimed at stimulating the economy. He also called for a debt exchange, with the
intent of reducing interest costs on the debt, particularly in the near term, but as
of now there is no proposal for additional funds from the IMF or other sources to
support an “orderly” exchange. The government’s explicit position to date is
that there will be no change in the current exchange rate regime.
In our Greenbook forecast, we have projected that real GDP will
decline sharply in Argentina during 2002 and then be about flat on balance over
2003. While the actual path will no doubt differ from this, a substantial decline
in output in Argentina is unavoidable over the forecast period. Our current
thinking is that negative spillovers to real output growth of other countries in the
region will be limited. This round of problems in Argentina has been unfolding
for about a year, and financial market developments support the view that market
participants do distinguish both Brazil and Mexico from Argentina. Spreads for
Brazil remain around 1100, with those for Mexico much lower, and both the
Brazilian real and the Mexican peso have appreciated on balance over the
intermeeting period. Thus, despite the imponderables of the Argentine situation,
we see average output growth in Latin America turning positive next year and
strengthening further in 2003, similar to the pattern projected for the Asian
emerging market economies and the foreign industrial countries.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.

11/6/01

16

MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question for David. You
mentioned in your comments the possibility of weaker household spending and, of course, that was
one of the alternative scenarios that you had in the Greenbook as well. The Greenbook analysis
indicated that under this alternative scenario households would react more adversely than you
anticipate in the baseline forecast. I was wondering if you could elaborate on what you’re
anticipating in that case, particularly in terms of external shocks such as terrorist attacks and anthrax
scares that are so important to household spending and consumer confidence. Could you provide
some more detail about what you are assuming in each of these alternatives?
MR. STOCKTON. Certainly. In our baseline forecast, we have assumed a significant hit
to consumer confidence, one that is by our estimates sufficient to subtract roughly 3/4 of a
percentage point from real GDP growth in 2002. So in the baseline scenario we are already
expecting some additional weakness--an exogenous hit--beyond the weakening in consumer
confidence one would expect as the economy weakens. We have that also influencing business
spending in ways that we tried to calibrate, a spillover effect to other forms of spending as in other
periods when there have been outsized movements in consumer confidence.
In our alternative simulations, version one removes that consumer confidence effect from
the forecast so that you can get a sense of what it implies. In essence the stronger growth in that
simulation is sufficient with unchanged policy to bring the unemployment rate back down to 5
percent or so by the end of the forecast horizon.
The second version, which is the even more pessimistic version, assumes a further
percentage point rise in the personal saving rate--again, an exogenous further change--and again with
consequences and fallout for the rest of the economy. That produces a much weaker economy and a

11/6/01

17

much higher unemployment rate. In that scenario, with an unchanged policy the unemployment rate
moves up to 7-1/4 percent by the end of the forecast horizon.
I think there are two important and related risks in this projection. One, in the baseline
projection, we have some weakness in consumer confidence but we don’t really have a complete
collapse in the consumer sector. And with some turnaround in activity by the middle of next year,
we get through this period of economic weakness without a really large decline in GDP. One of the
risks we’ve been highlighting for some time is that we’re not highly confident that consumers will be
able to withstand the kind of weakness we are currently projecting in the near term. That could
obviously lead to a bigger fall in confidence that will feed back on the economy with fallout that
extends into late 2002 and into 2003. As I noted in my remarks, certainly the data that we have
received since the last Greenbook haven't been especially weak for the consumer side. Yes, we did
see a very significant drop in retail sales in September and we expect some of that to be offset. But
even that drop in sales and the decline we’ve seen in consumer confidence have not been so large as
to make us think that we are already in the process of a confidence contraction. Whatever one
makes of 21 million units of motor vehicle sales--and as I said, we have pretty much written that off
as a signal of stronger consumer spending--it does at least pose in our minds some question about
whether we have that story right. I think we will begin to see in the next couple of months whether
our forecast is correct. A significant payback in the auto sector will confirm our view that there is
going to be weakness in consumer spending. But right now that’s still a forecast.
MR. MOSKOW. In your “weaker household spending” alternative, as you look forward
do you envision a more or less stable environment in terms of the terrorist threat that we’re facing?
MR. STOCKTON. That’s a very good point. The answer is more stable. We have not
built in escalating terrorist activities in the United States that would either significantly affect

11/6/01

18

consumer confidence or add significantly further to business costs. I wouldn’t even know how to
begin to produce such a forecast. But certainly there are some significant risks. Just as anthrax has
been a concern in the past month, it could be smallpox the next month and something even worse the
following month. I don’t think our forecast begins to capture the potential consequences of that for
consumer and business confidence. Nor does it capture the hit we might take to the productivity and
business cost structure.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. David, I just wanted to probe a bit more on the impact you project
from the assumed passage of legislation regarding a partial expensing provision. If you’re right in
your projection, that won’t make much of an impact until we get to the second quarter of 2002. But
from then on the effect is fairly significant. The analysis seems solid, but in an environment where
we have so much excess capacity and a great deal of pessimism, intuitively it’s a little hard for me to
connect to it. Could you elaborate a little on that? In particular, I wondered if you looked at this at
all from a disaggregated standpoint. In other words, I’m asking what particular industries might
react strongly to this provision if it is passed.
MR. STOCKTON. We certainly did look at it at a disaggregated level. Perhaps my
colleague, David Wilcox, can talk about the underlying theory of how we embedded this in the
forecast in terms of its potential implications for different kinds of capital spending, in particular on
shorter-lived versus longer-lived assets. Obviously this provision has a larger effect on the cost of
capital for longer-lived assets than for shorter-lived assets. If you consider, for example, the
computer area where prices are declining by 30 percent a year, the advantage of the expensing
provision may not be quite so significant in terms of moving up any spending. So, we have looked

11/6/01

19

at it by industry but we certainly haven’t gone through a very detailed disaggregated analysis. But
maybe David wants to talk a little about how we actually worked with the models that we used to
incorporate this effect.
MR. WILCOX. There’s not a lot to go on. We don’t have clean, historical experiments.
We have some elegant theory and some consensus parameters. We attempted to calibrate simulation
models to values that we think are sensible and that in other circumstances produce reasonable
results. But history is not replete with temporary investment tax incentives of the kind that we’re
simulating here. And Congress is not notorious for following through in every respect with the
specifics of its original announcement. So one possible risk that could attenuate the effect of the
investment incentive is that, contrary to our assumption in the Greenbook, businesses may doubt that
in fact the incentive will be allowed to expire at the end of the three-year period. In that case the
provision wouldn’t spur as much investment as we had assumed will take place. That said, there is
econometric evidence that at least helps us to narrow the range of uncertainty a bit. We have a view
about the long-run elasticity of the capital stock with respect to the cost of capital. We have some
evidence on speeds of adjustment. We tried to piece together those bits of evidence using a
simulation model to get a handle on how big an effect the proposed legislation might have.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Dave, one of your comments in your presentation surprised me a little, and
that was the link that you described between capital deepening, productivity, and inflation. You
emphasized the implications of a temporary investment incentive that raises investment, spurs
additional capital deepening, and leads in a sense to a positive supply shock. In the Greenbook,
though, it seems to me your emphasis was that on balance we face a negative supply shock because

11/6/01

20

of a significant slowing in structural productivity growth that is expected to occur for a couple of
reasons, including a slowdown from an unsustainable pace of technology spending and also the
reallocation of resources to security enhancements.
MR. STOCKTON. I should have been clearer about that. My remark in the briefing was
really referring to the revisions that we have made in the forecast, which involved a downward
revision in our price forecast at the same time that we’re showing a lower unemployment rate. A
piece of that story was the slightly faster capital deepening in 2003 that has been stimulated by the
faster investment in late 2002 and 2003. You’re absolutely right. As we noted in the Greenbook,
you could look at the very sharp deceleration that we are projecting in wage inflation and, if you
were so inclined, wonder why that is not showing through more forcefully into our price inflation
forecast. The reason is that even with the improvement in structural productivity that we expect to
see by 2003, the gains are still well below where they had been earlier. And we see this on net as a
factor limiting the extent of the disinflation that we are likely to see over the next two years as
businesses respond to that and attempt to rebuild margins that have become compressed significantly
in the last year or so.
MR. MEYER. Just to follow up on that, the slowdown in structural productivity growth is
really quite significant into 2002 in particular. We became somewhat familiar with the complicated
dynamics of how that plays out on demand as well as inflation when we had an acceleration in
structural productivity, so this is perhaps a factor that we should weigh in our real forecast as well.
MR. STOCKTON. I agree with that. We’re not showing very much disinflation in the
course of 2002 in part because of the unwinding of the positive productivity shock that we saw on
the other side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.

11/6/01

21


MR. PARRY. Dave, I have a question and also a comment about the forecast. In looking
at the sources of weakness in the short term, a large portion of it comes from residential investment.
It strikes me that there certainly are some positive fundamentals in this area. In September, for
example, starts continued to increase. Moreover, the financial fundamentals in housing are still quite
good and the falloff in permits was actually quite small. I can see that the negative effects of higher
unemployment rates and the impact on confidence might be playing a role, but why does that seem
to have so much of a role in the residential sector and, in my view, not much of a role in personal
consumption expenditures? I ask because in your forecast personal consumption expenditures in the
current quarter and even in the subsequent quarter aren’t all that weak.
MR. STOCKTON. I’d note a couple of points. One is that our projected falloff in single
family starts is not dramatic; it’s certainly not dramatic if one thought we were witnessing a typical
recession.
MR. PARRY. Eight-tenths of a percentage point of the decline in real GDP this quarter is
due to residential investment, and that’s a small sector.
MR. STOCKTON. We believe our starts forecast is reasonably aligned with the decline
in permits that we saw and with what we think will be some depressing effect from the weakening in
income growth. And we built in some additional weakness because of the assumptions we’ve made
about consumer sentiment. So that is one of the places where the confidence effect shows up. We
also noted that homebuilders have reported a noticeable falloff in both traffic and home sales
recently. Again, none of this is suggestive of a major weakening in that sector; by my view what we
built in is actually fairly mild. Certainly the percentage change at an annual rate looks fairly large
because, as you noted, it is a relatively small sector. But that would be one of the upside risks that I
think we were talking about in terms of how things have held up in the household sector. I think one

11/6/01

22

would have to say that housing also is an area where we have not seen the extent of weakness one
might have anticipated. So that would be a part of the upside risk that we see associated with our
assumptions about extra weakness in the household sector coming from confidence effects.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you know if there is anything special in the adjustment
that goes from starts to value put in place that would be involved in this change?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, there is a bit in the residential investment forecast because the
falloff in construction put in place has been greater for homes at the high end than at the low end. So
the cost per start has been falling as well and that certainly adds to that weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that’s an issue.
MR. STOCKTON. But we do still have a falloff in single-family home starts in the
quarter to 1.2 million units. That is a noticeable drop.
MR. PARRY. I also have a comment about the partial expensing investment tax
incentive. Given that the proposal is for a three-year period, and recognizing some of the points Al
Broaddus made--that the capacity utilization rate is so low and that the current economic situation is
so poor and likely to remain so for a while--why wouldn’t the resultant investment be back-loaded
more? The lead times needed for much of the equipment are short. I don’t know how you made the
decision about how to spread out the investment, but as an alternative I think you clearly could have
spread it in a way that is much more back-loaded than you did.
MR. STOCKTON. We certainly could have and we debated that. In the end, as I noted,
more judgment than science was applied to how we spread it out. I would sound one note of caution
about assuming that a provision like this won’t be important by the middle of next year. When the
economy starts to improve, there is a fair amount of tinder that can be accumulated in terms of
stimulus from both federal tax and spending provisions, from monetary policy, and so forth. While

11/6/01

23

we’re sitting here now in the midst of a significant contraction in output, it’s obviously difficult to
envision why businesses would be very excited about using an expensing provision. But coming on
the heels of a year-and-a-half of significant contraction in capital spending, there could be a rush to
take advantage of this incentive as sales prospects begin to improve. I wouldn’t rule out even an
upside risk to how we built this in; I think there are risks on both sides. Firms may wait until they
are absolutely certain that the economy is on a path of trend or above-trend growth before they are
induced by this provision to raise spending. On the other hand, there could be some reasons as well
for them to want to take advantage of it early on, especially while prices in the capital goods markets
are on the low side. I can’t say that we offer much science here and, as I indicated, this is an area
where we feel quite comfortable with your second-guessing us. But I think you could second-guess
us in either direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There’s also the risk that the provision will be not for three
years but for one or two years.
MR. STOCKTON. Another risk, too, is that the provision could be smaller than now
anticipated. This is not a very large temporary investment incentive. If the window were made
shorter, we might see a more immediate effect. Or if the amount that can be expensed were lessalong the lines of the 10 or 15 percent people have talked about as a compromise--the effects could
be even more muted than we have in this forecast. So there is a lot of uncertainty. In the end we felt
uncomfortable coming to you with a baseline projection that completely ignored what we thought
were cumulating signs of additional fiscal stimulus. We had a very modest amount of fiscal stimulus
in our last projection and our best guess of the mode is more along the lines of what we’re showing
now. But as I indicated, it’s certainly possible that gridlock will reassert itself and nothing will
happen.

11/6/01

24


MR. PARRY. Have we gotten any greater visibility about what is likely to happen in
terms of Congressional action on this?
MR. STOCKTON. All I know is what I read in the newspapers, and that has not been
terribly encouraging. Yet this would be the time when we might in fact not expect to hear much
encouraging news, as parties on both sides position themselves for the hard negotiations that, at least
in our view, will probably need to take place in the next month or so.
MR. WILCOX. I’d like to underscore two points that Dave made earlier. First, what we
have built into the Greenbook projection is not a straight read of our model simulation. We did very
substantially push back the investment response to the tax incentive precisely on the theory that
businesses might plausibly respond to the heightened climate of uncertainty over the next couple of
quarters by opting to wait. They might well decide in the context of a three-year incentive--if it does
last that long--that there’s very little penalty to waiting until some of that uncertainty is resolved.
Secondly, we observed from the experience with auto sales in October that at least in a different
context economic actors do respond quite vigorously and quickly to something that is seen as a
temporary sale on a large capital item, namely motor vehicles in this case. It’s conceivable that
businesses may respond in a similar way.
MR. PARRY. That incentive is for a period of months versus three years.
MR. WILCOX. I will grant that the duration makes a big difference.
MR. PARRY. Right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. I’ve been thinking about what we might see in some of the data that will be
published over the near term, in particular payroll employment and the impact of seasonal factors. I
assume, other things equal, that the seasonals anticipate an increase in employment in December and

11/6/01

25

probably in November, although I’m not sure, and then some runoff in the first part of next year. Is
that right?
MR. STOCKTON. Yes, and I think even in October we reach the front edge of a pickup
in seasonal hiring. Obviously that seems less likely and is part of the reason why we would expect
ongoing substantial weakness in the employment data.
MR. STERN. Right. So even if we don’t get further substantial employment reductions,
the seasonally adjusted numbers are likely to look fairly lousy.
MR. STOCKTON. Yes. We are expecting payroll employment to continue to contract at
more than 200,000 a month over the next few months and to contract rather sharply in the first
quarter of next year as well.
MR. STERN. Okay, thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a question about the interpretation of interest rate developments. In
the pre-FOMC briefing you mentioned the common view in the marketplace that the budget deficit
had something to do with the behavior of longer-term interest rates. It wasn’t clear what your own
view on that was. I was interested in Chart 1 in yesterday’s Board briefing where you plotted the
implied one-year forward rates, which currently are not that different five years out from those that
prevailed on January 2nd, let’s say. I would have expected the budget argument to make a big
difference--to see more effect on interest rates, say, five years out and beyond the current cyclical
situation. Yet those curves are not that dissimilar. In fact, the longer end is actually lower now,
which is not consistent with the argument involving the erosion of the budget surplus. Would you
offer your own view on that?

11/6/01

26


MR. STOCKTON. Sure. I’d say two things. One, we do think that the longer-run budget
outlook and the accompanying fiscal policy that underlie that outlook have been factors influencing
long-term interest rates. When I look at that implied one-year forward rate, it currently is showing
those rates rising above levels that were prevailing in January--though you’re right, not by a huge
amount. However, the other news that we have received since January--this enormous contraction in
capital spending--would have been a factor working to depress the view about where equilibrium
real interest rates might be going in that period. So, in our view, we have seen some effect of the
fiscal policy on the structure of interest rates and that certainly is a factor in interpreting what has
happened. It’s quite clear in our models--and we think there’s some reasonably sound economic
theory for this view--that equilibrium long-term real interest rates would be related to the long-run
thrust of fiscal policy. So that’s our interpretation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for our colleagues? If not, who
would like to start the Committee discussion? President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the fallout from the September 11 attacks has intensified
existing weakness in the Twelfth District economy. The high-tech sector has been struggling for the
past year and now the timeline for recovery has been pushed back by business firms in the aftermath
of the attacks. The latest figures show that California’s high-tech manufacturers reduced payrolls by
more than 12,000 in the third quarter alone, which accounts for nearly half of the 29,000 jobs lost on
net in the state. The impact has been especially visible in the San Francisco Bay area office market
where vacancy rates recently rose above those in Los Angeles for the first time in recent memory.
And with struggling companies accounting for much of the space made available through subleases,
the full financial effect on landlords has yet to be felt.

11/6/01

27


More generally, construction activity has fallen throughout the District in recent months
and a sharp drop in September may herald further weakening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that residential and commercial?
MR. PARRY. It’s primarily commercial. Southern California had been the main pocket
of economic vitality in the District through August, showing substantial strength in housing demand
and population-based services like education and health. But weak September employment numbers
suggest that the slowdown may be taking hold there as well. The slowdown in southern California
will be exacerbated by the ongoing reduction in travel spending resulting from the terrorist attacks.
Compared to most areas of the country, the Twelfth District is somewhat more exposed to the travel
slowdown, with states such as Hawaii and Nevada relying heavily on tourism dollars. Although
travel sectors overall are less critical to District activity than the high-tech sector, a continued
slowdown in travel activity on the order of 10 to 15 percent will reduce District growth noticeably.
Some impacts of the travel slowdown already are evident, with the latest data on new
unemployment insurance claims confirming a sharp increase in District layoffs, especially in Hawaii
and Nevada, in the weeks following the attacks. And Seattle will soon feel the impact as well when
Boeing initiates production cuts and implements its planned layoffs of up to 20,000 commercial
aircraft workers there. Moreover, state and local governments and their creditors are on alert in
much of the District as many areas expect significant revenue shortfalls of up to 8 percent this fiscal
year compared to pre-September 11 predictions. The negative impacts of the travel slowdown will
be offset somewhat by increased spending on military hardware in some areas, including weapons
systems manufactured in Arizona and southern California. However, the amounts spent by the
federal government are likely to represent only a partial offset, especially in the short term.

11/6/01

28

Let me now turn to the macro picture. An official recession this year appears
unavoidable. With the October employment report, the data in hand now have the depth and
duration to declare a recession. Furthermore, given last summer’s weakness in various monthly
indicators, it seems likely that the start of the present recession will be dated back into the spring.
Looking ahead, the recession in our forecast is not as deep as the Greenbook’s. But our projected
recovery next year develops more slowly than in the Greenbook forecast. Assuming a funds rate of
2-1/4 percent, we anticipate a more gradual pickup in growth, largely in response to monetary and
fiscal policy actions. This recovery primarily mirrors the unusually gradual slowdown over the past
year. It took a year for real GDP to decelerate slowly from growth of about 1-1/2 percent during the
second half of last year to last quarter’s decline of 0.4 percent. This slow erosion of growth reflected
a long sequence of causal shocks: the jump in energy prices, the slowing in demand abroad, the
bursting of the asset price bubble, the related re-evaluation of desired capital stocks, and, of course,
the events of September 11th. Some recessions in the past resulted from one big shock, but this one
seems to have had many causes. The unwinding of these many shocks also will take time, and in our
forecast, recovery progresses fairly slowly.
Our inflation forecast is little revised. Our best estimate is for inflation of about 1-1/2
percent in the core CPE price index in 2002. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Economic activity in the Eleventh District continued to weaken over the
past six weeks. Although the District economy had probably begun to slump even before our last
meeting, output declines now appear to be more pronounced and widespread. Four of the District’s
usual economic drivers--air transportation, energy, border trade, and worker migration--have turned
from plus to minus. As I mentioned last time, we certainly are sharing in the national economic

11/6/01

29

slowdown related to air travel, with Dallas a hub for American Airlines and Southwest, and Houston
a hub for Continental. Activity in our energy industry has slowed too, responding to a decline in oil
and gas demand.
Tighter security at the border also is having a significant negative effect on District
economic activity. On the demand side, far fewer Mexican consumers are willing to bear the
increased hassle of getting across the border to shop in our stores. They also have less money to
spend owing to a decline in Mexican maquiladora output and U.S. tourism in Mexico. Our directors
from border towns report a drop of 15 to 50 percent in retail sales in their areas. On the supply side,
Mexican commuters who work in the District face rush hour wait times of two to four hours to cross
the border, whether they come by car or by foot. Some have even taken to riding bikes so they don’t
have to stop to open the trunks of their vehicles.
With all these drags on Eleventh District output, virtually every economic statistic is
signaling weakness. September’s announced layoffs in the District jumped to three times the norm
for the year and October’s layoffs remain well above earlier levels as well. For the first time since
we began constructing the Texas leading economic indicator index, every one of its components
turned negative in September and overall the index showed the largest decline in its history.
About the only good news is that auto demand and construction activity so far appear to
be holding up fairly well. As reported in the Beige Book, some of the District’s industries most
impacted by the terrorist attacks did see activity bounce back a bit during October. But overall we’re
not expecting District employment levels to regain their previous highs until sometime in the middle
of 2002. The ripple effect has visibly spread out from air travel and mail service to hurt other
businesses such as hotels, recreation, aircraft production, travel services, and retail trade, and those
effects are leveraged even further through big declines in consumer confidence. Resources cannot

11/6/01

30

be allocated fast enough from areas of excess supply, such as the air transporters, to those of excess
demand--security for example--to prevent large dislocations. And the newly unemployed high-tech
workers are not likely candidates for airport security jobs. The adjustment is going to be very
sluggish.
It comforts me somewhat that the stock market is back up to roughly where it was before
September 11 and that it has withstood a lot of bad news subsequent to the attacks. That I interpret
as the markets’ best opinion about our economy’s resilience and its ability to bounce back. Still,
there is a long list of discouraging current statistics: industrial production, capacity utilization,
durable goods orders, retail sales, existing home sales, initial jobless claims, consumer confidence,
and more. Those statistics set the overall tone for today. The Greenbook increased its estimate of
the contraction in GDP in the fourth quarter and I suspect that last quarter’s numbers also are going
to be revised down. Even so, we question whether the rebound is going to be as prompt or as strong
as is shown in the Greenbook.
Given the unique nature of our situation, where an unseen enemy is working accurately to
undermine our confidence, I wonder if the forecast that we have for next year may be wishful
thinking as well. Hunches and hopes are somewhat sick. The risks are clearly on the downside for
now and for the foreseeable future, and I’m not sure monetary policy can do much more than it is
already doing. Market participants are insisting on further easing while suggesting that it won’t help
much. We keep saying the bias is for further weakness, which is obviously true. The markets keep
taking that as a promise of more ease to come and we seem to be afraid to disappoint them. With a
2-1/2 percent fed funds rate and a 2 percent discount rate, this may be a good time to begin the
transition to a penalty discount rate, with a larger cut in the fed funds rate than in the discount rate.

11/6/01

31


I’m told that the defenders of the Alamo at least used up all their powder. I suppose we
should too. But the Alamo story had a rather discouraging ending. [Laughter] However, it would
have played even less well in history had the Alamo’s defenders been found with dry powder.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I don’t have any good stories about the Alamo or anything similar. On
the Friday morning before Open Market Committee meetings, I usually meet with a group of local
investment professionals and economists from the District’s largest banks. This group has a pretty
good take on credit conditions locally and nationally, on market realities and expectations, and on
risks in general. After a fairly gloomy go-around about near-term prospects, I asked if anyone saw
light at the end of the tunnel. The only response was that by the fourth quarter profit comparisons
should start to be made against the slowing economy of late 2000, making otherwise dismal behavior
look a little better. Their take on the prospects for substantial fiscal stimulus was equally downbeat.
They viewed the current situation in Washington as political gridlock and didn’t expect anything like
the near-term fiscal stimulus shown in the Greenbook. Monetary policy seemed to them to hold out
the only hope. But they also seemed to believe that lower interest rates could do only so much to
spur demand on the part of consumers who were either experiencing or fearing layoffs or on the part
of businesses faced with sizable excess capacity, inventories to work off, and declining profits.
This overall assessment may be a bit gloomy for the nation as a whole. Auto sales in
particular suggest that consumers have not gone into total hibernation and will react to a good--or
maybe I should say spectacular--deal on interest rates, albeit largely by changing the timing of their
expenditures. Moreover, the stock market is upbeat, all things considered. And I am a bit more
confident than the group about the prospects for at least some fiscal stimulus.

11/6/01

32


Their outlook, however, is completely consistent with everything we know about the First
District economy. We do not yet have any regional employment data past September 11, but
available indicators suggest that New England’s economy has declined recently, likely at a sharper
pace than that for the nation. In part this is because the slowdown in the region occurred later than
that in the country as a whole and our area is to some extent playing catch-up, but it also reflects the
growing impact of a fall-off in high-tech equipment and software spending.
Both consumer and business confidence about the current economy are off substantially,
and non-manufacturing respondents to recent business surveys are now seeing sales declines and
have joined manufacturers in a negative overall assessment of business conditions. Initial claims for
unemployment insurance rose sharply, and help-wanted advertising both in print and online
deteriorated markedly as well. Sales of existing homes fell sharply in September and permits for
new homebuilding trended down through August. Similarly, office vacancies were up substantially,
to 8-1/2 percent in downtown Boston and to nearly 14 percent in the suburban markets. These
vacancy rates might not seem high in an absolute sense, but, relatively, they are multiples of the rates
prevailing a year ago and represent a sea change in Boston real estate markets.
Business conditions are not expected to get better any time soon. Surveys of business
confidence see no recovery until well into 2002. A University of Massachusetts leading indicator
index points to declining economic activity in Massachusetts for the next six months. And the New
England economic project, in which our Bank participates, forecasts a sharp drop in regional activity
continuing into the first half of 2002 followed by very slow growth.
On the national scene, the question no longer seems to be whether the economy is in
recession. The latest employment and durable goods data seem to seal that. The questions now

11/6/01

33

focus on how deep and how long the turndown will be and what appropriate further policy action
should be taken.
We see a similar trajectory in near-term economic activity as the Greenbook, even with its
latest revisions that take into account last Friday’s unemployment data. Negative growth is expected
to be relatively short-lived--three quarters--even with that change in the employment picture,
followed by a snapback induced by fiscal stimulus, monetary ease, and a revival of inventory
spending. If cyclical turns are a fact of life at some point, and I think they are, the Greenbook and
many other forecasts as well suggest that this contraction might not be such a bad one. But
uncertainties abound. The unemployment report was unexpectedly negative. Claims data suggest
that another jump in the unemployment rate may be a foregone conclusion. And the drop in durable
goods orders doesn’t bode well. My breakfast group may be overly gloomy but the risks to
consumption and business spending that they discussed I think are real. Corporate profits have
deteriorated significantly and analysts have been revising what had been overly optimistic forecasts.
External sources of demand don’t add much in what now appears to be a global recession. Fiscal
stimulus may save the day, as the Greenbook suggests, but the possibilities for political gridlock are
there, creating uncertainty both about the amount of stimulus and its timing. State and local
government spending almost certainly will contract in early 2002, as these bodies dig in to rainy day
funds and cut back spending in the face of decreased revenue. Monetary policy has eased
aggressively and the stock market seems to have leveled off. But other aspects of financial marketsspreads and commercial bank credit tightening--suggest financing conditions that may be tougher
than the level of real short-term interest rates implies.
That said, I keep arguing with myself about how to view these undeniably downside risks
in terms of the stance of policy. How low should rates go? How fast should they get there? And

11/6/01

34

how easy will it be to tighten conditions when that is necessary? Much of the data we have on the
current economy continue to reflect the tragedy of September 11th. Confidence, consumer spending,
and even business investment might begin to look better with a little more time. Further monetary
easing might help, but I think we also need to be careful not to overreact. I realize that inflation is
not a current worry and that growth is now far below potential and will likely be so for some time to
come. But policy easing has been particularly forceful to date. And I confess to some misgivings
about rapidly approaching the point where nominal rates can no longer be reduced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in our District appears
to have declined further in October, but perhaps a bit more moderately than in the weeks
immediately after the September 11 attacks. That partly reflects the pattern of retail sales, which
dropped less sharply in October than in September, due mainly to strong car sales in our region--as
elsewhere in the country--in response to the zero percent financing packages.
A couple of weeks ago Jerry Jordan, who apparently has been spying in my District, told
me he had heard that a large annual boat show in Annapolis had surprisingly strong results. We
checked it out, Jerry, and you were right. Sales were quite robust. But the reason given was that
people want to enjoy themselves while they still can! [Laughter] I don’t know whether that’s a
good signal or a bad signal.
Many of the retailers we talked to over the last couple of weeks in an attempt to get some
sense of how they are approaching the holiday season, indicated that they are quite nervous about it
and accordingly are building holiday inventories very cautiously. Elsewhere in the District,
residential home sales and construction are still growing, but much more slowly than a year or so
ago. We no longer see the signs of a possible bottoming in manufacturing activity that we thought

11/6/01

35

we might be seeing right before the terrorist attacks. In sum, with unemployment rising, both
households and business firms in our region are generally nervous, and I would describe many of
them as hunkering down.
Turning to the national outlook, in short I think it’s problematic. The staff, as we know,
has marked down fourth-quarter real GDP growth to minus 3 percent at an annual rate. And they see
it remaining negative until the spring. On the face of it, one could see that as a pessimistic forecast.
But in my view, as a number of other people have suggested, a strong case can be made that under
the circumstances it is an optimistic forecast with a considerable amount of downside risk. I say that
for three reasons. First, the Greenbook is projecting a loss of payroll employment of about threequarters of a million jobs in the fourth quarter. Of course, we got more than half of that in October
so the staff may already have revised that quarterly number, though I haven’t seen it. In any case,
we could get significantly greater job losses in this quarter. Second, the Greenbook still projects that
the unemployment rate will peak at around 6 percent or perhaps a little higher. That would be a
cumulative increase from the low point of a little more than 2 percentage points. But in four of the
five recessions since 1970 the cumulative increase in the unemployment rate has been somewhere
between 3 and 4 percentage points. Only in the unusually brief and quite atypical 1980 recession
was the cumulative rise limited to only about 2 percentage points. Based on past experience, I think
it’s reasonable to expect that the 1-1/2 percentage point increase in unemployment that has already
occurred will weaken household confidence further, continue to depress spending growth, and cause
still more job losses and so forth. Third, the possibility of higher than projected unemployment in
and of itself is not the only downside risk in this situation. Historically, rising unemployment in
recessions has been associated with disinflation. The Greenbook is projecting some disinflation this
time around, of course, but it is relatively mild. The slower growth in projected wages due to the

11/6/01

36

slack in the labor markets is accompanied by a slowing in productivity growth, so the decline in unit
labor costs is restrained by that. But the disinflation could be more pronounced than projected. For
the last several decades, disinflation has been seen as a good thing and many of us around this table
have spent the better part of our Fed careers promoting it. But it is a potential problem today.
My main point, and this has been alluded to already, is that in past recessions the Fed has
had the leeway to cut the nominal funds rate to keep the real funds rate from rising as disinflation
has run its course through these periods of weakness. Today, we have only 2-1/2 percentage points
of leeway left before the nominal funds rate hits the zero bound. We will have to match any further
disinflation with nominal funds rate cuts just to keep policy at the same place. But that’s going to
eat up part of the leeway to cut the real funds rate, which we may need to do in order to counteract
potentially serious weakness in the economy.
I have always believed that price stability is the goal of monetary policy. I still believe
that. Often in the past I’ve argued for policy actions to preempt inflation as over time--over a couple
of decades--we moved the trend inflation rate down. That was really the essence of our antiinflationary strategy. And it has largely succeeded. But in my view the risk to price stability is
different today. What we need to do now is to preempt disinflation--as novel as it is to think in those
terms--and do so fairly aggressively to guard against the potential problem of the zero bound I
mentioned a minute ago. Of course, the core PCE inflation rate, which is the measure I think most
of us now focus on, is currently about 1-1/2 percent. I think that’s pretty close to the inflation target
we should be aiming for at this stage, for the reasons I just noted. And I believe we should focus our
short-term policy actions, as best we can, on preventing that particular measure of inflation from
falling much below 1 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.

11/6/01

37


MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As has been the case for some time, the District
economy is tracking closely with the national economy. There are some oases of strength but I don’t
think they are particularly representative, so I won’t spend a lot time on them.
Overall labor market conditions have eased and layoffs and initial claims for
unemployment compensation are up. Office vacancy rates have begun to rise. That was certainly
anticipated. Vacancy rates for other commercial properties are also rising and apartment vacancy
rates are increasing as well. The expectation is that that will feed back on activity as projects
currently under construction wind down. It has been a very strong year for single-family
construction in the District but in that area, too, the outlook is less promising. Sales, especially at the
upper price end of the market, have slowed and I anticipate that the region will have a lot of trouble
next year duplicating the residential construction performance of the previous two or three years.
There has been some tightening in credit conditions overall, but my impression from
talking to a variety of people is that decent quality credits can still be accommodated on reasonable
terms. So I don’t sense a huge amount of tension or a problem there.
By way of a few more specific anecdotes, I talked to the leaders of a couple of national
retailers. They described their business over the last four or five weeks as okay relative to reduced
expectations. One cited same store sales as running about 1 percent ahead of a year ago; that’s
down, of course, from what typically had been the case. But retailers generally seemed to think that
things could have been worse, perhaps significantly worse. So that was their take on the situation.
They also added that the discount business was doing better than the full service department store
business, which is not particularly a surprise.
I talked to executives of a couple of large paper companies who also described their
business as okay relative, of course, to subdued expectations. That has been a business in which it

11/6/01

38

has been tough to make money for several years. Those executives were quite cautious about capital
spending going forward and didn’t put a lot of weight on whatever programs Congress might gin up,
but perhaps that view is specific to their industry. Finally, I talked to an official of a full service
financial services firm who said that their sales of a wide variety of investment products have been
quite robust recently.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I’m in general agreement with the contours
of the Greenbook forecast. I suspect that the contraction in the current quarter may be a bit deeper
than is projected in the Greenbook and it may take an extra quarter before we see a recovery
sometime next year. Those are pretty much guesses on my part. Talking to business people in the
community, their views are along the same lines. They expect business conditions to get worse
before they get better and that the recovery will occur later rather than sooner. But having said that,
we do know that the economy is very resilient even without the stimulus in place or in prospect.
And, of course, we do have a lot of monetary stimulus in place and it appears to me that more fiscal
stimulus is likely. This resilience is something that I think we need to bear in mind. Its implication,
to me anyway, is that we want to calibrate policy very carefully from here on out so that we give
ourselves at least a chance of winding up in the right place for a sustainable period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On balance the Seventh District economy
has slowed further since we met in early October. We’re in an unprecedented situation and
uncertainty is very high. Many business firms and households are essentially in a wait-and-see mode
regarding capital spending plans and consumption expenditures. Both businesses and consumers are
described by the people we talk to as hunkering down.

11/6/01

39


The major exception, as discussed before, is the recent surge in light vehicle sales. They
are rising in response to the zero percent financing programs far more than the automakers had
anticipated. Our Big Three contacts expect sales to drop once these programs expire later this month
but not as much as indicated in the Greenbook. The sense we get from automakers and from UAW
contacts, given that labor costs are relatively fixed under their collective bargaining contracts, is that
various incentive plans will continue to be offered this year and next year to try to prevent light
vehicle sales from falling below an annual rate of 15 million units.
In the hard-hit travel and tourism sectors, there are few signs of any significant
improvement. Airlines have cut fares and hotels are offering special deals. Airline load factors,
however, are a bit more sensitive to developments in the war on terrorism than the fare cuts. Our
contact at

said that after cutting capacity 20 percent their load factors were good in

the first week of October but plummeted once the bombing in Afghanistan started, dropped more on
news of anthrax cases, and fell again when government officials issued warnings about additional
terrorist threats.
Our manufacturing sector continues to bear the brunt of the District’s slowdown but
economic weakness is spreading more rapidly into other sectors, especially retailing. Consumers
seem more focused on family and home, so sales of home improvement items are doing okay but
sales of luxury items are not. One contact, with over 140 shopping malls in 39 states, reported that
mall traffic returned to pre-September 11th levels in mid-October, but consumer spending at the
malls was still noticeably lower than prior to the attacks. Retailers generally are bracing for what
they think could be the worst holiday shopping season in a decade. Many have canceled orders and
refused delivery of goods in order to keep their inventories under control.

11/6/01

40


How consumer spending fares in coming months will hinge importantly on labor market
conditions, which are deteriorating rapidly. The latest Manpower survey of hiring intentions for the
first quarter of 2002 shows the largest year-over-year drop since 1980. These results won’t be
released publicly until November 21st, so they should be treated confidentially until then.
Boeing is one of several firms we know of that are pulling forward layoffs they had
planned for later this year and 2002. Small businesses that last year were desperately trying to retain
workers are now reporting a dramatic drop in worker turnover. Wage demands of employees are
abating. A special survey showed that 35 percent of firms had reduced the size of planned salary
increases since September 11th. However, a frequently mentioned concern is the double-digit
increases in insurance premiums for employee health care.
In our banking sector, reports on credit availability are mixed. However, the risk of loss
in C&I loan portfolios at small and large banks with significant exposure to middle market auto
suppliers has increased dramatically as a result of the financial difficulties of these firms.
Turning to the national outlook, it’s now quite clear that we are in a recession, as defined
by the National Bureau of Economic Research. What is not clear yet is how severe it will be. The
data in hand are still consistent with a relatively mild downturn as in the Greenbook and our staff
forecasts. But as I’ve already noted, business sentiment is very weak and I am increasingly
concerned about the fragility of consumer sentiment in this very uncertain environment. Given all
I’ve heard from contacts, we could be facing a worse downturn than the staff anticipates and, of
course, that assessment does not include any additional negative shocks from further terrorist
attacks.
To be sure, there are some positives going forward. We have put a lot of monetary
stimulus in place and we suspect that significant additional fiscal stimulus is coming as well. Also,

11/6/01

41

energy prices have fallen. And once final demand stabilizes, we will get some big contributions
from inventory investment. Indeed, when all the positives align themselves sometime next year,
we’ll have to be ready to adjust policy appropriately. For now though, the risks remain weighted
toward economic weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The negative economic trends in our District
that reappeared in the third quarter now extend into the fourth quarter. Some sectors have continued
to deteriorate as the risks and uncertainties directly attributable to September 11th play themselves
out. In particular, tourism, rental car activity, and airline traffic, although now improving slightly,
continue to be well below pre-attack levels. Airline flights are off 25 percent and planes are reported
to be only 40 percent filled. Rental car companies are “defleeting” and also have canceled new fleet
purchase orders. Miami’s cruise industry has been hurt by a large number of cancellations and
Renaissance Cruise Line has filed for bankruptcy. Hotel occupancy in Miami is down; hotels whose
bookings typically run at about 75 percent of capacity are now at 45 percent. In Orlando, traffic at
Disney facilities is running about 75 percent of normal. Disney reportedly has asked employees to
volunteer for a 20 percent cut in hours and pay. In contrast, business at casinos and hotels along the
Mississippi Gulf Coast has come back to about 90 percent of normal levels. The difference in the
experience of the two areas appears to be due to the greater dependence on air travel for most of
Florida’s customers.
Turning to other sectors in the region, new and existing home sales appear to be slowing
except for continued strong growth in South Florida. Inventories of unsold homes are reported to be
too high in Tennessee and in northwest Florida. While the pace of single-family construction
remains only slightly below year-ago levels, both multifamily and nonresidential construction have

11/6/01

42

weakened further. Merchants report heavy discounting and are anticipating a weak holiday season
based on “early bird” shopping. While full service store sales are especially disappointing, discount
chains like Wal-Mart and Target are posting solid year-over-year gains. Auto sales dropped
precipitously in the early fall but, as others have pointed out, they picked up at the end of September
in response to extended warranties and zero percent financing. In October sales have been extremely
strong and are arguably, as the Greenbook points out, at unsustainable levels. Manufacturing
continues to be weak and contacts note falling productivity, as more resources are diverted to
heightened security. More lumber mills are closing and high-tech firms are reducing payrolls
further. After having been able to report job growth better than the national average in meeting after
meeting, we are now also feeling the employment pinch. Only Florida actually posted significant
job growth in the third quarter. Prices remain subdued, though we hear continued reports of
increases in liability and health insurance premiums.
As far as the national economy is concerned, the data that have come out since our last
meeting have not been very encouraging. While the reported third-quarter decline in real GDP of
0.4 percent could have been a lot worse and may be revised lower, Friday’s negative jobs report
makes it clear that the economy is headed toward what eventually will be defined as a recession.
That’s really a side issue. The key question for policy, as others have already indicated, is how
severe it will be both in depth and duration. Comparing the current situation with historical
experience suggests to me that there are reasons to believe it will not be especially deep or
prolonged. First, as almost everyone has already observed, monetary policy has eased steadily since
the first of the year and is presently accommodative. Second, significant government and private
sector spending stimulus have been put in place with the recent tax cut, and more government
spending programs are likely. Security investment, rebuilding, and insurance payment flows are all

11/6/01

43

likely to bolster spending. Admittedly, these types of expenditures will not lead to productivity
increases. I’m not especially worried about that because of the need to keep personal income
moving up in the near term until business fixed investment recovers. While the added spending will
help, it is really a form of stop-gap income maintenance. Third, while the economy received a major
shock on September 11th, the banking and financial sectors are sound and have proved largely
resilient. Our examiners tell us that banks continue to lend prudently and that, while some
deterioration in loan portfolios has occurred, the losses are not especially worrisome at this point.
Unlike the financial situation in most previous economic contractions, it’s hard to argue that
financial system weakness and reduced credit availability have contributed or likely will contribute
significantly to the decline in economic activity.
Monetary policy over the past year has done what it is supposed to do and arguably
virtually all of what it can do to shore up the current outlook. The more important policy question
for the short term is fiscal policy, the impact of which will depend on how the federal tax and
spending programs are actually structured. Since a further change in monetary policy will have little
observable impact on Q4 performance, our focus should be on the projected path of the economy
over the next year and whether we believe that path is achievable. While the range of professional
forecasts for the next two quarters is quite wide, those forecasts are remarkably consistent and quite
optimistic for the second half of 2002, as is the Greenbook. Our experiments with some of those
models as well as with our own VAR model suggest that additional easing at this point is not likely
to provide any meaningful spending. In some ways, it might even hinder the adjustment process that
still needs to work its way out in many sectors of the economy. Additionally, the Greenbook
simulations of alternative monetary policies suggest that with slack demand and higher
unemployment additional attempts to cushion the economy will ultimately be associated with a

11/6/01

44

further uptick in inflation. Moreover, to achieve any of these paths requires policy to be more
nimble than in the past, in terms of raising the funds rate as the economy begins to recover.
I must confess that it confuses me at least a bit when Al Broaddus and Bob McTeer swap
hats! [Laughter] Nevertheless, my views today are probably closest to those expressed by Gary
Stern. While we continue to face considerable uncertainty and downside risks, I believe we have
come to a point where further policy responses should be more measured. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Tenth District has not really
deteriorated since our last meeting, but that’s not saying much since it is considerably weaker than it
was before the events of September 11th. Layoff announcements have subsided somewhat but
remain significantly higher than before the attacks. The composition of the job cuts being
announced also has shifted in the last month, with more now outside the airline, aircraft
manufacturing, and travel industries in our region. District manufacturing remains in a slump but it
does not appear significantly weaker than last month. Outside of autos, consumer spending has not
recovered from the initial fall after the attacks and retailers in many areas are very much worried
about the upcoming holiday season. The convention and hotel business has not returned to normal
either, due not only to continued concerns about safety and travel delays but also to cost cutting by
businesses under earnings pressure. Housing activity has slowed in much of the District, especially
in the high-end sector and particularly in Kansas City and Denver. Those cities are also being hit
with slowdowns associated with layoffs in the high-tech sector. These layoffs also are increasing
concerns about commercial real estate. We see a lot of subleased space emptying out right now.

11/6/01

45

And though Realtors are prone to point out that it’s not nearly as bad as in the last recession, they are
in fact worried.
Let me say a bit more on manufacturing. Preliminary results from our Bank’s latest
survey of manufacturers show that production was about as weak in October as it was in September.
Our firms are more pessimistic about the future than they were in the previous month. For example,
the six-month-ahead production index was down about 6 points in the survey. Among other
forward-looking indicators, the capital spending index fell about 5 more points and the inventories of
raw materials index also declined. So, looking forward, there is quite a bit of pessimism in the
manufacturing sector.
Let me mention the energy industry. It has eased further since our last meeting. The
District’s rig count is now down about 25 percent from the decreased level in July, as the steep fall
in natural gas prices since the winter has rendered some marginal wells unprofitable. Spot prices
have turned back, as you know, and we’re at about the 3.50 MCF level, which is a level that at least
will sustain activity at about where it is now.
In agriculture, prices have dropped in the cattle industry, as you know, partly because of a
drop-off in restaurant demand after the September 11th attacks but also because there is a large
inventory in the feed lines. Crop prices also have been weak, although there’s reason for a little
more optimism there with storage levels not as high as they were a year ago. Overall, business
conditions in the District are generally poor.
Turning to the national economy, I would agree with those who say we are in a recession.
As for the outlook, while our forecast differs in some ways from the Greenbook, I would say that in
terms of the outcome it’s a matter of degree, not substance. In that context, though, I think it’s
important to look at two time frames. One is the immediate future--that is, the fourth quarter--which

11/6/01

46

will be negative and will remain negative as we move toward the first quarter of next year. The
other is the intermediate term--the first half of next year and into the second half--where the outlook
is more optimistic in both the Greenbook and, as others have said, in forecasts by private economists
as well. That’s due importantly to a very stimulative monetary policy, fiscal policy that is
stimulative and should be more stimulative as we go forward, and to the fact that energy prices have
fallen significantly.
In terms of policy, I think we need to be very careful, as we always are, but our task is
particularly difficult now. In that context I’ll say just a couple things in summary. Regardless of the
funds rate, the fourth quarter will likely be negative and there’s nothing we can do about that today.
With a significant amount of stimulus already in play, the economy should recover in the first or
second quarter of next year, and there’s probably not a whole lot we can do about the timing of that
recovery at this stage. I would also point out that we tend to get very nervous when we have taken
actions and we’re not seeing a turnaround, and I think we need to be very careful and patient in such
periods. So, I can’t help wonder if we shouldn’t pause, knowing the downside risks are very serious
as we look to the future, and watch events develop. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Overall underlying economic
conditions in our District have worsened somewhat since our meeting five weeks ago. While there
has been a slight rebound from the initial decline in activity we saw after September 11th, the
underlying trend still has a downward tilt and our contacts acknowledge a good deal of pessimism
regarding the rest of the year. The October business outlook survey gave us our first data on the
District since September 11th. Prior to the attacks, manufacturing in our region appeared to be
stabilizing. That is no longer the case. The index of current activity took a sharp downturn in

11/6/01

47

October, indicating that manufacturing activity continued to contract in the District and at a much
faster pace than in prior months. Indeed, the index is now at levels we saw at the beginning of the
year. There was a striking consistency across all the indices. New orders, shipments, and
employment indices all fell sharply in October. Manufacturers’ capital spending plans remained
weak.
In our October survey we asked some special questions to try to gauge the effects of the
September 11th attacks. First, we asked each firm how the attacks had affected their shipments and
new orders. Half of the firms reported that shipments were unaffected. But 40 percent reported a
decrease and 10 percent said it was a significant one. The results for new orders were more
troubling, since over 50 percent of the firms reported a decrease in orders, suggesting that activity
will continue to be weak in the coming months. We also repeated a question from a previous
month’s survey by asking firms when they expected to see a turnaround. The results indicate that
many of the respondents are putting the rebound further out into the future than they had in the past.
There was some good news, however, in that 75 percent of our respondents still expect to see a
turnaround before the second half of next year.
Other economic indicators for our District are weak. Payroll employment in each of our
three states declined in the third quarter and the unemployment rate increased. It will likely go
higher in subsequent months, given the current pace of layoffs. Retail sales in the District are
running below last year’s pace. Zero percent financing has boosted motor vehicle sales in the
region, as many others have indicated for their Districts, but dealers expect sales to decline later this
year since the incentives are pulling sales forward as well as generating new sales. Indeed, dealers
report to us that they are limiting their orders from the factories. Retail sales of other goods and
services have risen in recent weeks but have not regained the levels seen before the terrorist attacks.

11/6/01

48


Finally, construction activity in the District, one of our better-performing sectors during
this downturn, has eased somewhat. Homebuilders in the District generally report steady demand
for new homes, with some softening in demand for higher-priced housing. Nonresidential
construction activity has begun to fall off.
On the national level, the events of September11th and their aftermath have significantly
weakened the near-term outlook for the economy. Even before the attacks, the economy was more
sluggish than many of us had forecasted earlier in the year. The initial estimate shows a contraction
in GDP growth in the third quarter, which is not a surprise. And most forecasts, including our own,
see a sharp contraction in the fourth quarter. Typically the longer-run outlook is the least certain, but
these days most economists feel more certain about the long-run prospects for the economy than the
medium-term. Assuming no further shocks, we see a pickup in activity next year, driven by the
aggressive monetary and fiscal stimulus. The difficulty, of course, is determining when this pickup
will occur and whether further monetary stimulus will help to ensure a better outcome.
My outlook is similar to the Greenbook’s, although rebounds have been much stronger
historically than the one we are now forecasting. In addition, a Philadelphia staff analysis suggests
that forecasters typically underpredict the response of output growth to expansionary monetary
policy. Nonetheless, the incoming data certainly point to continued economic weakness in the near
term and one could easily argue that the current period represents a break with past history. The
October NAPM survey, like our Bank’s business outlook survey, indicates that manufacturing will
continue to struggle. Labor market indicators point to accelerated job losses. The sizable drop in
consumer confidence suggests continued weakness in consumer spending. The surge in October
auto sales drew sales from the future, so vehicle sales are likely to fall in future months.

11/6/01

49

Nevertheless, the auto sales data illustrate the stimulative effect of interest rate declines even in
times of increased uncertainty and unease.
So where does this all leave us? In response to the devastating events of September 11th,
the Committee’s focus appropriately turned to the immediate term and we acted swiftly and
significantly. The fed funds rate is now 100 basis points lower than it was on September 10th. Two
months have now passed since the attack. I certainly do not want to underestimate the amount of
weakness we are seeing in the economy and that we expect to see in the coming months. I’m
sufficiently unsure about the timing and strength of the forecasted recovery, even given the sizable
monetary stimulus already applied to the economy, that I would support some further easing action.
However, it seems incumbent upon us to begin to shift our focus back to the medium and
longer term. In so doing, we would acknowledge that a significant amount of monetary and fiscal
policy stimulus has been applied to the economy. By almost every measure, monetary policy is
quite accommodative and there is more fiscal stimulus on the way. Focusing on the medium and
longer term would help us prepare the markets and the public for the time when the Committee
decides that further rate cuts are not needed. It would also shift some of the focus from monetary to
fiscal policy. It would give us more flexibility going forward as we gather additional data on the
economy’s current condition and its trajectory. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to comment on a few of the highlights
from conversations I’ve had with business contacts. The extent of the weakness in the U.S.
economy and its impact on Asia I think was well illustrated by my UPS contact who said that his
firm’s volume outbound from Asia has been running only one-half of what UPS had anticipated. Of
course, that’s because expectations were for a lot of high-tech equipment to be shipped here and that

11/6/01

50

has not happened. The UPS outlook is that next year will be better than this year and they are
anticipating about a 2-1/2 percent growth in volume. Volume this year is running about 10 percent
below last year. UPS, along with many others, is cutting capital spending. The firm expects to
reduce capital expenditures by $500 million out of a budget that would otherwise have been $2-1/2
billion, so the cutback is about 20 percent.
My FedEx contact said that in his discussions with customers their belief is that business
is going to be flat to the end of this year and on into 2002. FedEx sees flatness but not substantial
weakness from here. The firm finds that since the end of September volume has been very steady
and predictable, though obviously not strong.
My contact at J.B. Hunt, which is a very large trucking firm, says that customers are rather
pessimistic. Business this October was about flat compared with last October; the company had
anticipated growth of 10 to 15 percent. The market for used large trucks has collapsed. My contact
described it as a disaster and he is expecting a lot of bankruptcies in the trucking industry.
I would like to finish on a slightly positive note in terms of reports from my contacts, so I
will mention that Wal-Mart, as others have noted, is doing rather well. Wal-Mart sales for the five
weeks ended October 5th, which includes the immediate and subsequent post-attack period, were up
6.3 percent. The company’s expectation had been 4 to 6 percent, so total sales over that period were
actually a bit stronger than had been anticipated. Moreover, Wal-Mart is not cutting its capital
expenditure plans at all and in fact has revised up slightly its forecast for next year from the
expectations held before September 11th.
I want to make a comment on fiscal policy. The temporary investment incentives that are
being discussed are really very treacherous. Policy actions are being considered and yet the best
experts in the world don’t know how to forecast what the outcome is going to be. That says to me

11/6/01

51

that it’s a very treacherous policy instrument. There is a lot of experience with temporary
investment credits of various sorts over the years and I think the experience is not very favorable.
Sitting where we are today it might look as if an investment credit is going to be a positive for the
immediate future, but I think it’s going to involve a high probability of some greater difficulty later.
If the economy were to rebound strongly, we would see great efforts to bring capital expenditures
forward into the temporary window. That would make the economy even stronger. Moreover, it
would raise a lot of problems in interpreting the incoming data and trying to anticipate how much
fundamental strength really exists in the economy. If the economy remains weaker than anticipated,
we’re going to see proposals to extend the temporary provision but we won’t know whether it will
be extended or not. In my view, our history of temporary fiscal policy adjustments is not a good one
and I think they are going to cause trouble rather than provide any assistance to the economy. That’s
all I want to say at this point. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. It is a little after 11:00 a.m. I understand that coffee
is available next door. Let’s take a break but try to be back in 15 minutes.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the Second District’s economy has
deteriorated further since the last report, but it is very unclear how much of the weakening can be
tied to the terrorist attacks and how much would have happened in any event. Widespread
transportation disruptions that developed immediately after the attacks eased substantially in
October. That includes the subway service to lower Manhattan, which is now reasonably well
restored. Our big problem is getting people from New Jersey to lower Manhattan. About 55 percent
of the people who commute into lower Manhattan come from New Jersey and an average commute

11/6/01

52

time that was an hour and a half is now two-and-a-half hours. Efforts are under way to get more
ferries and other rerouting of the rail and subway lines, but that continues to be a difficulty.
Businesses most clearly affected by the disaster include retailers, hotels, and other travelrelated firms. Retailers note that sales in October remained well below plan at Manhattan stores.
That mainly reflects fewer tourists, especially international tourists who spend substantially more
than residents of New York or tourists from elsewhere in the United States. Manhattan hotels
experienced their worst September on record. Business reportedly rebounded moderately in
October. The outer suburbs and outer boroughs are pretty much back to business as normal.
The impact on the local labor market is not yet clear. An estimated 75,000 additional
jobless claims, well above trend, were filed in New York and northern New Jersey in the five weeks
after the attacks. Commercial real estate markets in Manhattan and the suburbs have not tightened
as expected since the attacks. What seems to be the case, despite the enormous loss of office space,
is that firms were hoarding office space during the boom years and they have discovered they can
now give it up. Citicorp, for example, had about 400,000 square feet earmarked for further
expansion that it was able to make available to Lehman Brothers with really no burden to itself. The
further expansion is now less likely, so Lehman Brothers won and Citicorp won. In general the view
seems to be that relocation--most firms are actually going to midtown Manhattan--can be achieved
without much additional building. That puts an another question mark on “Whither lower
Manhattan?” In that regard I’ll mention an interesting side note. Last Friday Governor Pataki
declared, after a great deal of pressure from the business community--including our Reserve Bank,
which in some ways considers itself part of the business community--that he was creating a
corporation for the restructure of lower Manhattan. The members of that group I believe will be
named later this week. That’s a very positive development because there has been a real question

11/6/01

53

about who is in charge. The answer is that nobody has been in charge and therefore the degree of
uncertainty hovering over Ground Zero as it’s now called and neighboring lower Manhattan has
been greater than it should have been.
Not surprisingly, because of the downturn in the financial services industry, Manhattan
apartment sales activity has been very thin. It’s hard to gauge exactly where the prices are but they
are probably down 10 to 15 percent, with very few deals actually taking place. Bankers report
weaker loan demand, tighter credit standards, and increased delinquencies. The residential mortgage
segment appears to be faring relatively well.
On the national level, we share the view about the general shape of recovery that the
Greenbook describes and that Dave Stockton presented so well. On the international side, I’m
inclined to believe that Karen’s forecast is accurate, but optimistic, and that the downside there is
probably even greater than it is domestically.
Regarding consumer confidence, the fact is that housing has held up rather well. And
certainly the pace of automobile sales in October, at 21 million units, indicates that people want to
buy cars. It’s nice to have zero percent financing, but presumably people don’t purchase an
automobile even with no financing costs unless they want one in the first place. So I think there are
indications that consumer confidence is holding up better than we might have anticipated. How long
it will hold up at this level is a very big question, as many of us have discussed.
Business fixed investment is abnormally low even for a recession. There may well be
enough of it waiting on the sidelines that fiscal policy directed at increasing investment will work.
But in my view there are some very legitimate questions about whether that will be the case. In any
event, partisan politics are alive and well. They did not go away except for a very brief respite after

11/6/01

54

the 11th of September. So I think there is a real question of when and if the fiscal policy that is being
discussed will happen.
We believe that the downside risk is very clear and quite dismal. That is a view that is
shared fully by the members of our board of directors and by those on our Small Business and
Agriculture Advisory Committee. It is also the view of everybody that I and my colleagues at the
New York Bank talked to in trying to ascertain what is happening in our District as well as
nationally and internationally. So I believe our forecast is the best forecast that can be made under
the circumstances but it is one where the downside risk is very clear and the role of monetary policy
continues to be a vitally important one. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Listening to everyone who has spoken so far
leads me to feel that it’s not much easier today than it was five weeks ago to know what to make of
either the economic reports or the anecdotal information available to us. I come to each of these
meetings hoping there will be less uncertainty than the last time--and last time was uncertain
enough--but that doesn’t seem to have been the case today based on our go-around.
About 150 years ago a clever economist made a reputation for himself by talking about
the unseen versus the seen. He had a lot of fun talking about those things that were not so obvious,
but rather important to think about. Of course, that concept wasn’t new with him. It was in the
works of Copernicus and Ptolemy also. Nevertheless, what people are not doing at all or are doing
less of is not news to any of us. However, what they are doing instead--if we can find out what it is-is of interest and might give us some clues. For instance, based on a lead from one of our directors
we found that ticket sales for the Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey Circus in the last two weeks
of October at Cleveland’s Gund Arena were 10 percent higher than a year ago. So apparently people

11/6/01

55

are doing something for the family, which seems to be consistent with other things we’ve heard. In
fact, both a member of our advisory council and one of our directors reported that the composition of
consumption spending that they have been seeing is consistent with the notion of a cocooning effect.
A couple of remarks by previous speakers support that notion--for instance, the spending on home
improvements and durable goods for one’s home. I don’t know whether the car sales phenomenon
goes with that too or not.
A company that produces security glass for both businesses and residences reported that
they were already having a very strong year and they experienced a sharp increase in orders after
September 11th. Our contact said that all four of the firm’s plants are running at capacity and their
backlogs are lengthening. Also, the health-care sector has generally boosted capital spending since
September 11th, both for facilities and equipment. My contacts indicate that the expenditures are
primarily for emergency room facilities.
As for the retail sector, we stay in contact with Federated department stores and they
reported that their October sales were down year-over-year but the decline was considerably smaller
than they experienced in September and much less than they had expected based on what happened
immediately after September 11th. Their thinking now, looking ahead to this quarter, is that they
will finish the year down 6 percent from the fourth quarter of last year. They’ve revised down their
expectations for the spring to a 2 percent decline, year-over-year, which is a smaller decline than
they were thinking a few weeks ago. And for the second half of next year they have projected a 6
percent increase year-over-year. Our contacts at both Kohls and Federated told us that they now
expect stronger year-end gift giving sales than they had previously. They analyzed the composition
of sales over Halloween and now believe the desire to give gifts is much stronger than before, which
may also be related somewhat to the cocooning effect.

11/6/01

56


Tying in with some of the remarks made earlier about the uncertainty regarding what is
going on with auto sales, auto dealers in our District think that sales will fall very quickly. They said
their strategy is not to have any inventory on December 31st. One director, continuing in the good
news vein, said that Bob Evans, Applebee’s, and Ruby Tuesday’s all had the strongest September in
their history, which is consistent with people driving to places instead of flying to Florida, for
example. The bad news side of that is that auto accidents are probably up!
One of the sources we’ve been looking at is a company called Telecheck, which has
270,000 outlets across the country that report on purchases by checks. The data are analyzed now by
a former

It’s a rather interesting report. Sales in New York City,

which is a big market and heavily weighted, were down 5 percent October over October. Overall
sales in New York State were down about 1 percent. Those were the only declines recorded in the
survey either by metropolitan area or on the state level. The Southeast was the strongest region, led
by Louisiana and by New Orleans in particular. Maybe it’s those casinos! One of the strongest
states in the survey was Ohio, where sales increases were well above those in California. And the
metropolitan area of Cleveland was second only in strength to New Orleans. So we’re not quite up
there at the top, but we’re pretty close.
Eleven years ago at this time, looking ahead to Desert Storm and in the midst of Desert
Shield, it seemed that both businesses and households went into a mode of postpone the postponable.
The attitude was: “Don’t do it now if you don’t have to; wait and see what is going to happen.” We
met with quite a few groups in recent weeks, including our directors, advisory councils, and the
senior credit officers of all the large banks in the District, and asked them whether they see a similar
response today. Confirming what we’re seeing in the numbers, the answer was “yes” for businesses
but “no” for households. How does one explain that to a large extent the business sector, especially

11/6/01

57

manufacturing companies, seems to have gone into a postpone and wait-and-see mode while
households have not? Generally, the initial response among our contacts was: “Apparently my
spouse doesn’t read the same things I do!” But upon further discussion they said no, in fact it’s the
opposite. The spouse usually says: “Haven’t you read about unemployment and the bad economy?
It’s our duty to go out and spend.” Apparently businesses don’t think the same way.
In our meeting last week with senior credit officers I asked them to imagine that a year
ago, when making their budget plans for 2001, they had accurately forecast the economic situation
of today in terms of broad measures of output, employment, and so on. With an accurate forecast of
the macro economy I wondered what they would have expected with regard to their consumer loan
portfolio. They said they would have projected a substantially worse outcome. They would have
assumed a very negative hit to the consumer portfolio, but that has not happened. Asked why, they
suggested that the refinancing boom might be a factor, with the lengthening of maturities and, of
course, lower interest rates. One banker commented that his bank’s mortgage department is buried.
The general view is that household debt service burdens are actually lower now than they were a
year ago. If that could be confirmed, I would think that’s pretty good news. They also reported that
their commercial real estate portfolios were in much better shape than they would have thought; in
fact they described them as excellent, which is quite different from the experience 10 or 11 years
ago. I asked about car loans, expecting that there weren’t any. But they said car loans are in fact
still increasing. I had forgotten about imports and transplants, such as Honda, which did not offer
zero percent financing. Honda didn’t go that route because it doesn’t like it and thinks it’s a mistake.
Toyota and in fact many of the DaimlerChrysler models were not included in the zero percent
financing deals either. And Jeep, for instance, is producing a Toledo model for which they can’t
keep up with the demand. Moreover, the loan officers made a point that is obvious, but I hadn’t

11/6/01

58

thought about it: With every new car sale, a used car sale almost always occurs too, and the banks
often finance those purchases.
Let me make some general comments on economic policy actions and the performance of
the macro economy. It seems to me that a prescription for policy should be derived from a
diagnosis. We never see all regions, sectors, and industries of the economy moving up or moving
down together. There have been times in past history when we’ve seen weakness in sectors like
housing and autos. Those situations often warrant a prescription of easier monetary policy; lower
financing rates may seem appropriate. When I look at the fiscal policy under consideration todayand having listened to the staff this morning regarding the uncertainties about it--it’s very hard to
understand what might be going on, in the way of economic thinking at least. I don’t know how
what is being proposed or considered by the Congress is going to help any of the problems that we
actually see now in the economy. It’s easy to understand the need for separation of powers in the
branches of government. And it’s easy to understand that members of Congress want to raise their
hands and vote for something. They want to be perceived as being a part of the solution. But it’s
not at all clear to me that anything that is being proposed under the banner of fiscal action is going to
be on balance constructive. That assessment may be derived from my general bias in that I’ve
always been skeptical about the thrust of fiscal policy actions. But I could easily talk myself into
believing that the fiscal actions currently under consideration will do more harm than good.
On monetary policy I distinguish between the level of the fed funds rate and the reactions
associated with announcements of changing it. The level, of course, is important because we need to
know where the funds rate stands relative to some perception of the natural rate. That’s crucial in
assessing whether we are injecting a sufficient amount of liquidity for the macroeconomic
circumstances to achieve the outcome we want. That’s one issue. I look at where we are and

11/6/01

59

evaluate other information to tell me whether I think the funds rate level is appropriate or not.
That’s quite different from the issue of announcements of the Committee’s decisions to change the
rate, which show up in the headline news. When I engage in the debate between “keep the powder
dry” versus “take preemptive action,” I think in terms of how many more announcements we might
want to be able to make. That would lead me to suggest one-eighth of a point changes in the funds
rate as more appropriate at this juncture because then we would capture more headlines. But that has
nothing to do with whether I believe the current stance of policy is sufficiently stimulative or not.
Finally, my thinking is that over time the Committee should look at the balance of risks,
not in terms of the statement that we put in our announcements, but in the sense of what kinds of
mistakes are we more willing to make and how can we correct them. We know that mistakes are
inevitable, but we need to assess which mistakes are more harmful or more difficult to correct.
There was a time when we thought the greater risk was for policy to remain stimulative for too long
because having to tighten dramatically would be difficult. So we thought it would be better to err on
the side of restraint because we could always ease more readily. I now perceive, at least based on
some of the comments made around the table, that the balance of risks is reversed. And that may be
correct and appropriate. Now the view generally is that the risk of being too restrictive is the greater
mistake, especially looking at the experience of Japan and theoretical worries in some other
countries, resulting in either deflation or prolonged contraction. So the thought is that it’s better to
err on the side of more stimulus. While that may be correct, I think we should be saying, at least
among ourselves if we don’t want to go public with it, that we are more tolerant of running the risk
of re-inflation than we were before.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.

11/6/01

60


MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our decision today, as Jerry Jordan has
just indicated, comes at a time of great uncertainty. I think our challenge is to minimize the risk
facing our economy in these uncertain times. As we have already indicated around the table, there
are some positive signs that can’t be overlooked. Certainly the strength in light vehicle sales is
attributable to incentives to some extent, but there are those who believe that it’s more than that and
may reflect some positive sentiment remaining among households. Several forward-looking
financial markets, particularly the equity markets and the futures markets--and perhaps even the
level of the U.S. dollar--attest to a market expectation of a rapid rebound. And finally, as has
already been discussed, monetary stimulus is in the pipeline and fiscal policy may well become more
accommodative.
However, buried within these potentially positive signs are some negative ones, and we
have already talked about those to some extent. The current strength in auto sales is probably
borrowing from future demand and we can expect demand for autos to fall off. There is the
possibility that the process of finding a fiscal stimulus package that works for all will produce fiscal
action that is too little, too complex, and too late. And finally, the strength in equity markets may
well erode quite rapidly and we could have a negative wealth effect as earnings fail to meet the
expectations that are built into equity market prices.
Against the background in which much of the good news in the near term is potentially
bad, certainly there’s a lot of other negative news as well. Labor market weakness is spreading
beyond manufacturing to other sectors. With the specter of growing unemployment likely to weigh
more heavily on consumers, weakness in the labor market will mean, I think, smaller increases in
wages and salaries going forward, potentially undermining consumption as a major driver of
macroeconomic strength this year and next year. While the housing market appears to be robust,

11/6/01

61

there is some anecdotal evidence from building materials firms that suggests some weakening in the
construction segment. One of our contacts noted that for the first time since late 1991 several
construction firms plan to close down between Thanksgiving and Christmas because of insufficient
order backlogs. Again that’s a small sign of some uncertainty in an area that has been strong for
some time.
More recent data on durable goods orders suggest that companies are hoarding liquidity
and more firms than had been expected are holding off on putting new fixed investments in place.
Participants in the bond market tell us that even the record-setting bond issuance, which could be
seen as an indicator of business confidence, is better interpreted as indicating that the free cash flow
for firms is insufficient to cover even existing investment activities much less support new ones.
And finally, as I think Dave Stockton mentioned, survey indicators show that manufacturing is
clearly contracting and I gather that our own IP numbers may well support that conclusion.
We haven’t put very much weight on the international outlook, though I would agree with
Vice Chairman McDonough that Karen’s forecast seems to be the most reasonable one given the
facts we know now but that the risks internationally certainly are very much to downside. And
insofar as commodity prices tend to suggest the relative balance of supply and demand in global
markets, certainly commodity prices are suggesting further slowing, not a pickup.
The question is how to guide policy with this confluence of developments. Recognizing
the risk that we might do too much, I would still err on the side of continuing to be aggressive, which
I think speaks directly to the point Jerry Jordan was just making. The best strategy when confronted
with an ongoing deterioration is to move to offset the worst downside risk and prepare to respond to
the upside in the unlikely event that we’re surprised in that direction.

11/6/01

62


While it is true that monetary policy in the pipeline is already stimulative, it’s important to
recognize that we put that policy in place against a particular background of a forecast and outlook at
the time and, if anything, the outlook has continued to erode. Accordingly, I think that does require
ongoing policy response. The one mistake that a central bank can make when confronted with the
type of erosion that we are facing, which may indeed include the risk of disinflation, is to move
sluggishly in increments that are too small out of fear of hitting the zero bound too quickly. That
cautious strategy is the most risky because it leaves open the possibility of a much weaker situation
still in the context of little room for policy maneuver.
So, while Bob McTeer encouraged us to remember the Alamo, I would suggest that
perhaps the experiences of the Bank of Japan and others might be important to remember as well.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. An important theme at our last meeting
was uncertainty. We were meeting reasonably close to September 11th and it was still hard to sort
out the data. It’s easier to do the sorting now. To paraphrase Murphy’s Law, almost everything that
could go down, did. It’s pretty hard to find sources of strength in today’s economy.
The list of downward-pointing indicators is long and getting longer: the Beige Book,
employment, the NAPM survey, durable goods orders, consumer confidence, industrial production,
commodity prices, foreign demand growth, and on down the list. What seems especially
troublesome is that former sources of spending growth are beginning to weaken. Housing
expenditures are beginning to slip and consumption is starting to fall relative to disposable income.
As Governor Ferguson just noted, auto sales spurted but that could imply weakness ahead if the sales
just reflect an immediate bunching of expenditures in response to the zero interest rate deals.

11/6/01

63


The stock market is surprisingly high, but that could be problematic as well. The
earnings-price ratio is now virtually the same as the real AAA bond yield and this with analysts’
earnings forecasts that are still implausibly optimistic. When and if more prudence strikes the
earnings forecasters, or if more normal risk spreads assert themselves, stock values could fall as
well.
Many commentators are now arguing that because all of this has happened as interest rates
were cut, monetary policy must be impotent. Perhaps I’m preaching to the choir here, but since I
think it’s relevant for our decision, let me spend a minute taking on that argument. To be sure,
monetary policy has been fighting very powerful downward forces this year, far more powerful than
I think any of us imagined at the start of the year. Policy easings may not have had the curative
effects that we had all hoped for, but I think the impotence argument takes things much too far. The
essence of monetary policy is through the interest rate-cost of capital channel. In the Goldman
Sachs financial conditions index this interest rate channel gets 90 percent of the weighting. In the
FRB/US model its weighting ranges from 76 percent to 90 percent, depending on whether one takes
one-quarter impacts or long-run impacts. And that channel has worked well this year. Short rates
obviously have dropped sharply. Even longer-term, 10-year Treasury rates have come down from 4
to 3 percent in real terms since the start of their easing cycle last year and from 6 to 4-1/2 percent in
nominal terms. These changes have held up final spending. This year the easing of monetary policy
clearly seems to have held up spending for housing and consumer durables, especially autos. It’s
possible that it has even had some positive effect on investment, though it’s obviously hard to make
that case given the powerful downward impact of the capital overhang.
I will agree with the critics that there are both theoretical and empirical questions about
some of the other ways that monetary policy allegedly stimulates the economy. One suspect channel

11/6/01

64

involves the foreign sector. It seems that a drop in interest rates doesn’t necessarily lower domestic
currency values, perhaps because it raises expected profits or perhaps because conditions might have
become even weaker in other economies.
The other suspect channel involves the wealth effect. There seems to be no doubt that a
rise in future productivity will raise equity values and consumption, as people try to consume some
of their future anticipated income up front. But whether falling interest rates and rising relative
house prices, which do raise computed net worth, should also raise consumption has always been a
matter of some theoretical ambiguity.
So monetary policy is perhaps not as potent as some believe, but it still can have powerful
impacts, still can be used to fight downward movements, and still has been effective in maintaining
spending this year. In the face of the powerful downward momentum that seems to come with each
day’s economic news, I think we have no choice but to use our instrument as emphatically as we
can.
Finally, let me say one word about reversibility, something about which I am not very
worried. Much of the Greenbook recovery hinges on additional fiscal stimulus, which is somewhat
in doubt for political reasons and is perhaps even economically treacherous. It’s not so much of a
stretch to say that the world recovery hinges on the U.S. recovery, which hinges on fiscal policy,
which hinges on politics. That is an exaggeration, I admit, but not too much. It’s easy for me to
imagine a very slow recovery here and in the world and that should give us plenty of time to reverse
course. But if conditions are such that we have to reverse more quickly, that would actually be
fantastic news and we should be delighted to do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.

11/6/01

65


MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Relative to the current Greenbook forecast, I
believe that there are still asymmetric downside risks to the first half of next year but that the risks
are more balanced after that time. Because of the near-term downside risks, I view the alternative
scenario of still weaker consumer spending as identifying a material risk. Given that risk and
considerations that, in my view, suggest that policy today should be set to err on the side of stimulus,
the path of the federal funds rate in my forecast is more consistent with the easier monetary policy
alternative simulation. Indeed, that would be the case even if I were beginning with the Greenbook
baseline. Still, as David Stockton noted in his presentation, there is an unusual blend of pessimism
and grim data on the one hand and signs of resilience on the other hand, further complicating the
assessment of the outlook.
But my major concern relates to the question of the appropriate monetary policy relative
to the forecast. My first concern here is that monetary policy may be less effective in this easing
cycle than it normally has been because of the failure of the declines in short-term interest rates to
pass through to other dimensions of financial conditions that matter more for spending. In that
regard I recognize that my views run counter to the remarks we just heard and to many of the
comments around the table this morning that have emphasized the amount of monetary stimulus
already in the pipeline and its likely contribution to the vigor of the projected rebound.
Financial conditions indices, including the one recently constructed by the Board’s staff,
are sometimes subject to difficulties in interpretation. But they do in my view highlight the risk that
financial conditions have improved much less than would have been expected based on the
magnitude of the cumulative decline in the federal funds rate over this easing cycle. The Greenbook
forecast presumably takes this into account. Indeed, I suspect it may be the reason why monetary
policy is assumed to remain so stimulative, measured in terms of the real funds rate relative to its

11/6/01

66

long-term equilibrium value and relative to the economy’s rebound. The implication of concerns
about the improvement in financial conditions is not that we should rely less on monetary policy but
that we may have to do more than would otherwise have been necessary.
Second, I wonder whether we need to take into account another aspect of asymmetric risk
--what might be described as the two-states-of-the-world problem. The Greenbook, like most
forecasts, seems to assume a one-time terrorist attack with a near-term effect on confidence that
dissipates over time. That might be appropriate for a modal forecast. But relative to this
assumption, there seems to be significant asymmetric downside risks, specifically of further terrorist
attacks that affect confidence in the economy or perhaps for other reasons as well. The forecast for
the first state of the world is therefore likely to be biased in an optimistic direction though, as David
Stockton noted, we would be hard pressed to parameterize the downside risks associated with the
second state of the world. Still this analysis suggests that the mean of the forecast might be
interpreted as being below the mode in this case. So the question is how policy should respond to
this type of uncertainty and whether policy should be set to err on the side of ease relative to the
modal forecast.
This concern is reinforced by the implications of the zero nominal bound restraint. My
remarks here will elaborate on the points that have already been made by President Broaddus and
Governor Ferguson. Some have suggested that the initially low nominal funds rate should
encourage us to keep our powder dry. To the contrary, I read the lesson from our study of the zero
nominal bound constraint as pointing to an asymmetric policy response, one that is more rapid with
respect to downside shocks. This allows policymakers to use a faster speed of response and
compensate for the smaller possible cumulative decline. The result of the more aggressive policy
would be to limit further declines in core PCE inflation, restraining it from falling below my long

11/6/01

67

run target of 1-1/2 percent as it does in the Greenbook baseline. This maintains a cushion that would
allow a larger decline in the real federal funds rate if needed.
This may be less of a pressing concern at the moment given the steepness in the yield
curve and the opportunity for long rates to fall relative to short rates if the downturn is deeper or the
recovery more gradual or longer delayed than now expected. A more rapid easing would, however,
provide an opportunity for long-term rates to fall by more over the forecast horizon if the sharpness
of the decline or the moderation of the recovery disappoints the financial markets. In any case, I
take the lessons from the zero nominal bound analysis to mean we probably should move more
aggressively in response to adverse shocks, not less when nominal short-term rates are already low.
My last concern is about long-term rates. While they have declined somewhat further
recently, they have been sticky in relation to the cumulative decline in short-term rates. As a result, I
have become concerned that we may have lost the ability to lower them further with monetary policy
and, therefore, have quite limited leverage on aggregate demand. This stickiness may reflect in part,
as David Stockton noted, the offsetting effect of a revision in longer-term budget prospects. But in
my view, it may also reflect a divergence between the FOMC’s forecast for the economy and the
forecast implicit in the bond market, equity markets, and the federal funds futures market. Given the
more robust forecast apparently priced into these markets--most evident in the expectation of an
early and aggressive reversal in the federal funds rate--any further decline in the federal funds rate
may be viewed as unnecessary, even damaging, and in any case short-lived.
As a result, I have mused, the best way to stimulate the economy might be not to lower the
funds rate further but to encourage a decline in long rates relative to short-term rates. How can we
do that, I hear you ask? [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To say the least!

11/6/01

68


MR. MEYER. Perhaps, I muse again, we could do that by being unusually transparentthat is, by informing markets that we view the economy as weaker than they appear to be assuming
and that as a result the federal funds rate is less likely to rise as soon or as aggressively as they
expect. As I said though, I am just musing here--I think--and perhaps amusing, [laughter] as
opposed to making a serious policy recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You’re on, Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. I really should pass at this point! Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the time
of our last meeting, the economic horizon already appeared dark, but there was little hard data yet
available to judge the severity of unfolding events. Since then we have gotten considerable
information that indicates that we have on hand a steep and rapid decline that may be starting to feed
on itself in a vicious cycle. It’s not a pretty picture.
It continues to be my view that monetary policy played a crucial and appropriate role in
the economy over the first half of the year. But we have now entered a period when its influence
will be subordinate to the unfolding of other events, political and military, domestic and
international, and how they impact on net with the psyche of the American consumer. Our challenge
today is to identify how monetary policy can most usefully assist in assuring a positive outcome, and
that will be discussed shortly. This will be an interesting exercise because even if everyone had
precisely the same view of the economic outlook, several different policy prescriptions can be seen
as the best way to go.
Although fiscal actions under consideration have been discussed earlier by several around
the table, please let me make a brief comment on the expectations that a temporary investment tax
incentive may induce a significant early spurt in capital investment. Obviously, such a tax break is
quite attractive and tempting. However, given the present environment of extremely low capacity

11/6/01

69

utilization, rising unemployment, and weakening demand, this gambit may prove disappointing.
Beyond whatever level of capital spending will occur regardless of events, a great many firms,
especially the smaller ones that constitute half or more of the nation’s production, are likely to
conclude that attractive as this incentive may be, they simply cannot afford to acquire nonessential
additional capacity when their existing capacity is so underutilized and the outlook is so uncertain.
Larger and stronger companies who have more maneuvering room in managing their capital
structure are better candidates to accelerate their investments. However, they may wait and see until
the last minute before the incentive sunsets before making major discretionary commitments. If that
day is in the second half of 2004 it may come too late to be of much help, as the tale of the economic
recovery will by then have long since been told. If the economy is rebounding, they will be
investing anyway and the incentive would be unnecessary. If the economy is still in the doldrums at
that time, this incentive is unlikely to smoke them out, and policymakers will be searching for
stronger medicine. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. We now turn to Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The policy easing you have
already undertaken--and in particular the 100 basis point reduction in the federal
funds rate in the three weeks after September 11--anticipated a substantial
downdraft in economic activity. Nonetheless, with the incoming data indicating
that the economy is even weaker than expected, and by a considerable margin,
the question you would seem to be facing again today is not whether to ease
further but rather by how much.
To be sure, your answer is not likely to have an appreciable effect on
the near-term trajectory of the economy, but it will alter interest rate
expectations and asset prices now and in the future and, in so doing, will help
to shape the eventual recovery. The extent of the contraction is important to
your policy decision. The larger the output gap created as the economy goes
through this current period of weakness, the stronger the rebound that can be
accommodated consistent with satisfactory inflation performance over the
longer run.

11/6/01

70

Market participants expect you to lower the funds rate today, and they
have put a little more weight on a decline of 50 basis points than one of 25.
The cumulative easing they have built into the yield curve stands at close to
75 basis points by early next year. Although whatever you decide is likely to
have some effect on interest rates and asset prices, the changes may not be
large--at least immediately. Much of the initial adjustment is likely to be in
the expected timing of further ease--when markets see the funds rate hitting
bottom, rather than in the level of the rate at that point. But the cumulative
size of the anticipated easing will be affected, at least a little, and possibly
more so over time, as the markets factor in their perceptions of your concerns
and responses when reacting to future information. An important aspect of
the decision today, then, is how you would like to nudge those expectations
and asset prices in light of your assessment of the outlook, the risks around
that outlook, and the costs of the economy deviating to one side or the other of
its most likely path.
In the staff Greenbook forecast, only 25 basis points of further easing,
along with greater fiscal stimulus than assumed in the last forecast round,
helps to promote a rebound in activity after a relatively shallow contraction.
Indeed, the added monetary and fiscal policy actions about compensate for the
greater-than-expected near-term weakness, leaving the level of output at the
end of the projection period close to where it was predicted to be in the last
forecast round.
In a couple of respects, financial market prices suggest that
participants in these markets foresee a stronger revival in economic activity
than does the staff. Markets are anticipating a little more easing than the staff
has assumed, but also a quicker and more substantial increase in the federal
funds rate thereafter, presumably in response to a more rapid pickup in
growth. The rise in equity prices and the substantial narrowing of risk
premiums on junk bonds over the intermeeting period are particularly
noteworthy in the face of downward revisions to near-term economic and
interest rate expectations. This more favorable attitude toward risk suggests
that financial market participants have become less fearful about future
prospects and are expecting better earnings performance than is the staff.
Giving some weight to the stronger tenor of market expectations would lend
support to a decision to limit the easing at this meeting to 25 basis points.
Moreover, the Committee may prefer to reduce the federal funds rate
only 25 basis points at this meeting even if it sees a high probability that
further easing will eventually be needed. Moving gradually, rather than frontloading the additional ease, might have a number of advantages. Importantly,
it could help you to calibrate the extent of your easing better. Additional time
should give you more information about the economy’s developing response
to your earlier actions, which include some unusually large easings very
recently. In addition, the nature of the fiscal response to September 11 could

11/6/01

71

well become clearer in the next month or so, and you will have more data to
help sort out the more persistent effects of the attacks on consumer and
business behavior. Moreover, the Committee may want to take account of the
possibility that over the next several months the interaction of market
expectations and fragile public confidence will weigh heavily on the side of
further easing as the economy continues to contract. If the stance of policy is
set now to fully anticipate that oncoming weakness, you could be faced with
weighing the risks of disappointing the markets and the public on the one
hand, or easing policy excessively on the other. If financial markets have
done a reasonably good job in reading your intentions and building the policy
actions you anticipate into current asset prices, little of the stabilization power
of policy would be sacrificed by moving in more measured steps. In the
present situation, market participants are likely to continue to anticipate at
least another 25 basis points of easing after a 25 basis point move at this
meeting. And that might be roughly consistent with your own estimate of
what will be needed, though, as noted, the structure of market rates also
incorporates a substantial policy tightening beginning later next year.
However, the risk in a gradual approach to policy implementation is
that policy actions may turn out to be insufficient to forestall a cumulating,
self-reinforcing, movement in the economy because the forces bearing on
demand or prices prove to be stronger than the central bank or the markets
anticipate, or because the economy is hit with another shock in the same
direction. In the current circumstances, with incoming data and the near-term
outlook considerably weaker than anticipated at your last meeting, and with
the rebound still only a forecast, the Committee may see a more aggressive
policy easing of 50 basis points as better calibrated to the prevailing profiles
of the economic risks and the costs and benefits of potential alternative
outcomes.
The recent data may indeed be consistent with a short period of
weakness in which adjustments are compressed and the stage is set for a fairly
prompt and robust turnaround, as the financial markets seem to believe. But
they also may be symptomatic of a deeper and more prolonged contraction.
The latter could occur as both households and businesses engage in a mutually
reinforcing withdrawal to safer balance sheet and spending patterns in the face
of the heightened level of uncertainty and concern about the future.
The forecast of a reasonably shallow downturn and robust recovery
depends not only on a measured response of households to high levels of job
losses, but importantly also on stimulative fiscal actions that have not yet been
agreed by Congress and the Administration. Were such an agreement to be
delayed significantly or structured in such a way as to be less effective than
has been assumed, easier monetary policy would be needed to carry more of
the load in stimulating the economy. And, a substantial shortfall in fiscal
stimulus could require appreciable further monetary accommodation. The

11/6/01

72

decline in stock prices and the strength of the dollar this year have
counteracted much of the effect of your previous easings, raising questions
about how much stimulus from monetary policy alone is now in train to
counter more persistent forces of restraint on private spending behavior over
the next few quarters. Moreover, the downturn is unusually synchronous and
interactive around the world, but global demand may not get much of a boost
from monetary policy elsewhere--at least from policy in the other two main
currency areas. The Bank of Japan is constrained by a lack of effective
alternatives, and the ECB seems hamstrung from vigorous action by a desire
to build consensus amid concerns about establishing price stability credentials
in its initial years.
If the standard forecast is correct, were the Committee to ease by 50
basis points at this meeting and perhaps by smaller amounts in coming
months, you would find yourselves next spring with a strengthening economy
and monetary policy in a very stimulative position. But, unless the
contraction is a lot shallower than most expect, you will also be facing an
economy with a considerable margin of excess labor and capital that will be
exerting downward pressure on inflation. In these circumstances, the FOMC
should have ample time to begin to firm policy to forestall the onset of
inflation pressures. If, on the other hand, the recent data signal that the
economy is in a steeper contraction, you will want to have eased aggressively
to cushion the fall and to foster a more rapid rebound.
If the Committee sees inflation as most likely to be moving down as
slack accumulates in labor and product markets, it may perceive little benefit
from risking a further shortfall from the expected path of the economy and see
reasons to lean a little harder against that possibility. The cost of such a
shortfall could be unusually large. Not only is there the potential for
cumulating downward movements in output for a time, but that spiral could be
prolonged under circumstances in which the nominal federal funds rate is
already low and the forces of restraint turn out to be large and persistent. In
these circumstances, economic slack could reduce inflation and inflation
expectations so far that it became impossible for the Federal Reserve to drive
real interest rates far enough into negative territory to counteract continuing
weakness. If this is seen as a possibility, acting gradually--that is, “keeping
the powder dry”--risks finding yourselves in that very situation. Therefore, it
would be especially important to act preemptively to bolster the economy,
limit disinflation, and forestall being “pinned to the zero bound,” as the
Bluebook put it.
Taken together, these aspects of the current situation may be seen as
arguing for leaning on the side of another 50 basis point easing at this time,
rather than 25. The larger action is likely to lower somewhat market
expectations of the funds rate over the next few months, but the effects of
such revisions in reducing interest rates further out the yield curve and in

11/6/01

73

supporting equity prices may be seen as providing a desirable extra margin of 

financial accommodation in the face of the downside risks and costs. 

Whatever you do, the tenor of the incoming data on both output and
prices and the downward revision to near-term forecasts would suggest that
economic weakness continues to be more of a concern than rising inflation.
At some point, near-term weakness will be balanced by the prospects of an
expansion in the future that could give rise to inflation pressures, but for now
and into the foreseeable future, the risks to achieving your objective for
sustainable growth would seem to outweigh those to longer-run price stability.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Don, doesn’t arguing for a 50 basis point cut, on the grounds that the
economy may be worse than we thought likely, lead to arguing for an even larger cut because we
ought to do all we can now given the limited inflation risks from such an action? You didn’t
mention making no change in the funds rate, but that would say that we reacted very strongly after
the crisis--which I agree is what we should have done--and are awaiting the effects of those actions,
which haven’t even come into play yet. But the rationale for a 50 basis point move is that we are so
fearful that we think we should make a large cut. It strikes me that that argues for an even greater
cut given the uncertainty and the lack of inflation risk from that.
MR. KOHN. I think it depends on where you see the central tendency of your forecast. I
believe the central tendency among Committee members is for something like the Greenbook
forecast--some additional weakness followed by an upturn next year. We’re talking about the risks
around that central tendency. One could view 50 basis points of ease not so much as a response to
the central tendency forecast, if that appears to be a reasonable forecast, but rather to the risks
around that central tendency. By risks I mean not only the risk that the economy could turn out to be
weaker and the rebound weaker, perhaps because the fiscal stimulus doesn’t come through, but also
the costs of falling short. We could end up with a very severe disinflationary pressure that policy
would have trouble catching up to--being behind the curve, as Committee members sometimes like

11/6/01

74

to say. Getting behind the curve on the downside might be particularly costly at this time. If you
had a very weak central tendency forecast, then I would agree that you should be considering a
larger cut. But with a central tendency about like the staff forecast, I think we’re really talking about
the risk around that forecast.
MR. HOENIG. May I ask one other question? With a 50 basis point move, in your
opinion are we going to affect the markets’ expectations going forward? Will those expectations be
completely revised and instead of 75 basis points of ease on the horizon from where we are will they
talk about another 75 basis points from where we would be if we were to go with a larger cut?
MR. KOHN. I think a move of 50 basis points will have a relatively small effect on
market expectations. After all, markets have already built in about a two-thirds probability of a 50
basis point cut. I don’t put too much weight on the precise measurement of that probability, but you
would not be greatly surprising them with such a cut. I would expect something along the lines of
what happened after your last meeting when the markets were debating between a reduction of 25 or
50 basis points. You did 50, and the markets revised down the out-year Eurodollar contracts by 7 to
9 basis points. And I think that kind of response would not be an unreasonable one. So I would
anticipate some downward revision, but not a big one in the immediate expectations.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. My question is along the same line. You’ve drawn--and maybe this is
just my perspective--what seems to me to be a fairly stark difference between a cut of 25 versus a cut
of 50 basis points. I must say I was troubled by your comment about getting ourselves into a
liquidity trap without a 50 basis point cut. I understood you to say that a 25 basis point cut would

11/6/01

75

not work to avoid that problem. I found the starkness of your argument a little off-putting and I
thought you might expound a bit more on that.
MR. KOHN. I think that’s partly a function of how I structured the briefing, in terms of
trying to give all the arguments for doing 25 basis points and then all the arguments for doing 50
basis points. It’s clearly a matter of considerable judgment. And there are arguments on the 25 basis
points side. This may be one of those unusual situations--President Jordan said he thought this
might have happened over the last few weeks--where we really do get some information over the
intermeeting period. As he remarked, we’ve been disappointed by that information. As many of
you commented, the gridlock on fiscal policy may well persist past December 11th, the date of your
next meeting. So I think there’s that argument. The markets have built in more ease. You’re only
reducing expectations by a little. We could be getting a rebound next year. It’s really more a
question of where you want to take the risk. I don’t think the differences between the two choices I
described are as stark as you suggested, but there are differences in emphasis, differences in
message, and differences in what might happen.
MS. MINEHAN. Let me say a little about the implicit comparison to the Japanese
situation. We’ve been so much more aggressive in a very much shorter period of time than the Bank
of Japan was. And our economy is so much more resilient--people use that word over and over-than their economy seems to be in terms of the expectations of consumers and the innovation of
businesses and so forth. I recognize that there is a potential for all of the academic work we’ve put
into the zero bound on nominal interest rates to come into play here, but I question the reality of
those expectations or those worries in the context of where rates are now.
MR. KOHN. Well, you do have 250 basis points before you get down to where the
Japanese rates are. So you have a ways to go. And I agree with you that our financial system--our

11/6/01

76

private economy and our financial markets--is much stronger than the Japanese system, which is
really what is holding them back.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.
MR. KOHN. On the other hand, our economy is subject to some unusual shocks and we
just don’t know how businesses and households will be responding to unfolding developments. And
there are downside risks. Some in the market see a bottom to the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 percent.
So, the rate is approaching that level. It may be a little premature to have boxes in the Bluebook and
a discussion around this table of the zero bound, but it’s not that premature. One could construct a
scenario in which there is a major loss in confidence, as in the alternative scenario in the Greenbook,
or scenarios in which business activity and foreign economies are much weaker. I think we could all
sit here and write down about three or four developments that would seriously weaken this economy.
They would all have to occur at the same time--a number of very bad things happening at onceincluding the possibility of another terrorist attack. It’s not impossible to imagine that six months
from now the Committee could be dealing with some very, very low interest rates.
MS. MINEHAN. I don’t put that out of the bounds of possibilities. It’s a question of how
much control we use in the process of getting there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. I just have a comment on Don’s presentation. I thought you were
especially effective this time, Don, in making the case for both a 1/4 point move and a 1/2 point
move. Indeed, it was a bit of a roller coaster ride for me. I felt myself being swayed first in one
direction and then whipsawed back in the other direction. So it was an enjoyable ride! Thank you.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don? If not, let me proceed.

11/6/01

77


This is a particularly difficult period and I want to start off with a few important issues.
The first is that we keep forecasting stabilization but there has been no evidence of it anywhere. We
go from one Greenbook to the next with a projection of rising economic activity, at least beyond the
near term. And, indeed, by the processes we employ for forecasting, that conclusion is inevitable.
The alternative forecast would be one that violates the rules of statistical inference or, I should say,
the great historical research that Dave Stockton set into motion, which concluded that the United
States has never had a recession that failed to end. That general view is very helpful, I know, but the
important issue is for us to be aware that we are witnessing developments that are quite
extraordinary. As a number of you have mentioned, the international outlook is continuing to
deteriorate. We currently are observing the obverse of the extraordinary accelerations that occurred
in world economies during the latter part of the 1990s as a consequence of increased globalization--a
development that is now seen as a two-edged sword. Indeed, the dispersion of growth rates in
economies around the world has come down very dramatically.
There is an increasingly synchronous and mutually reinforcing pattern of economic
activity among the world’s nations, and we are beginning to see a gradual breakdown of barriers to
stabilization as our economy goes from one stage to the next. The erosion is slow but persistent. It
is a development that I don’t think any of us has seen previously. We certainly don’t put it into our
econometric models, whether they are structural or VAR. Indeed, the one thing we can say about
our models is that left to their own devices they will not project a long-lasting deflationary process.
The coefficients and the structure of the models always produce an upturn at some point. There is a
tendency to revert to the type of growth path that has characterized our economic history. We
cannot presume that we can put a few exogenous assumptions into our models and then conclude the
model predictions are telling us something. I submit that that is not true. We are telling the model

11/6/01

78

what to conclude by the way we have built it, and indeed the exogenous inputs that we put in will
not induce a contraction unless we go far beyond the normal range of inputs that we have used in the
past. Nonetheless, the real world has the potential to generate deflation, and I think we are moving
gradually from a disinflationary process toward a situation where we could begin to experience
outright deflation. I think that inflation rates finally are getting down to a level that can satisfy Al
Broaddus, which is something I thought would never emerge. But the point is that he’s right. At
this stage I don’t know what the next Greenbook is going to show, but I would wager that it will
indicate a weaker economy. What is very disturbing is that we have not yet seen any underlying
basis for stabilization. In that regard I found the comments around this room very distressing. To be
sure, nobody has said that the economy is weakening substantially; it is not recovering, but neither is
it going down precipitously.
There is one part of our economic system that is saying in effect that the economy is
stabilizing. It is called the stock market, and I hope it is right. The stock market patterns of the last
several weeks are essentially projecting a bottom in the U.S. economy and the world economy
sometime in the early months of 2002. If the market were a person, I would ask about the basis for
such a conclusion. Earnings expectations continue to decline, and we are seeing patterns that
historically would suggest a rally in a bear market that may be perfectly consistent with a subsequent
decline. I wish I could take greater comfort from the recent rally, but I have looked at too many
stock market charts going back to the 19th century to take much comfort in recent developments.
I think the surge in motor vehicle sales is a fascinating phenomenon because I do not
believe that we can explain it wholly in terms of price discounting. The problem unfortunately is
that the estimate for October sales is so bizarrely out of the ordinary that even if there is a good deal

11/6/01

79

of real change in the demand for motor vehicles, sales will still have to come down very sharply just
to get back to something resembling normal.
I think we are looking at developments that imply a very difficult policy issue. My first
reaction to the employment data on Friday was to presume that the wisest thing for us to do today
would be to move the funds rate down 25 basis points, given the downside risks, and to continue to
make 25 basis point moves as long as we have to. I struggled through the weekend reviewing
numerous anecdotal reports and looking carefully at the simulations that our models are creating.
And most interestingly I took a really close look at what is going on abroad, where the data are not
as good as ours but they are increasingly more disturbing.
I thought that your UPS report, Bill, was striking because it is anecdotally consistent with
what we are seeing, namely a gradual but continuous contraction with no evidence of any degree of
stabilization. I believe we are at a point where we are beyond disinflation and getting to the edge of
a deflationary process. This means that even if we were to provide a great deal of stimulus, we
would still have to deal with disinflation before we could create a problem of inflation. So we have
a few stages to go through.
I must admit that one of the things I read which sort of struck me as being relevant was
that little box on the “zero bound” that Vince and his staff put in the Bluebook. I thought it really
addressed the key question.
I don’t think any of us has a big dispute on the economic outlook. But there is a crucial
dispute here. It relates to the issue of whether we want to keep our powder dry or whether we want
to make sure that we put in enough shot to knock down the opponent before the opponent eventually
does us in. I started with the view that keeping the powder dry was the wisest policy, but as I
struggled through the weekend I came out where Al Broaddus is. The reason I would argue for such

11/6/01

80

an adjustment is that policy invariably gets down to the issue of what happens if we are wrong. And
what I conclude is that if doing 50 basis points today is wrong--if it turns out that the economy starts
to stabilize tomorrow and a lot of things go well--being required to move our funds rate target back
up would be the most delightful problem we could conceivably face. I don’t anticipate that. I think
the chances of that happening are extraordinarily remote. I do think that if we have an inadequate
response today, there is a danger--because as I see it we are at a critical point in the way this
economy is functioning--that we will be taking too high a risk. I don’t know what the future holds
for us. I don’t think any of us can know. But on the basis of what we do know, what is the
downside if we do 25 and we are wrong or we do 50 and we are wrong? In my judgment the answer
to that question is pretty forceful. As a consequence I must say that, after great struggle, I come out
in favor of 50 basis points. I wouldn’t go to 75 basis points largely because I am not absolutely
convinced that I am right. If I were, I would argue for that larger move.
MR. HOENIG. May I ask you a question?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.
MR. HOENIG. I would appreciate your opinion on this. By going with a 50 basis point
change, are we likely to foster expectations, not just in financial markets but in the economy more
generally, that we will do at least another 25 basis points and will that induce people to hold back
because they anticipate further easing?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I think the expectation that we will do another 25
basis points will be built into the market. I’m not sure that’s all bad. I very much suspect, in terms
of the way Don put it, that we already have a goodly part of that further easing baked into the
market. If we were to go 75 basis points, I would really be concerned about what the forward
position of the funds market would be. And taking Bill Poole’s general edict, we must be careful of

11/6/01

81

what we construct out there because how we respond to what is in the forward markets has a very
significant impact. So I think it is far safer for us to be moving 50 basis points, and frankly that is
what I would like to put on the table, and to continue in any case a bias toward economic weakness.
Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation,
probably with the usual enthusiasm of the recently converted, because I entered the weekend with a
view that we ought to ease by 25 basis points and over the course of the weekend changed my
opinion. Somewhat symbolically I have a pond behind my house in Westchester County and there
are a lot of fish in the pond. Therefore, I have two hawks, and the hawks enjoy fishing in the pond.
This is a true story, though what will follow is not true. [Laughter] This past weekend--now we get
into mythology--one of the hawks miraculously turned into a beautiful white dove. I was very
confused until I realized that what was even more miraculous was that the dove spoke with a
southern accent! [Laughter] And that convinced me even more that the 50 basis point move was
appropriate.
MR. PARRY. Wow!
CHAIRMAN GREENPAN. I second that.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Let me respond to the question that Tom Hoenig
raised on the market reaction. If we ease 50 basis points, the market will assume that we will ease at
least 25 basis points more. If we ease 25 basis points, the market will make the same assumption but
will be confused, I think, about whether we are slowing down just for the sake of slowing down,
which I think is a bad message to send. If we ease by 75 basis points, that will create an immense
amount of confusion, probably starting with the notion that we know a whole lot more with a greater
degree of certainty than anybody else does and that the downside we’re all concerned about is now

11/6/01

82

our central forecast. That would be very dangerous. So we certainly don’t want to do that. The
conclusion is that a 50 basis point cut, with the balance of risks still toward inadequate growth, is the
right though difficult conclusion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your preference for a 50 basis point cut in the
funds rate. For me the downside risks to the outlook are sizable as illustrated by emerging data,
which keep signaling lower and lower forecasts for real GDP growth. Also, as noted in the
Bluebook and commented on by Governor Meyer and by you, a larger preemptive easing move now
may reduce the risk of being constrained later by the zero nominal interest rate bound. I think that’s
another compelling reason to do 50 basis points at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. The good news in
what you said was that you came out with a policy that I support. But the bad news is that you
actually scared me a bit more than I was already. Nevertheless, I do support your proposal.
Let me also address Tom’s question. I’ve had a little trouble with this myself because
changes of 50, 25, or even 75 basis points aren’t that huge. And as Tom points out, if there’s an
argument for getting the funds rate down, why don’t we get it down? The way I would rationalize
what we’re doing is that there is a sense in which we are speaking in code here. We’ve been
operating under a procedure for a while where 50 points is viewed as a big change and the Fed being
responsive. A move of 25 basis points is viewed as a little change and the Fed not being very
responsive. Seventy-five basis points is language we’ve never used. So I think it’s particularly
important to be clear in our communication, as many people around the table have said. To me
that’s a powerful argument for continuing the dialog that we’ve already been having.

11/6/01

83

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I support it for the
reasons that you gave.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, I view the risks relative to the Greenbook baseline as still
to the downside in the near term. I believe that’s a case for erring on the side of stimulus relative to
the baseline, given the asymmetric risks and the relationship between the mean and the mode in the
forecast. And I believe that’s a case for moving more rapidly than otherwise, given the zero nominal
bound constraint. For these reasons I support your recommendation of a 50 basis point decline in the
target federal finds rate today and also your recommendation for a balance of risks statement toward
weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, and I support it
strongly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, although I think Don did
make good arguments for both of the alternatives he described. I am a bit concerned that if the tenor
of the economy doesn’t change until sometime in the spring, say, we’re going to run the risk of
either overdoing it or at some point having to disappoint market expectations. That risk may not be
huge in this environment; it is there nevertheless.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.

11/6/01

84


MR. SANTOMERO. I’m sufficiently uncertain about the timing and the strength of the
forecasted recovery that I support a cut of 50 basis points. I do worry a little about endogenizing
expectations regarding what we’ll do next and about how weak the economy really is. Having said
that, I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I can support the recommendation, although I certainly
came into this meeting favoring a move of 25 basis points. The way I see the issue is as follows. As
you certainly have said on many occasions--and I have said the same thing--we believe that the U.S.
economy has essentially undiminished long-run prospects. The question, I suppose, is when those
long-run prospects will materialize. If we believe that they are coming in 2008 or 2010, that’s a long
time away. It seems to me that the tenor of the views around this table is that we may have a very,
very difficult five years, and that the risks are decidedly on the downside for the reasons that people
have discussed. I think our statements about the long-run prospects for our economy are part of the
reason why long-term rates have not gone down very much. In my view we have expressed a lot of
optimism about the outlook for the economy and I think those statements of optimism do not fully
reflect the beliefs that we heard around the table today in terms of, let’s say, the next three to five
years. Would I bet my house on my own conviction on this score? No. Obviously, we’re going
through a very difficult period--one that has no clear analog in history, yet one where to date the
absolute level of decline in activity has been mild. But we apparently are projecting a considerable
risk of a steeper decline to come. So, if we really want the reduction in the funds rate to translate
into declines in longer-term interest rates, I think we need to change a bit the tone of what we say in
our statement and in our testimony and speeches. Presumably we do believe that the long-run
prospects for the economy are sound and essentially undiminished and we should say that. But we

11/6/01

85

also need to say something along the lines--I don’t know how to word this--that we have ahead of us,
in calendar quarters or maybe even years, a very significant risk that the economy could require a
period of prolonged and substantial monetary easing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just comment on that. First of all, if we seriously
believed the time horizon was five years, then I think making a statement that the long-term
prospects are optimistic is in any meaningful sense just wrong. When I talk about it, I’m thinking in
terms of two years or something in that range. If in fact our comments are holding long-term interest
rates up--if indeed we’re that powerful--then I submit to you that if we take the position that the
world is going to be awful for the next five years, we can create that result even if it’s not in prospect
now. So I would be careful about what we say we perceive. I personally don’t believe that the
problems are deep seated to the extent that we are looking at a situation like the 1930s or something
of that sort. But I do think that we are going through a period where the next year or next couple of
years is going to be subnormal. I don’t know whether I’m talking about just the first part of that
period or whether the second part also will involve less than adequate growth. But I’m surely not
arguing that it’s going to go on for longer than that. I have no evidence that that is the case.
MR. POOLE. I appreciate your comment on that. My belief--conviction would be too
strong a word here--is that we will go through an adjustment, which when we look back at this
period sometime in the future, will be regarded as a cyclical adjustment and not a change in the
secular outlook for the economy. I think we will be pulling out of this situation along the lines of the
Greenbook forecast. I view that as a very good outlook. But if that is really what we have in front
of us, then it seems to me that we already have a very substantial amount of monetary ease in place.
And to me the argument for 50 basis points today rather than 25 is not totally consistent with that
outlook. That’s what concerns me about looking at it this way. I am also concerned that there is a

11/6/01

86

sense in which we have double-counted the recent bad news. After all, we have cut the funds rate
100 basis points since September 11th in anticipation of bad news, the weak economic data to come.
And we got the bad numbers. In part what we are saying today is that we are cutting the funds rate
again by 50 basis points now that we see the actuality of the weak data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But, remember, we have revised down the forecast since
those earlier cuts.
MR. POOLE. I understand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s not as though the forecast remained unchanged from
the immediate post-September 11th period. If it had, we would be in far better shape now. The
outlook has deteriorated. That’s the problem.
MR. POOLE. At any rate, where I come out is that I’m concerned about doing 50 basis
points now and about the process that I think we are getting into. I'm not going to dissent; that’s not
my point. I’m just indicating the reasons underlying my preference for 25 basis points. The
likelihood is that we will have more weak economic data ahead of us and I think the market will read
in another 50 basis points of ease at our next meeting. I’m not sure that that dynamic is really
helpful. That’s essentially what I am saying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve long thought that a variety of
unforecastable internal and external shocks do happen and that there’s nothing much we can do
about that but try to interpret them and respond appropriately. And we can hope that we don’t get a
succession of shocks going in the same direction that builds into a cumulative process. To my mind
the role of policymakers is often one of trying to avoid becoming part of the problem rather than part
of the solution. I do believe that in some episodes in the history of this central bank and others in the

11/6/01

87

world the policymakers became part of the problem rather than part of the solution. That’s the basis,
too, for my comments earlier about fiscal policy. I’m not convinced that what is going on now in the
fiscal arena is all that constructive. But actually I’m less concerned today than I was five weeks ago
that monetary policy is not properly calibrated. At that time I was worried that things were moving
in the direction of rational risk aversion so fast that we might find that the funds rate was too high to
be consistent with the appropriate thrust of monetary policy. Given the Desk’s net injections of
liquidity over the period since then, I actually feel more comfortable that the level is not too high.
Moreover, my confidence in the inherent resiliency of a market economy and its tendency to expand
following shocks is undiminished. My uncertainty remains about what kind of internal or external
shocks we need to be prepared for. So I would have been perfectly comfortable to stay with an
unchanged funds rate at this meeting, given my reading of the events since October 2nd. Looking at
the yield curve--the four-week, the three-month, and the six-month bill rates--it’s hard to disagree
with a cut of 50 basis points. I can’t say that that’s wrong. But I’m actually fairly comfortable with
where we are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I will take your lead on this. But I also want to express a
differing view in the sense that while our economy obviously had a terrible shock, we have taken
very aggressive and I think appropriate action and monetary policy is now in an accommodative
position. Some time has to pass before we will see an upturn, even with this accommodative
position, and I believe it will take place. I have confidence in the future. In my view the U.S.
economy is quite different from Japan’s in terms of its soundness and its ability to recover from the
shock. So I would be comfortable with no change or a 25 basis point change today. I think we are
raising expectations with this move of 50 basis points. People are going to be making decisions now

11/6/01

88

in the anticipation that there will be more ease to come and I think there is a risk to that as far as the
economy goes as well. I will certainly follow your lead on this. These are difficult times and I
realize it’s hard to know the right answer. But I think we could afford to be more patient and let the
flow of time work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I, like President Hoenig, would be much more comfortable with a move
of 25 basis points or even no change versus your recommendation of 50 basis points. I want to go
through some of my thinking on this. I think it’s right to ease further. I had the same kind of battle
with myself over the weekend that a couple of other people in this room, including you, Mr.
Chairman, have talked about. But I continue to believe that there’s some need for caution. We have
a lot of monetary policy ease in the pipeline and potential fiscal stimulus as well. It’s important not
to overreact. The recession seems to be baked in the cake now; the incoming data will be negative.
But the process has to play itself out. And as Dave Stockton mentioned, recessions do inevitably
come to an end.
There’s not a lot we can do about the near term. Monetary policy doesn’t work in the near
term. It can be a support for confidence. And I think we provided support through our policy
actions after the terrorist attacks; we put enough into the pipeline to bolster confidence. But right
now I don’t see further easing as a confidence-bolstering move. I think it is likely to work in the
direction of confirming people’s thoughts about the impotence of monetary policy because there
won’t be much effect in the near term. Instead, most of the impact will be felt next year--around the
end of the first quarter or the beginning of the second quarter perhaps--when the economy is
expected to be picking up anyway. And I have great faith that it will be picking up. How, when,
and to what degree, I don’t know, but I think this economy has a lot of resilience. In fact, people

11/6/01

89

have mentioned that lower rates now could actually increase long rates because the market
apparently sees a quicker pickup than does our forecast.
There’s probably not a lot of difference between a move of 25 or 50 basis points today. I
don’t see big differences in outcomes. I don’t see the stark distinctions that Don was drawing and I
don’t see major differences in being wrong here. But I do think that a 25 basis point cut would
suggest a bit more control on our part. I think it would show that we are being more forwardlooking rather than focusing on the recent incoming data. To me it would indicate that wherever we
stop the policy position might be a little less stimulative to the inevitable upturn than otherwise. I
don’t see the comparison to the current Japanese situation, though I fully understand the frontloading part of that argument. I don’t think going 25 basis points versus 50 would indicate that the
central bank in the United States is part of the problem rather than part of the solution. But all that
said, I do take your points on the feedback effects of the international situation now and the potential
for a downward spiral. And if the psychology doesn’t work domestically, I think it does work a little
on the international side. It’s a tough call for me right now but I am willing to go with your
leadership.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I started out my comments earlier by saying
that this is an uncertain and unprecedented time. That clearly was evident as we went around the
room and heard the comments during the go-around, which I too found very depressing. I expected
it coming into the meeting because all the data and all the anecdotes were so negative. I guess at
some point we are going to get some positive anecdotes. I keep looking for them but I haven’t found
them yet.

11/6/01

90


There is clearly a risk that the greater caution we’ve seen by consumers and business firms
could cumulate into a more severe recession. When one looks at the consensus of the forecasts that
are out there, those forecasts seem to discount anything like that. I personally think the economy is
going to be weaker than the Greenbook forecast and weaker than my staff’s forecast too for that
matter. Therefore, I do feel that a 50 basis point cut is safer and I support it. I, too, am concerned
about the interconnectedness of the international economy and the feedback to our economy, which
is the result of globalization--a development that, of course, all of us have supported for many, many
years. I think we just have to watch the situation very, very carefully as we move forward. So I
support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, first I’d like to correct the record regarding Al and I
swapping hats. The point of my remembering the Alamo was that even though the defenders lost the
battle it was not because they were keeping their powder dry. So basically, he came around to my
point of view! [Laughter] I agree with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, this is the most fascinating meeting in my six years at the
table. People have often asked me if I ever change my mind during the course of a meeting and I
always say “yes,” but I’m not sure that I often do. Today is probably the exception. I not only went
into the weekend but I came out of the weekend thinking that either no policy action today or a
modest move was the right decision. I certainly have come some way during the course of the
meeting and I think I understand the downside risks more fully. Having said that, I’m still of the
view that a modest move today feels more right to me. I think Don made a credible argument for
such a policy. I share the concerns of Cathy Minehan and Bill Poole that we may in fact build in

11/6/01

91

expectations for even more easing than we would like. I think there’s even a chance of a scare
factor; people will think that we believe the economy is far worse than they thought. Having said all
that, I support your recommendation and understand the arguments for a 50 basis point move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will you read the appropriate wording?
MR. BERNARD. This is from page 13 in the Bluebook: “The Federal Open Market
Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an
average of around 2 percent.”
The sentence for the press statement would be: “Against the background of its long-run
goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth, and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may
generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you call the roll?

MR. BERNARD. 

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Ferguson
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Minehan
President Moskow
President Poole

Yes
Yes 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
















VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. You missed Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. May I vote also? [Laughter] I believe I’m entitled to.
MR. BERNARD. All right, Governor Gramlich. I have you voting “yes.” [Laughter]

11/6/01

92

MR. GRAMLICH. I didn’t think I was that transparent! I vote “yes.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The preliminary statement that has been drafted is very
close to the previous one. It’s very short and it will be circulated to you. In the meantime I request
that the Board of Governors retire to the room next door so that we can act on a discount rate
request. So, this meeting is in recess and we will return shortly.
[Recess]
MS. MINEHAN. Do you need a vote on this statement?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. No.
MS. MINEHAN. I just want to ask whether it’s really necessary to make what could be
interpreted as derogatory references to enhancing security. It’s clear that the diversion of resources
to security enhancement will have a negative effect on productivity, but do we really need to say that
in this statement? After all, the whole world is dependent upon people feeling comfortable with the
security measures being taken because the world has changed forever, in my view anyway. People
need to feel that these measures will be beneficial for the long term. I don’t think we need to say
this.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that’s a valid criticism. Would somebody else like
to comment on it?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Well, if we don’t say something about the
reduction in productivity over the short run, for whatever reason, the statement will suggest that we
think productivity is going to bounce back as soon as this economic slowdown abates. That sounds
too much like whistling in the wind. I’m not sure we need to blame it on protection and security
measures. But I think we have to say that something is happening that likely will affect productivity
adversely for a while.

11/6/01

93


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I agree with that. I think the question is whether or not
we phrase it in the way it is phrased here.
MS. MINEHAN. Can we just say that because of the economic slowdown or the cyclical
impact or something like that productivity growth will slow?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, there is a heightened risk premium that has occurred as
a consequence of this. What we’re talking about, in the extreme form, is the elimination of just-in
time inventories.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes, I know what you mean. But I don’t think this is the time to be
sounding quite so negative about security.
MR. FERGUSON. Well, could we say the “appropriate” or the “necessary” diversion of
resources to enhance security or something along those lines to suggest that it is well understood that
resources will be used in this way?
MR. KELLEY. I think the word “necessary” is good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, why don’t we say the “necessary diversion of
resources”?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes, that does it.
MR. PARRY. Or how about just the “reallocation of resources”?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, “necessary” addresses the issue that Cathy is raising.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That turns it positive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that adequate?
MR. GRAMLICH. Well, let me first comment on the broader point and I’ll also talk
about the words used. Continuing with Bill McDonough’s whistling in the wind argument, I think
we also have to show that we recognize this phenomenon, whether we call it a reallocation or a

11/6/01

94

diversion of resources. So I think we actually have to tie that in there. “Necessary” is fine with me.
Also, there’s a double clause in there with “and protect against disruptions.” We might not need
that. A lot of words are devoted to that sentence and it could be stripped down. But in my view we
have to recognize not only that it will be a while before productivity comes back, but also that a
diversion of resources is occurring. Otherwise the message just doesn’t look real.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you feel better if we said: “The necessary diversion
of resources to enhance security is likely to detract from advances in productivity for a time”?
MR. KOHN. How about “necessary reallocation of resources”? I think that was
somebody’s suggestion. That sounds a little better.
MR. GRAMLICH. Okay.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That’s better.
MS. MINEHAN. But the economic slowdown all by itself produces a reduction in
productivity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, the reference here is to structural productivity. I might
note that the estimate for productivity in the third quarter is going to be coming out tomorrow. I
don’t know what the precise number is going to be, but it’s going to show strong productivity in the
quarter. If we subtracted out the September 11th problem, it would be supportive of the fact that
there have been structural changes in productivity in the last four or five years.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it’s not cyclical productivity we’re talking about.
MS. MINEHAN. No, I realize that.
MR. JORDAN. Mr. Chairman, could I offer a slightly different perspective? It may be
consistent with what is bothering Cathy. The last clause is a clear statement that productivity growth

11/6/01

95

is good. I might think that and everybody around this table might think that. But hypothetically,
suppose 20 years ago we had substituted for the term “to enhance security” the phrase “to clean up
the air and the water”? The vast majority of people believe that whatever is being done in our
country to enhance security is for the good. For the tone of our statement to somehow suggest that it
is really unfortunate that our country has to do this, I think is very undesirable.
MS. MINEHAN. That’s my point exactly. You stated it so much better than I did. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. That’s why the words “necessary 

reallocation”-MS. MINEHAN. I don’t think that takes away the negative tenor.
MS. JOHNSON. Pardon me, but it’s a measurement issue, isn’t it? The GDP doesn’t
measure increased security; it doesn’t give better security a positive weight. Is there a way to get the
word “measurement” in here?
SPEAKER(?). Measured productivity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that may do it.
MS. MINEHAN. We’re trying to get across a very sophisticated concept here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, measured productivity. I think the key question as far
as the statement goes is: Do we want to leave in “and protect against production disruptions”?
MS. MINEHAN. Yes, right.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I don’t think we need that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The sentence is very long. Let me read it and see whether
or not we need that phrase. “Although the necessary…” Do we want to say “reallocation” or
“diversion”?
SEVERAL. “Reallocation.”

11/6/01

96

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. “Reallocation” is more positive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. “Although the necessary reallocation of resources to
enhance security is likely to detract from measured advances in productivity for a time, the longterm prospects for productivity growth and the economy remain favorable and should become
evident once the unusual forces restraining demand abate.”
MS. MINEHAN. Did you keep in “advances in productivity” or did you say “measured
productivity”?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first reference is to measured productivity. The second
one is to true productivity growth so I would leave the word “measured” out.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes.
MS. MINEHAN. But one could argue, along the lines that President Jordan did, that the
actual productivity of the U.S. economy is better because of what might have been looked at as
overhead expenditures on clean air and clean water. This reallocation of resources may turn out not
to be a terrible development.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me tell you what the problem is. If we’re going to get
into this, we’ve got a serious problem, which is whether in fact we’re measuring efficiency or
improvements in the quality of our standard of living.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Environmental and other types of controls do not increase
efficiency. They improve the quality of life. Measured productivity is efficiency.
MS. MINEHAN. The improved quality of life could make the overall labor force more
efficient.

11/6/01

97


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s conceivable, but that’s not what is being measured.
One way of looking at it is that a lot of activities basically don’t benefit us because they are in some
sense protective. A big chunk of medical expenditures falls into that category; it depends on
whether the expense is for preventive or curative purposes. What I’m trying to get at here is that this
involves a very serious conceptual problem.
MS. MINEHAN. I know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We don’t want to get into that.
MS. MINEHAN. No, we don’t. But I also don’t think we want to come out with a
statement that could be interpreted negatively. Granted, there are a zillion different sophisticated
arguments one can make about why this statement is true. I still think the public interpretation of it
will be negative with regard to security.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we say “the appropriate reallocation of resources”? I
made the statement in testimony to Congress in very much this way. I got very positive responses.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Absolutely. I dispute the major premise here,
which is that it’s negative. I don’t find it negative for the Federal Reserve to say that investment in
security is a good thing, which is in my view what we’re saying. I absolutely fail to see how that’s
negative.
MS. MINEHAN. Well, maybe it’s just an interpretation. I think investment in security is
a good thing right now. That’s what we need.
MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, if you wanted to appear more neutral, the verb
“detracts” may also seem negative.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes.

11/6/01

98


MR. REINHART. So if instead it said “is likely to slow the advance in measured
productivity” I think that would pretty much go in the direction of neutrality.
MR. BROADDUS. I think that’s very good. I’d suggest the language “may restrain
advances in productivity,” which is shorter and less awkward.
MS. MINEHAN. How about “may restrain advances in near-term measurements of
productivity.”
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. You’re on a roll, Al! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s do it.
MR. PARRY. “May restrain advances?”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, in that context we don’t really need measured. Let me
reread it. “Although the”--do you want to say necessary or appropriate?
SPEAKER(?). “Appropriate.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. “Although the appropriate reallocation of resources to
enhance security may restrain advances in productivity for a time, the long-term prospects” etc.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Great.
MS. MINEHAN. That’s shorter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that does it.
SPEAKER(?). All right!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. May I just ask a question? In the second paragraph, third line, is the
phrase “for the foreseeable future” new in this statement?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it’s part of the boilerplate.
MR. MOSKOW. We had it in previous statements?

11/6/01

99

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes, it’s part of the boilerplate. 

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. We’ve had that in our statements since the 

Ferguson Committee came up with it.
MR. MEYER. It’s in a slightly different location in this statement, but we always use it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay?
MR. MOSKOW. Fine.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, may I suggest that the Committee reconsider using the word
“necessary” to describe the reallocation of resources rather than “appropriate”? Several people
suggested “necessary” during the course of the discussion and I think it may be a little better there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that’s a good suggestion. Is that okay with
everybody?
SEVERAL. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn’t think we could rewrite the press statement as a
Committee, but we did! The next meeting is December 11, 2001. We adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING

