Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 18, 1999
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May
18, 1999, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT: 	Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 

Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman 

Mr. Boehne 

Mr. Ferguson 

Mr. Gramlich 

Mr. Kelley 

Mr. McTeer 

Mr. Meyer 

Mr. Moskow 

Ms. Rivlin 

Mr. Stern 

Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, Jordan, and Parry, Alternate Members of the 

Federal Open Market Committee 

Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Minehan, and Mr. Poole, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis respectively 

Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 

Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 

Ms. Fox, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 

Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Prell, Economist 

Ms. Johnson, Economist 

Messrs. Alexander, Cecchetti, Hooper, Hunter, Lang, Lindsey, Rolnick, 

Rosenblum, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate Economists 

Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors, Divisions of

Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics respectively, 

Board of Governors 


5/18/99

2

Mr. Reinhart, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Goodfriend, Hakkio, Ms. Krieger, and Mr.
Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Richmond, Kansas City, New York, and Cleveland
respectively
Messrs. Cunningham and Gavin, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta and St. Louis respectively
Mr. Trehan, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 18, 1999
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to move to approve the minutes
of the March meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection they are approved. Mr. Fisher,
you have the floor.
MR. FISHER. Thank you. I will be referring to the package of charts in front of
you.1/
I will be discussing three distinct topics this morning: first, recent
interest rate and exchange rate developments; second, the recent behavior
of the funds rate and Desk operations; and third, some preliminary
thoughts about the Y2K issues the Desk may be facing.
Turning to the first chart on forward rate contracts for 3-month
deposits, you can see in the top panel that after the last meeting U.S.
forward rates drifted lower and then began rising, intriguingly, from about
the time of the European Central Bank (ECB) rate cut. Subsequently, they
rose significantly further after the release of the first-quarter GDP data and
the Chairman’s May 6 remarks in Chicago. Of course, last Friday the CPI
data caused an even bigger jump in the forward rates, with the 9-month
forward 3-month rate backing up 21 basis points to 5.51 percent and the
3-month forward rate backing up 10 basis points to 5.18 percent. The
September fed funds futures contract rose 8 basis points on the day to 4.50
percent and the long bond backed up 17 basis points to around 5.92
percent.
In the middle panel you can see that the ECB managed to surprise the
markets a bit with a 50 basis point cut in its repo rates about a week after
your last meeting. And forward rates have shifted lower more recently,
with the 3-month forward 3-month rate right on top of the current 3-month
rate.
The bottom panel shows rate movements in Japan. While a few
brave souls were suggesting a few weeks ago that there may be evidence
of a reviving Japanese economy--the Wall Street Journal, for example,
brought out the old hackneyed story about a rise in golf club memberships
--there are no such signs in the forward interest rate market. Looking at
interest rate markets, it is hard not to notice that at this point, almost
1

/ A copy of the material used by Mr. Fisher is appended to the transcript.

5/18/99

2

halfway through the year, the U.S. economy seems to be chugging right
along, while the rest of the world is at best sluggish.
Turning to the second page, the top panel shows selected 3-month
deposit rates in terms of the change in basis points from January 4 and the
bottom panel shows the percentage change in various currencies against
the dollar, indexed to January 4. Without going through all the details--the
specifics are covered in our written report--twelve central banks have cut
rates since your last meeting, six of them more than once. As you can see,
much of the world has declining 3-month rates and declining currencies
relative to the dollar. But as can be seen clearly in the bottom panel, two
interesting exceptions are Mexico and Canada, whose currencies have
been strengthening against the dollar. However, it may be worth
considering the possibility that the weakening of our exchange rate with
our North American counterparts could reflect the strength of the U.S.
economy and its spillover to the north and to the south.
The charts on the third page display changes in the Treasury yield
curve over the last two years. The top panel shows rates for on-the-run
coupon securities from May 1, 1997 through May 14, 1999 and the bottom
panel depicts selected yield curves. Again, as a consequence of the CPI
release last Friday, you can see that the long end of the on-the-run curve
has backed up to about where it was a year ago. That backup is a little
hard to see in the top panel because of the brownish-orange vertical line,
but the bottom panel shows it more clearly; the yield on the 30-year bond
rose to 5.91 percent and the 10-year rate went to 5.61 percent. But it is
worth pointing out in the micro picture of the last few days that the
30-year bond had backed up--you cannot see it in this scale--to 5.86
percent on Wednesday in anticipation of the PPI numbers to be released
on Thursday. Those data gave the market something of a pleasant surprise
and the bond closed Thursday at 5.75 percent. So the market had been
bracing itself for a negative inflation shock, got a head fake from the PPI
numbers Thursday, and then got faked out again Friday. This morning,
the long bond is actually trading at 5.87 percent, only 1 basis point higher
than the close on Wednesday. It certainly was a big move, but it is worth
noting that some of it had already occurred, was taken away, and then
given back.
Of the four yield curves shown in the bottom panel, the steepest was
on May 1, 1997, which is before any of the pressures developed in
Thailand. The panel also depicts the rather flat yield curve of May 1998,
the inverted curve of last October, and last Friday’s yield curve. The
floating diamonds reflect the twice off-the-run 30-year bond yield, which I
have noted there as a placeholder. I think of that rate as providing
something of a crude measure of market uncertainty about the level of
long-term rates. Which way to look at the liquidity premium is something

5/18/99

3

worth pondering. To anticipate what the Chairman may ask me after my
remarks: Yes, bid/ask spreads on both on-the-run and off-the-run
securities are a good bit wider today than they were at the time of your last
meeting. They had come in a little further by the end of April, but the
noise of the last few days has moved them out a bit.
Turning to open market operations, the top chart on page 4 shows the
trading range of the funds rate over the last four maintenance periods. As
shown in the upper left portion, covering the first maintenance period from
March 25 to April 7, we supplied a high level of excess reserves to try to
get through the quarter-end and month-end period, but we faced fairly
typical pressures for such a period. However, the intriguing interval was
the second period, depicted in the upper right portion of the chart, when
we never quite appreciated the speed with which banks shifted to a desire
to be on the short side of meeting their reserve requirements. You can see
there how softly the funds rate traded over the period, when we supplied
only $900 million of excess reserves on average. Initially, lower-thanexpected tax receipts through most of April were a contributing factor, as
receipts lagged our daily estimates. They caught up at the end of the
month, leaving the market initially in the next period with higher reserve
levels than we intended. There also seems to have been some hangover
effect from last year when we had a very soft funds rate.
To bring pricing back in line, we left excess reserves in rather short
supply at the start of the April 22 maintenance period, which was
compounded by a bit of a miss and gave us a rather firm market on April
26 with a standard deviation of 197 basis points. That did seem to shock
the market back to a trading level a little closer to the target. But, again,
we have seen some oscillation. Yesterday’s funds market was a bit firmer
than we had hoped, but rather typical for a quarterly refunding day; the
effective rate was around 5.01 percent. The average rate for the period we
are in now is still just 4.76 percent, including yesterday’s firm rate.
Turning to the next page, I’ve provided a quick summary so you can
see that this year’s tax season was roughly similar to last year’s tax season.
The blue dots represent 1998 and the red dots 1999. Funds have traded
around zero for the effective rate minus the target rate, as is evident by the
cluster of dots near zero on the vertical axis showing the standard
deviation. If you look rather carefully--perhaps if you squint--you can see
that the softness of last year was not entirely repeated. The shorthand way
to see that is to note that there are slightly more red dots than blue dots to
the right of the zero, i.e. on the firmer side. But the pattern was roughly
similar to last year’s.
Let me mention a few other issues regarding our open market
operations. We commenced the securities lending program on April 26.

5/18/99

4

Since then we have lent securities on 16 different days, and on 5 occasions
we had overbidding in the 30-year bond, beyond our lending limit of 25
percent of our holdings. There were also 3 occasions when we had more
bids than we needed in the 10-year area. There were 4 days of no
borrowing. Interestingly, on 8 days we lent bills and coupons that were
not being actively traded. I view that as a very good sign for the program
--that it really involved securities loans that were very close to maturity
and might have led to fails; so, that was very helpful. Let me be clear that
I think this program is going well. As I mentioned last time, I am likely to
want to raise the limits at some point in the future, but before doing so I
will complete a more thorough analysis of our experience with the
program, which I will share with the Committee and the Treasury.
In our outright operations since your last meeting, we added a net of
$11.74 billion to the SOMA portfolio in 16 different pass operations over
12 different days. We did a TIPS pass where we purchased $303 million
of inflation-indexed securities against bids by the dealers of $3.9 billion.
The reaction to our purchases in the TIPS market was very muted.
I would note that currency in circulation has been growing more
rapidly this year than last year, which explains in part the extent of our
outright operations through April. The currency component of M1 has
grown at an average annual monthly rate of 10.9 percent versus 6.7
percent last year. For the coming intermeeting period, we are now
forecasting a $9.9 billion growth in currency as opposed to $5.3 billion
over the same period last year.
A number of you have asked me about our preliminary thinking at the
Desk on Y2K issues. I thought it would be helpful to share with you some
thoughts on this, but I want to be clear that these are very preliminary
views. I am not committed to these ideas, but it might be helpful to take
you through them, even though I am not looking for approval or
concurrence at this time.
If you turn to the next page, I have listed some of our preliminary
thoughts on this subject. First and most importantly, I think there is an
increased likelihood that later in the year the Desk will be operating on
both sides of the market, alternately adding and draining reserves in any
given period of time. Secondly, the Special Lending Facility that the
Board addressed yesterday, if used as intended, will provide a means for
the System’s balance sheet to expand as we lend to small banks, who may
be perceived to be less well prepared than the large banks to handle any
Y2K problems. Small banks may lose deposits either through outright
withdrawals or transfers of deposits to larger banks that are perceived to
be better prepared.

5/18/99

5

Now, the large banks may not be comfortable with either holding
high levels of excess reserves or recycling deposits back to lesser credits.
This could lead to a tiering in the funds market, with the System acting as
an intermediary--providing added reserves to the small banks through the
Special Lending Facility and perhaps needing to drain reserves from the
large banks. Thus, the System’s balance sheet may expand through the
use of the Special Lending Facility as well as through our outright and
longer-term repo operations. We are likely to need to fine-tune more
frequently, alternating the use of repos and matched sale transactions.
Perhaps the simplest way to put this is just that we may have greater
uncertainty; and in a period of greater uncertainty, the Desk is likely to
need to be on both sides of the market.
A separate and much narrower issue is that as we approach the yearend, if there appears to be a developing scarcity of collateral, as some fear,
we may be inclined to oversupply reserves intentionally early on with term
repos. Then we can fine-tune total reserves over the turn of the year
through matched sale draining operations, where we provide the collateral;
thus we would not be dependent on the securities markets to come forward
with the collateral for our operations.
Also, we are giving some consideration to the need for late-day
operations. We are still thinking this through, but we think we might need
to conduct some operations late in the day; otherwise there might be
pressure around the time of the regular 3 p.m. close of the securities wire.
To drain reserves, we might do matched sales late in the day, though we
would have to find some means of crediting the collateral to the dealers’
accounts after what would be the normal close of the wire. To add
reserves, we are giving some consideration to the use of a third-party
custodian--really just Chase and Bank of New York who could act as
custodial agents for us--in the acceptance of certain types of collateral.
The Desk’s systems simply are not geared up to take some forms of
collateral that in fact are eligible for use in our operations.
Finally, the next page is a chart of the year-end butterfly trade for
1999/2000, the red line, and for the previous three year-end periods. The
difference between the yields on the 3-month December Eurodollar
contract against the average of the two surrounding contracts is an
expression of year-end funding anxiety. You can see the rather
extraordinary levels to which that differential rose over this past year-end
and early this year. It has come off quite a bit since then. While it was
trading at the higher levels, we gave some consideration to the question of
how we might respond, if you wished us to, to anticipated year-end
pressures in the funding market. The only tool that we have in our arsenal
now would be a forward RP--to inject reserves by doing forward RPs that
the dealers might execute with us. I have to say that gives me some pause

5/18/99

6

in terms of putting on our books operations that may not be necessary. It
seems to me to be a less-than-optimal approach. Conceptually, a tidier
tool would be the use of options: We would sell options on both repo and
matched sale transactions at strike prices out from the Committee’s target
and allow the dealers to bid for those as a way of getting assurance that
year-end financing would be available. I want to repeat that this is really a
conceptual issue regarding how we might respond if this premium began
to rise again and the Committee were concerned about funding in the yearend market. That is really all I can say at this point on these Y2K issues
that a number of you have asked me about. I hope this gives you a sense
of our thinking on the subject.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we had no foreign operations during
the period but I will need the Committee’s ratification of our domestic
operations. I have a separate issue to bring before the Committee about
the renewal of our Mexican and Canadian swap lines. I sent a memo to
the Committee explaining that the appropriate timing for a vote on that is
now rather than later in the year. So, I will also need a vote on that issue.
I would be happy to take questions on any aspect of my report, and then,
as you wish, we could take the two votes separately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, in the event, a low probability event, of
very significant runs on smaller banks for currency withdrawals or deposit transfers, do
those banks have enough collateral to come to the discount window and liquefy the asset
side of their balance sheets to weather that drain?
MR. FISHER. I would not consider myself the System’s leading expert on the
subject. I think they have collateral. At the discount window we can take pretty much
anything they have in terms of customer notes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I know we can do that, but I am wondering what
they have.
MR. FISHER.

Well, if your question relates to what collateral we currently

have in our possession, I should note that we also take on-site collateral in some cases.
The discount officers have been working on this issue, writing letters encouraging the
banks to get their collateral in and pledge it, but we are not there yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Suppose a bank holds a note of a long-term friend
of the bank’s president, which is 10 percent of the asset side of the balance sheet. Let’s
say everything about the loan looks fine: It’s a performing loan and the bank itself is
perfectly comfortable with it; indeed, it is a terrific loan. Can we accept that?

5/18/99

7

MR. FISHER. Yes.
MR. KOHN. Yes, with a haircut. If it’s a loan, there is a haircut because it is
not marketable and is therefore hard to value. And there’s a further haircut if it is a longterm loan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now the premise changes and the good friend of
the president of the bank is in evident difficulty, not in servicing the loan but in repaying
it at the end of its term. What is the point at which we effectively throw these people into
bankruptcy?
MR. FISHER. That is the issue that I think the most thoughtful institutions in
the market are anxious about in terms of Y2K concerns: What will be good business
practice with regard to closing out counterparties? How many grace days are going to be
appropriate? Will this be a one-day hurricane and then everything will be back to
normal, or will it be something more than that? Swap agreements have three days, repo
agreements have two days; a grace period is written into the contracts. So having the
loan as collateral makes things a bit easier, but there are a huge number of instruments
out there that are on what might be considered hair triggers. It is a very awkward subject,
and not just for us. We will be part of a larger community that will be grappling with that
question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we are the only lender of last resort.
MR. FISHER. Absolutely. But if you think of banks as big as Chase or
Citibank, it’s a virtual certainty that some of their customers will have computer
problems.
MR. KOHN. I think our supervisors would be looking at the fundamental
soundness of those customers and whether the liquidity problem is a short-term or a longterm problem. I thought your question had to do with whether this particular customer
might be in a difficult long-term situation so the viability-­
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am concerned about our being in a position
where we are unprepared to make judgments on which banks we effectively will shut
down because we are not going to accept their paper at the discount window and by
definition there is no other lender of last resort.

5/18/99

8

MR. KOHN. Our supervisory people are working very closely with the other
supervisory authorities through the FFIEC to make sure that the lines of communication
are open and that thought has been given to these very points in advance of the year-end.
So it is very much on the agenda of the contingency planners. I don’t know if that
provides any comfort, but people are thinking about precisely the issue you’ve raised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Communication is fine. But suppose somebody at
the other end of the line says: “Hey, I am drowning. What are you going to do for me?”
MR. KOHN. Well, I would point out that in the middle 1980s in Chicago and
through the late 1980s and early 1990s in New England and Texas, we made huge
volumes of loans to banks that had a lot of bad assets without ever impairing our
collateral position. For most banks, if we look hard at the assets they have, I think we
can get enough collateral for comfort.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is the judgment we have to make. All
I am suggesting is that we try to make it in advance.
MR. KOHN. That is why, as Peter noted, we are urging very strongly that banks
come in ahead of time to pre-position collateral and talk to the discount officers.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, Don is correct that we are doing that. The
discount officers are urging both small banks and large banks to have their borrowing
documents up-to-date and their collateral in place ahead of time. But given the number
of people involved and the speed with which this is happening, it seems clear that many
banks are not going to have done this in advance. So there will be a lot of last minute
scurrying around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We can make a judgment as to whether we are
looking at a systemic risk, in which case we can act under certain provisions specified in
the Federal Reserve Act. But what do we do if the risk is not obviously systemic but a
very significant problem for, say, Texas or some other area where there is a multitude of
small banks?
MR. PARRY. Don, are banks executing all-asset pledges? Isn’t that a way to-MR. KOHN. I am not sure, Bob.
MR. PARRY. We have done that in the past.

5/18/99

9

MR. KOHN. We have done that with banks. The Bank of New York is a classic
example where we took the building, the furniture, virtually everything as collateral. In
this case, we have the complication of the Home Loan Banks.
MS. MINEHAN. I think we did some variant of that for smaller institutions at
the time of the New England banking crisis. We can do these things fairly fast but it is
hard to do so for multiple institutions fairly fast.
MR. PARRY. But there is a problem with the Federal Home Loan Banks.
MR. KOHN. Right. We are working on that.
MS. MINEHAN. The other issue we have been tracking on a monthly basis is
how many banks versus how many thrifts have filed their documentation and pledged
collateral. We are at close to 70 percent on the banks. The thrifts are the concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a very quick comment. My impression is that a lot of the
small institutions are not setting up lines with us because they are assuming that the
Home Loan Banks will provide the liquidity. It is not obvious to me that the Home Loan
Banks know where they are going to get their liquidity. So I would think that’s a critical
point to straighten out with the Home Loan Bank System. We need to make sure that we
somehow either backstop that system or that they tell their banks in no uncertain terms
what those lines are going to be. That will force the smaller banks to set up arrangements
with us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we backstop that system, it will be difficult to
unwind it because they are going to want to keep it in place.
MR. POOLE. I agree with that. That is why I think we might be able to get
them to be more explicit about how much they will be able to provide through their own
resources so that the banks will realize that they must backstop themselves with us. In
my conversations with small banks, there is this presumption that it is all taken care of
and that their Home Loan Bank will take care of them. I don’t think they have really
thought that through.
MS. MINEHAN. Certainly not on the cash side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.

5/18/99

10

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The Home Loan Banks put out a
statement, over the weekend I believe, which I read as saying: We will take care of all
the banks we deal with but maybe we won’t, so then you will have to go to the Fed. That
puts us in an untenable position. We have to increase the pressure as we get into the
summer because we really cannot wait until the last days of December and have some
banks that have been asleep all year wake up and decide they have a problem. I think we
have to be banging on their doors or banging on their heads, if necessary, to bring this to
their attention.
We also have an issue regarding the large banks that will be the recipients of
large flows of funds. Some of them are getting very concerned about the flows getting so
large that they could become less than well capitalized.
MS. MINEHAN. We have that worry, too.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think we have to find a way consistent
with our regulations that allows the banks to do exactly what we want them do to--that is,
to bring in the funds and recycle them even though they will blow up their balance sheets
as a result. Work is going on in the System now on how to handle that problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions on open market operations?
If not, who would like to move to ratify the domestic transactions?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection they are approved. Mr. Fisher,
you wanted to discuss our swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.
MR. FISHER. Yes, I sent the Committee a memo on May 13 about the renewal
of our swap arrangements with Mexico and Canada that were established under the North
American Framework Agreement. A reading of the fine print--indeed Mr. Truman’s
reading of the fine print--made us realize that under the terms of these swap arrangements
6 months’ notice is required to terminate them. Therefore, the appropriate time for the
Committee to decide to renew or not to renew them at year-end is now and not, as has
been our custom, in November. Given some of the Y2K issues as well as the separatist
issue still afoot in Canada, our counterparts in Mexico and Canada may be particularly
anxious about them. So it is my recommendation that the Committee vote to renew these
two agreements at this time.

5/18/99

11

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter? If not, would somebody like
to move that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?
SEVERAL. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much. Let’s
turn now to Mr. Prell.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The April Consumer Price
Index, published the day after we printed the Greenbook, obviously is
occupying center stage in the financial markets and I would guess that it’s
a pretty prominent question mark for many of you today. But, before
getting into the nuts and bolts of that report and our interpretation, I’d like
to say a few words about the broader aggregate demand and supply
setting.
First, on the demand side, the picture is still one of strength overall.
We think, however, that the first-quarter increase in real domestic final
purchases of 7 percent greatly overstates the underlying trends. A variety
of transitory factors combined to boost outlays: the dip in interest rates last
fall, since reversed; the stepped-up incentives for auto-buyers, as GM
drove to restore its market share; the abnormally mild winter weather; and
so on. Given those considerations, it’s quite reasonable to anticipate a
noticeable slackening of expenditure growth this quarter.
And the latest retail sales figures support that assessment--although
we didn’t realize it fully when we finished our forecast last Thursday. The
surprisingly large increase in goods prices in Friday’s CPI report implied
that the softening in real spending was even more marked last month than
we had thought on the basis of the nominal retail sales data. If we’re right,
real PCE growth in the current quarter will be somewhere in the
neighborhood of 4 percent, at an annual rate--scarcely a weak number, but
one that would be at the low end of the range of recent quarters.
Another area of deceleration in our forecast for the second quarter is
residential investment. Our thesis has been that, although the demand for
homes probably hasn’t fallen off much, builders would find it difficult-­
perhaps practically impossible--to maintain the seasonally adjusted level
of starts they recorded during the late fall and winter months. This
morning’s report is consistent with that notion. Actually, single-family
starts fell more than we anticipated, 11 percent; but, as we thought last
month, the single-family permits figures may be telling a more accurate
story, having fallen about 4½ percent in March and another 3 percent in
April.

5/18/99

12

The final major element of deceleration in spending this quarter is
state and local purchases--especially outlays for construction. In this case,
we still have no useful data beyond March, but it just doesn’t seem
plausible to extrapolate the surge that we saw this winter. Unusually
favorable weather almost certainly helped move building ahead of
schedule, and some reversion to trend is to be expected in the near term.
This is not to deny that the underlying trend in public construction could
be relatively steep at this time. Among other things, the transportation bill
passed last year is helping to spur activity, and states and localities have
been experiencing a bit of a wealth effect themselves, as their revenues
reflect, directly or indirectly, the capital gains taxpayers have been
enjoying.
The wealth effect remains central to our projection of domestic
demand and economic activity through next year. To be sure, we believe
that waning accelerator effects should be a moderating force with respect
to houses, consumer durables, and business capital goods--and, as we
noted in the Greenbook, one can discern some hints of this already in
various categories of expenditure. But, if the stock market continues to
soar, consumers’ perceptions of their permanent income will rise and so
too will businesses’ perceptions of their sales prospects; target levels of
household and business investment goods will move still higher. So, the
fact that we’ve anticipated that the market will peak soon is crucial to our
prediction that GDP growth will moderate over the coming year.
As it is, the run-up in stock prices last month prompted us to raise our
forecast of demand growth during the next several quarters. However, this
has shown through to output rather than to prices because of the more
favorable supply-side environment we are now projecting. Perhaps most
notably, we’ve raised our sights on the prospects for gains in labor
productivity, and that has permitted us to raise projected output without
commensurate increases in pressures on labor markets.
Our reassessment of the productivity outlook is yet one more in a
sequence of adjustments we’ve made on the basis of incoming data over
the past few years. We’d prefer to rely on deep analytical insights, but the
fact is that the behavior of productivity is not well understood, let alone
readily predictable; if it were otherwise, economists wouldn’t still be
scratching their heads over the post-1973 deterioration in the trend of
economic growth. Consequently, we’ve had to feel our way on this.
In our view, the pickup in output per hour over the past year or so has
been greater than is likely attributable simply to the rapid growth of
output--the so-called “cyclical” influence. Firms do seem to be achieving
substantial structural gains in efficiency through technological

5/18/99

13

innovations, investments in more and better equipment, improved
information management, and reorganization of production and
distribution processes. Given the continuing high level of investment and
what we hear from business people about their efforts to improve
productivity, there doesn’t appear to be any reason to anticipate that these
gains will fall off markedly in the near term--apart from some tendency for
reductions in worker hours to lag those in output as the rate of GDP
expansion slows. And even that cyclical element might be weaker than in
the past, given the heavier use of contingent workers and the pressures on
executives to deliver strong earnings quarter after quarter--except, I
suppose, in the dot-com sector. So, putting this all together, we’ve added
several tenths to the rate of increase in output per hour through the year
2000.
Obviously, the outlook for productivity is a consideration in the nearterm prospects for inflation. Among other things, the recent surge in
productivity has helped boost profit margins and thereby given firms more
room to compete for market share without forgoing acceptable rates of
return on equity. Moreover, the compensation part of the unit labor cost
ratio is also looking more favorable. Even taking the first-quarter ECI
with a large grain of salt, we now have some evidence that, perhaps in part
because of a lagged response to the lower price increases of the past
couple of years, nominal pay gains are not moving up--despite a tight
labor market. These considerations encouraged us to take a smidgen off
our core inflation forecast--as did the surprisingly low price numbers
through March. But, especially with oil prices and other “special factors”
already, or expected soon to be, taking a turn for the worse, we’ve
maintained our view that an unemployment rate in the low 4s will in time
prove incompatible with stable or declining inflation. The question is
whether the four-tenths leap in the April core CPI is telling us that the day
of reckoning actually has arrived.
We’re inclined to be fairly sanguine on this score at this point. In
part, this is simply because what we hear from businesses doesn’t suggest
that there’s been anything approaching a sea change in the pricing
environment. But on the statistical side, while it’s almost always possible
to slice and dice these data to find some residual that fits your priors, we
think there are elements in the April CPI report that provide at least some
grounds for skepticism that the burst in the core index is truly a sign that
the trend of inflation has now turned upward. For example, the sizable
increase in apparel prices merely reversed surprisingly large declines in
the first quarter; we expected an offsetting firming of prices somewhere
along the line, and we may simply have missed the timing. And the
rebound in tobacco prices after some discounting in March probably is
telling us little about fundamental macro imbalances in the economy.
Incidentally, it’s perhaps worth noting that, setting aside tobacco prices,

5/18/99

14

which have risen 33 percent since last April, the twelve-month change in
the core CPI is the same as it was a year ago, even after we add back in the
effects of the technical changes in the index.
All that said, though, we didn’t anticipate the outsized April increase
and we wouldn’t feel comfortable ignoring it. If we were redoing our
projections now, we’d tack a tenth or two onto our inflation projections for
1999 and 2000. This would not really alter the basic conclusion that we,
and now many bond market commentators, have reached: that the best
news on inflation is behind us and that prices will most likely tend to
accelerate over time unless domestic demand softens considerably or we
experience additional fortuitous external shocks.
Given that we cannot divine those shocks, we’ve pointed to the likely
need for some monetary policy tightening aimed at reining in aggregate
demand. The fixed-income markets have been firming on their own in
recent weeks--especially in the case of Treasury securities. But it isn’t
clear that this is wholly a real tightening, as opposed to an escalation of
inflation premiums. Moreover, many lower quality corporate bond issuers
have seen rates fall and their market access improve of late, and the stock
market has weathered the negative news of recent days in remarkably
good fashion. Barring further adverse news, we can easily see stock and
bond prices turning back up in the coming weeks. Thus, we don’t believe
that the markets alone can be relied upon to do the work of curbing the
financial support for unsustainable levels of aggregate demand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, in line with the notion you raised about the
inability of maintaining the seasonally adjusted level of housing starts as we move into
the period where the seasonals start to rise, I do recall that the unadjusted April starts
figures were down. Were the permits down unadjusted?
MR. PRELL. I don’t have any additional detail beyond the knowledge that total
starts were down something under 3 percent in April.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unadjusted starts?
MR. PRELL. Yes. But, given that the level of starts looks low relative to
permits at this point, I suspect that in reality we probably did not have an unadjusted
decline in permits. That is a rough judgment at this point and I don’t have the additional
data to refine that immediately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You don’t recall whether the permits, unadjusted,
were down?
MR. PRELL. I don’t have that information.

5/18/99

15

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do have that?
MR. PRELL. Yes, we do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, it is not crucial. Does anyone remember
whether or not the seasonal for May goes up over the April seasonal?
MR. PRELL. I think the seasonals do continue to move in that direction to some
degree. I have those numbers with me, so let me check. Well, actually, the seasonal
factor in May is about the same as in April and then June is the low point for the seasonal
factor. It is just a little lower. We have had the major swing in the seasonal factors in the
last two months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Really from February to April is the big surge?
MR. PRELL. It’s basically February to April. The surge starts in February, but
from January to April is the story.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Mike? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mike, I want to ask you about your statements regarding
productivity. That, of course, is something in which we are all very interested. I thought
I heard you say in your comments that because of structural improvements and
efficiencies you have added several tenths onto your productivity forecast for 1999 and
2000. Part 1 of the Greenbook on page 13 has a reference to an increase of ½ percentage
point in your forecast of labor productivity gains. One question is: Are we talking about
the same number here? My second question relates to your comment that you didn’t
think there was any reason to expect this to fall off in the near term. The question is:
What is your sense as to what is going to happen beyond 2000 on these structural
improvements?
MR. PRELL. On the first question, part of the increase in the productivity
growth that we have in our forecast reflects the stronger demand trends and the cyclical
component. I would say that a little more than half, roughly, of the increase in
productivity growth going forward is attributable to the more positive view we have of
the structural improvements in productivity. The second question is obviously very
important if one is in the business of making 10-year budget forecasts or 75-year social
security forecasts. It is not a totally uninteresting question for us, either, even with our
shorter time frame, in part because one would want to have a sense of what expectations

5/18/99

16

might be and what would be built into peoples’ permanent income views. If people felt
that we were just experiencing a brief period of prosperity with these huge productivity
gains, they might behave differently than if they viewed this as a new era, as it were, that
will last decades. I think in a sense the stock market is probably behaving as if it is a new
era. That is the way one can best understand the longer-term profit forecasts and so on.
So, while we prefer to be noncommittal, it appears that what is going on in the economy
may be more reflective of an extrapolation of the kind of performance we built into the
forecast, if not a better one. I can easily see this productivity performance not persisting.
I can also see this as being a transition phase into a sustained period of more rapid
growth. After all, we have had periods of more than decades in duration in which
productivity growth has averaged 3 percent. The numbers we are working with are in
line with the very long-term trends in the United States. So we are not looking at a
radically high productivity advance here in a broader historical context.
MR. MOSKOW. I agree that it is not radically high in an historical context; but
compared with three or four years ago when we were talking about a 0.9 percent increase
in productivity on average, it is a very significant difference.
MR. PRELL. Some of this reflects changes in measurement--the introduction of
new weighting that has altered the history by a few tenths. But, as we look at it, we also
had a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s when in particular capital was shallowing,
and the low levels of investment did not help to boost productivity in that period. In the
mid-1990s and since then, we have seen that change considerably. So there are factors
that are readily identifiable. It isn’t possible to pin down what contribution investment is
making, but the normal kinds of calculations one can do suggest that investment has been
a significant element in boosting productivity improvement in recent years. On top of
that we do seem to be getting some extra productivity increase, so-called multifactor
productivity gains. All that fits with one’s sense of what has been going on in the
business sector--that firms have been taking advantage of new technologies, have
reorganized the way they do things, and so on. It has not been just the brute force
addition of capital goods that has promoted this improvement. We are extrapolating this
out for a limited time here, given our projection period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.

5/18/99

17

MR. PARRY. Mike, I have two questions, and the first one is on productivity as
well. Estimates of the productivity trend seem to have been revised quite frequently in
the last few years. To me, this suggests greater uncertainty about the productivity
forecast. Wouldn’t you have to conclude that the uncertainties associated with our
forecast of real output and inflation must be greater given the uncertainties that are
associated with the productivity forecast?
MR. PRELL. If the locus of the uncertainty is productivity, I’m not sure that we
are more uncertain about it now than we were three years ago or six years ago. I think
there has always been a considerable band of uncertainty around the prospects for
productivity. We were puzzled by why productivity gains were so low for many years. I
guess I don’t feel any more uncomfortable on that score. The only way I feel
uncomfortable is that, in a sense, we are moving a bit beyond the pack. But I think others
are moving up their assessments of productivity trends, too, as they overcome the basic
scientific skepticism reflected in the often heard statement that this recent experience
isn’t yet a statistically significant deviation from the previous trends.
MR. PARRY. The second question relates to the fact that the Y2K effect in the
Greenbook forecast appears quite large. Compared with the consensus of Blue Chip
forecasters, for example, it is considerably larger. Do you want to comment a little on
what your thought process was?
MR. PRELL. This is an area where many forecasters have been reluctant to take
a position, and thus it probably hasn’t shown up in their forecasts. I know that the
National Association of Business Economists just completed a poll of their members, and
they indicated that they expected about a ¼ percent addition to third-quarter GDP growth
and a ½ percent addition in the fourth quarter. But there is still some reluctance, given
the lack of hard information, to go out on a limb and write down a number that will stick
out in any way. Now, I might note that the latest forecast by Goldman Sachs, which I
just received yesterday, looked somewhat like our forecast. They have a considerable
increase in inventory investment in the fourth quarter, driving GDP growth up to about 4
percent and then a drop-back in inventory investment in the first quarter, though not to a
very low level, which gets their first-quarter GDP down to around zero. I know from
having talked with their economists that their security analysts are hearing reports from

5/18/99

18

various companies that firms are planning to do some precautionary stock building. It is
not across the board, but they are hearing this and I think gradually economists are
probably building something into their forecasts. But this is an area of enormous
uncertainty. It is very difficult to quantify. What we have in our forecast is a very small
increase in the number of days’ supply; in fact, it isn’t even a day’s supply. So there is a
lot of room to maneuver here if people begin to get worried. In some sense this is just
flagging the fact that something may happen. There probably is going to be some
turbulence in the data. I am afraid we are going to have a hard time sorting out the
underlying trends late this year and early next year.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a question about the outlook for investment, which is
driven importantly, as it should be, by acceleration considerations. My sense is that
investment has been very strong both because of the labor market tightness and the need
to substitute capital for labor and because of the attractiveness of new technologies
designed to improve productivity. When you look at capacity utilization, do you have a
sense of how much of the reported capacity is really genuine capacity, given the newer
technologies that are coming in? I remember what happened in the early 1980s, for
example, when the steel industry was being hit hard. There was a lot of steel capacity on
the books that, in fact, was never put back to work even though the economy revived. I
would guess that we might have something similar going on now with the rapid growth
of these new technologies that are simply making some of the old capacity on the books
no longer relevant for capacity utilization considerations. Do you have a sense of that?
MR. PRELL. I would say that we have some reasonable anchors for our
assessment of capacity utilization. The series is periodically benchmarked to Census data
in which companies report what they perceive to be their level of capacity utilization
based on a given definition. That definition has been uniform over time, so we think we
have a consistent time series. The National Association of Purchasing Managers semiannually asks its members to report on what they believe their capacity utilization to be.
It usually isn’t exactly our number. But the two series track together over time, and the

5/18/99

19

readings through the end of last year still looked reasonably aligned. We should get
another reading in a few weeks in the midyear survey of the purchasing managers.
Finally, if one looks at vendor performance, which historically has been pretty
well correlated with capacity utilization, we don’t see anything to suggest that we are far
off the mark. One additional point is that there is nothing in the behavior of producer
prices that is signaling that the capacity utilization numbers are leading us astray. Now,
one might wonder--given a world in which many goods are available overseas and have
relatively low transportation costs and where plants may have the flexibility to adjust
their production on a tighter schedule and so on--whether the supply curve has precisely
the same slope in the short run that it used to have. That is an interesting analytical
question, which we need to continue to explore. But in terms of the reading on capacity
use at this point, I don’t think we are any further off now than we have been in the past in
judging that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I remember that steel issue. My recollection is
that a lot of plant managers knew at the time that they had open hearth furnaces and
rolling facilities which were clearly of an earlier age. It would be interesting to know
whether in the Census Bureau data, as distinct from the American Iron and Steel Institute
data, the plant managers were reporting that as true capacity under the Census definition,
which has a cost element in it as I recall. That is, the question is not sheer physical
facilities but what can be brought into production at a reasonable marginal cost. I would
doubt very much that those steel facilities would have met that definition back then. I
guess we would have to argue at this particular stage that individual managers who are
reporting to the Bureau of the Census are aware of whether what they have is obsolescent
or not. They can be wrong, but it is their judgment, and I don’t know how we could do
better than that.
MR. POOLE. There is a strong tendency on these forms for people to put in
about the same number they did last year, as we all know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure. But I think the point that Mike is making is
that we don’t project capacity independently. What is projected is the operating rate. We
get capacity by division, and that is essentially-MR. PRELL. That is true of the estimation of capacity utilization up to a point.

5/18/99

20

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then you smooth it out.
MR. PRELL. Then we look at investments and so on to judge what capacity
growth would be going forward. I think the question they are asked to answer is what is
their capacity utilization rate given a normal operation of their plants, not allowing for
additions of extra shifts and those sorts of things. It is a question that is consistent over
time. So whatever it is measuring, it is measuring it on a reasonably stable basis. Given
all the other pieces of information, I don’t see anything that seems particularly odd.
MR. POOLE. The point is that it may be consistent over time, but you don’t
want it to be consistent over time if the underlying pace of technology has suddenly
changed dramatically. A whole lot of new technology is coming in. That’s not unlike the
change in the exchange rate in the early 1980s, which permanently put under water a
whole lot of U.S. manufacturing capacity.
MR. PRELL. They are not reporting that they have the same capacity as before
nor that they are using the same amounts as before, but the question they are responding
to is consistent. So, conceptually what they are trying to measure is consistent over time.
As I said, I just don’t see anything that looks particularly odd in the variables that we
would expect to respond to capacity utilization.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have two measures--the ones I assume you are
talking about--which are the lead times on the deliveries of materials and the number of
items in short supply. The lead times are stretching out some, especially in steel with the
prospect of a steel strike. The number of items in short supply, which are reported on a
reasonably consistent basis by the purchasing managers, has been zero for a long period
of time. So the symptoms of capacity restraint are not there and what we see is not
inconsistent with the 80 percent or so capacity utilization rate that we show for industrial
production in manufacturing.
MR. PRELL. The other point to raise is one that the Chairman reiterated in a
speech recently. And that is, if you see incipient labor cost pressures, how readily can
you adjust the productive capacity of your plant? How quickly can you purchase and
install capital goods? That is another element that one would have to think about in terms
of the dynamics going forward.

5/18/99

21

I might just respond to the Chairman’s earlier question on permits. My colleague
handed me the press release, which I didn’t have with me earlier. The permits for singlefamily homes in April were the same as they were in March; the drop was in multifamily
permits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unadjusted?
MR. PRELL. Yes, unadjusted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I have a couple of questions about some issues that have been
talked about already. First, on the Y2K effect, you have GDP growth moving from
somewhere in the high 2 percent to the middle 3 percent area through 1999 down
effectively to zero in the first quarter of 2000. That seems to be driven both by the
change in business inventories and the change in consumer expenditures on nondurables,
which in some sense is a double whammy. I am sure it is extremely well thought out
[laughter] but it just seems-MR. PRELL. Need I say more? [Laughter] I wish I could! We are flying blind
again. Maybe we are overly influenced by our experience with snowstorms in
Washington D.C. when everybody runs out and buys milk and toilet paper and cleans off
the shelves of the grocery stores. I think we should expect, even if we don’t get all kinds
of dramatic Y2K programs on television and scary stories on talk radio, that people are
going to be concerned. Polls suggest that if people are prompted to think about the Y2K
issue, they say: “Yes, we will take some precautions.” So the notion is that people will
buy some extra food and those who are dependent on prescription drugs will try to refill
their prescriptions early so they don’t have to worry about computer glitches creating a
problem in early 2000. There are various things I think people will want to buy, figuring
that they will just use them up in January if they don’t need them over the year-end
period. We also hear stories about people planning to buy guns and ammunition,
dehydrated food, electrical generators, and wood burning stoves. These things are
happening. The question is whether they are economically meaningful. But some little
movement at the end of the year seems inevitable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you recommend that we move our February
FOMC meeting back to December? [Laughter]

5/18/99

22

MR. PRELL. From what I understand about the thorough preparations that
people are making at the Federal Reserve Board, I suspect we would be able to meet here
even on January 2nd if we wanted to.
MS. MINEHAN. I was just wondering whether people will be building up an
inventory at home of some of the same things that businesses will be building and how
much double counting there might be.
MR. PRELL. We have allowed for that on a very limited scale in both cases.
MS. MINEHAN. The other thing I wanted to ask you about is the distinction
you draw between the productivity that is driven by additional demand and that which
reflects some underlying trend increases. I am wondering how it is that we can be at all
sure about that. I know from our own business advisory councils that in many different
industries people are beginning to say they are in a sense hanging on by their fingernails.
They don’t want to add people; they don’t want to add to costs; they are driving their own
production facilities as fast and as hard as they can. In our own Bank the volumes in our
check-clearing operations recently are double our normal volumes for a variety of
reasons. And I have heard stories from employees at breakfast about staff running pellmell to the elevators with cartloads full of checks to try to make the courier times because
processing has been so much heavier than usual. I don’t think this has anything to do
with the economy; it has to do with banking reorganization in our District. Our own
productivity undoubtedly looks really great right now, but we would not be able to
continue to move this volume of checks out the door for very long. Reconcilement issues
and other kinds of issues would come back to bite us if we did that for very long. I am
just wondering how you tell the difference.
MR. PRELL. It is obviously very difficult and it is a judgment call. But I think
the kind of situation you are describing, though complicated, is one reason to anticipate
that at least some companies will hire additional workers. You say companies are
working beyond sustainable levels of labor utilization, but you also say they are
absolutely determined not to add workers. In other cases, I think people are working very
hard, and firms would like to add workers but are finding it difficult to do so in a very
tight labor market. For the latter group, we would anticipate that, even if business begins

5/18/99

23

to flatten out, some of these firms will follow through on their hiring plans to reach a
more comfortable position.
MS. MINEHAN. And they would be entry workers.
MR. PRELL. And that would be a source of a cyclical weakening in
productivity. On the other hand, there is still obviously a very strong culture of cost
control--that may be your first group--and managers will do absolutely anything they can
do to keep their labor force to an absolute minimum. And where they use temps and
other contingent workers, those people will probably find their hours or employment
reduced fairly rapidly. So I think there is a balance in this prospect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is a distinction here on which we
cannot put a number, but we can get a judgment. The point I was making at Mike
Moskow’s conference earlier this month, and I may have mentioned it at our last FOMC
meeting as well, strikes me increasingly as the really crucial element in making that
differentiation. A number of years ago--maybe 5, 8, or 10 years ago--those of us who
were working as business consultants of some kind or another spent a very considerable
amount of time addressing the fact that all key business decisions were made with a
probability distribution around them. And in order to protect either the level of
production that the firm needed or the value of the franchise, a company had to introduce
layers of safety stock inventory on the one hand and redundancies of people on the other.
And as information technology gradually reduced the variance of error in the decisionmaking processes--in a sense knowledge became more and more crucial--the need to
have all of these redundancies gradually dissipated. When they are stripped out of the
system, they are permanent structural productivity changes; output per hour is
permanently changed. The type of productivity you are discussing is not in a sense real
productivity. Well, I guess you could call that productivity, but it certainly is not trend
productivity. It is, I would say, a cyclical dynamic. And that is the reason why we try to
cyclically adjust the productivity data; we try to get a rate of change with that cyclical
factor removed. And the truth of the matter is that I don’t see how we will know which is
which until after the fact.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.

5/18/99

24

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike? If not, would
somebody like to start the go-around? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, the Fifth District economy remains robust
overall. I think I have probably started my comments at the last eight or nine FOMC
meetings with that same statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don’t know why I even ask for your report!
[Laughter]
MR. BROADDUS. Nevertheless, that is definitely the case. But, if anything,
there seems to be some evidence of a possible acceleration in activity over the last several
weeks. Manufacturing is still a very important part of the economic base in our region;
you name it; we make it in the Fifth District. And manufacturing activity clearly seems
to have bottomed out and turned up. Consumer spending is very strong. We had
expected it to be strong, but its recent strength has exceeded even those expectations.
Probably the strongest sector in the District’s economy now is construction, both
residential and commercial. We are sitting in one of the hottest markets in the region
right here in the D.C. area; that’s true in the District of Columbia as well as in the
Virginia and Maryland suburbs. There is plenty of money around to finance all of this
building, maybe too much. The only apparent constraints that we are seeing and hearing
about in construction are the shortages of skilled workers and certain materials.
Elsewhere, both commercial and consumer credit are readily available. So far
we do not have any significant evidence of a decline in credit quality. But we are hearing
from experienced bankers, anecdotally at least, that the competition for loans is very,
very strong--probably excessive--which may be laying the foundation for problems down
the road.
On the price and wage side, retail price increases in the region have been
accelerating lately, slowly but steadily according to the service sector survey we do
monthly. At our last board meeting the Chairman of Reynolds Metals, who has been
complaining about weak metals and other commodity prices for at least a year and a half,
told us that prices of a broad range of items--not only metals but other commodities he
deals with in his business--have turned up. Finally, while there is not yet a lot of hard
evidence regarding rising wages in the District, we are hearing more and more anecdotal

5/18/99

25

comments regarding pay increases and a speeding up of wage increases here and there in
different industries.
At the national level, it seems to me that when one puts last week’s CPI and
industrial production reports in a longer-term context, they indicate that the risk in the
outlook has now moved pretty sharply to the upside. Back in November when we put in
place the last of our three policy easings, we did so because we were concerned that the
financial turmoil and the credit crunch that might come with it could push the economy
into a recession. There is no question that those easing moves did calm financial markets
at the time. But they also delivered, in my view, a very strong monetary impulse to an
economy which, even then, was arguably at risk of overheating. I think we have seen and
are seeing the results. Private domestic final purchases rose at a 7½ percent rate in the
first quarter. I agree with you, Mike, that that is probably above trend, but it’s probably
not too much above trend; I think final purchases grew 6½ percent last year. And given
the number for the first quarter of this year, the staff has increased its projection of real
GDP growth over the next two years by ½ percentage point and now sees the
unemployment rate as low as 4 percent by the end of the year.
That is the context in which we have to view this April CPI report. Obviously, I
don’t want to put too much weight on one figure, especially one that may have some
seasonal adjustment problems, as I gather this one may have. But against the background
I just reviewed it is worrisome to me because it offers the first direct evidence in some
time that inflation pressures may be building. The breadth of the increases in the core
index I found especially troubling. But even the headline figure--reflecting the jump in
oil prices--had a big impact. The oil price increase is going to get some attention if it
stimulates increased inflation expectations going forward. And sooner or later, if it
continues, it is going to show up in the core price component of the index.
Finally, the 20 basis point jump in the long bond rate to almost 6 percent, which
came on top of an increase after mid-April of about 15 basis points, makes it clear that
the markets have taken this report reasonably seriously and have not just dismissed it as
monthly noise. So for me, the bottom line is that at this point everyone is watching us.
People in the markets especially are watching to see how we are going to respond to what
may be direct evidence of rising inflation pressures.

5/18/99

26

Just one additional thought if I may, Mr. Chairman: The monetary stimulus we
injected in 1998 I think is a bit reminiscent of the stimulus we injected in 1987 in the
immediate wake of the stock market crash. With that in mind, I think it is worth
remembering that the latter was sufficient to help set off an increase in overall CPI
inflation--briefly to 6.3 percent in 1990. Oil prices were a factor then, but the core rate
also went up in that period. It is true, of course, that we have more credibility now than
we did then, but demand is stronger now than it was then. Labor markets are a lot tighter.
I know I have been crying wolf around this table for a long time and my fears have not
been realized, but we have to take each day as it comes, I guess. So, wolf! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You’ve made it impossible for anyone else to
come after you! [Laughter] Who wants to try? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I was hoping it was not going to be me! [Laughter] The
Seventh District economy continues to expand at a moderate pace. However, we are
starting to see some subtle changes. Consumer spending remains healthy and housing
activity is at high levels, but we are now seeing a few signs of moderation in these areas.
Conditions in the ag sector generally remain depressed, but results from our recent survey
of agricultural bankers suggest that there has been no further deterioration in farmland
values. Despite the continuing problems in steel and farm equipment, our manufacturing
sector is performing well and may be picking up steam. As evidence, the Purchasing
Managers’ Surveys from Chicago, Detroit, and Milwaukee indicate that expansion of
overall manufacturing activity has picked up in the past three months. Motor vehicle
producers continue to experience strong sales. April sales of light vehicles again
surprised us on the upside, and heavy-duty truck backlogs are still quite high. In fact, the
automobile industry is doing so well that profits are high, leading one senior official at a
major automaker to mention to me that he expected very difficult labor negotiations later
this year. Tensions are high and there is a strong potential for labor disruptions. One
major issue in the negotiations, of course, will be the use of outsourcing.
More generally, our labor markets remain tight, and the puzzle of slowing
compensation growth is even more pronounced in the Midwest than in the national
numbers. Our business contacts are starting to report less customer resistance to price

5/18/99

27

increases than was apparent a year or two ago. This is not a sea change, as Mike Prell
discussed, but we are hearing more anecdotes, and I thought I would mention a few.
One of our former directors with a large trucking operation noted that his firm
was negotiating contracts with higher prices for the first time in many years. A major
printing firm reported that advertising rates are increasing. A national specialty retailer
mentioned to me that wholesale prices for furniture were up sharply; he added that costs
for building new stores, including land, had risen 50 percent over the last three years.
Last time I noted that the prices paid component from the Chicago Purchasing Managers’
Survey moved above 50 percent in March for the first time since April 1998. That
component moved even higher this April, from 52.5 to 56.7 percent. And purchasing
managers from Detroit and Milwaukee also reported that prices paid moved above 50
percent in both of those months. The Milwaukee report provides evidence that energy
was not the only culprit, as 11 of the 21 commodity prices surveyed were above 50 in
April.
This regional pricing news leaves me quite sensitive to the data contained in
Friday’s CPI report. As Al Broaddus mentioned, of course, we should not make too
much of a single month’s data, though the increases appear to be broadly based. In fact,
my biggest concern remains not inflation this year, but rather the acceleration in core
inflation expected next year, perhaps from a higher level than we forecasted before. In
addition, incoming data have remained strong since our last meeting when we raised our
forecast of real GDP growth for both this year and next; if productivity growth remains as
rapid as it has been for the past few quarters, then this projected real growth would be
sustainable. But if, as my somewhat pessimistic staff keeps telling me, trend productivity
growth has not picked up as much as the Greenbook asserts, we could face a substantial
increase in inflation by the end of next year. Thus, I think the risks have become tilted
decidedly to the upside, and I think the time has come to reevaluate our policy stance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic growth in the Twelfth District has
shown some signs of moderation, but it is still rapid. In Nevada and Arizona, the pace of
job growth has slowed somewhat from last year’s very fast pace, but these states still rank
first and third in terms of employment growth over the past twelve months. In the Pacific

5/18/99

28

Northwest, employment growth picked up in Oregon but cutbacks in aerospace
manufacturing jobs held down such growth in the state of Washington. California’s
relatively rapid pace of job growth also moderated a bit in recent months as a contraction
of the state’s manufacturing payrolls partly offset employment gains in other sectors.
Overall, California employment has grown at roughly a 2 percent rate so far this year,
which is down about 1 percentage point from last year’s pace. Even so, California’s
unemployment rate of 5.6 percent is down significantly since the end of last year.
Turning to the national scene, obviously the data have revealed a stronger- thanexpected economy once again, causing us to revise our real GDP forecast upward. The
contour of the forecast has not changed very much, however. We still expect the
economy to slow, only now the phrase “slowing economy” means a growth rate of about
3¼ percent for the remaining quarters of the year. The GDP price index is projected to
grow at a rate of about 1 to 1½ percent over the same period. However, recent forecast
errors suggest that there is considerable uncertainty associated with this outlook. We are
all well aware that real output has consistently grown faster than predicted in recent
years. And if we had somehow known how fast the economy would grow over this
period, we would have overpredicted inflation even more than we actually did. It seems
clear that we are experiencing a positive supply shock but one whose magnitude and
duration are hard to determine. The existence of a supply shock makes it hard to judge
inflationary risk by looking at real output growth, since such shocks tend to change the
output/inflation mix in the economy.
A reasonable response to this uncertainty is to follow a strategy that is fairly
robust in the face of such shocks. One such strategy would be to pay more attention to
the growth in nominal GDP or spending. As supply shocks change output and inflation
growth in opposite directions, they will obviously have a smaller impact on nominal
GDP. Keeping an eye on spending would allow us to keep inflation within reasonable
bounds, even if we are unsure about the economy’s potential growth rate. Using nominal
GDP in this way--that is, as an indicator--is similar to the way that we actually employed
the monetary aggregates before velocity shifts made them hard to interpret. The data
show that nominal GDP growth has averaged close to 5½ percent over the previous three
years. This suggests to me that, despite the uncertainties associated with the supply

5/18/99

29

shock, the policy choices made during this period have been appropriate. By allowing
growth to come in higher and prices lower than anticipated, we have in effect been
stabilizing nominal GDP to some degree. In this light, however, the recent acceleration
in nominal GDP in the past two quarters causes me some concern. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. Discussions with directors and advisory council
members since our March 30 meeting have gone in the direction of reconfirming that the
regional economy is very strong. Even the communities that are most influenced by
steel, which had been registering some concern earlier, have reported that business
conditions never got as bad as they had feared and that they have started to show some
improvement. Wheeling Steel, for instance, is already recalling workers. Structural steel
orders are still strong and it was suggested that some “strike hedge” stockpiling may be
going on at the present time, with the backlog building.
Because of worldwide overcapacity, steel industry people expect to see
significant consolidation in the steel industry. In particular, they expect Western
European companies to be acquiring U.S. producers. In the first quarter, an overall
decline in steel imports had been expected, based on the view that less Japanese steel
would be coming in. And there was a decline in Japanese steel and Russian steel.
However, that was more than offset by an increase in Korean and Brazilian steel. So,
steel imports in the first quarter were up 4½ percent versus a year earlier.
In motor vehicles, production is reported to be flat out at the plants around the
District, with some of the larger plants, at General Motors in particular, operating 7 days
a week. And the workers are getting tired of it. One of the truck body manufacturers
responded to a shortage of welders by starting to offer courses in the high school, where
he pays his employees to go and teach welding shop.
We have an interesting situation with Honda. They have a number of plants in
Ohio and they have in the past been considered a model of labor/management relations in
the non-unionized sector. The UAW attempted to organize them twice, in 1985 and
1989. Early this year, a petition from workers asked the UAW to try again. The UAW
declined, based on a low expectation of being successful, so the workers went to the
Teamsters. The Teamsters went to the UAW and the UAW said the attempt would not

5/18/99

30

work and they were not interested in trying again, so the Teamsters decided to try. Out of
8,000 workers at the various plants, they have already collected 3,800 cards--they have
not certified them all and they need to have about 2,400 certified--which got the UAW’s
attention very quickly. The UAW has petitioned for a hearing, which is being held today,
to decide whether or not the Teamsters do in fact have jurisdiction or whether they will
have to turn the organizing effort over to the UAW. A contact in the Teamsters local in
Columbus said that they had not expected the organizing drive to be successful the first
time around. They were caught completely off guard by the response of the workers. So,
that is one we plan to monitor closely. Union communications workers just settled with a
company in Cincinnati; the contract is for three years and the package is 6 percent per
year for the three-year period.
In construction, the situation has been described as a surge of new business, even
though there continue to be shortages of workers with various crafts and skills. Some
said those shortages are worse than before. The Ohio building trades now expect to have
at least two more years of high levels of construction activity. On the residential side,
builders say the problem with starts activity is that they are so far behind schedule on
existing projects that they are seeing more delays, longer times to complete projects when
they do start new ones, and thus they are reluctant to extend the pipeline any further.
People from Pittsburgh say that the city is in the early stages of a major construction
boom that will last five years; and that includes the building of stadiums, convention
centers, theaters, bank operation centers, downtown retail space, tunnels, and bridges.
Earlier, people from western Pennsylvania had been saying that they were lagging
considerably behind Ohio and Kentucky but now they claim that they have closed the
gap. They have experienced very rapid growth and have labor shortages in an increasing
number of communities. A contact from one of the community banks in southwest
Pennsylvania said that a significant employer for their community decided to go out of
business and laid off 200 workers. So the bank joined with some others to co-sponsor a
job fair for the displaced employees. But they had to cancel the job fair because the
workers had all found jobs before the fair took place.
A food processing company in Ohio reported continued strong sales at both what
they call the in-store retail and their 800 Internet services or catalog sales. They are very

5/18/99

31

happy about that. But they are not happy on the cost side: Freezer storage rates in the
first quarter were up 13 to 18 percent from a year earlier; health care costs in 1999 are
now budgeted to be up 14 percent from a year earlier; and prices of corrugated packing
material in the first three months of the year were 15 percent above year-earlier levels.
Other manufacturing reports included tool and die companies who say they have now
fully recovered from the earlier loss of business to Asian imports. A manufacturer of
safety equipment for mining and manufacturing companies reports that in addition to
continued strong U.S. orders, they have recently seen some pickup in orders from both
Asia and Europe.
Bankers in the region report strong loan demand in every category. We asked
our Community Bank Advisory Council why we no longer hear the stories we were
hearing a couple of years ago about people walking in and turning over the keys to their
vehicle because they could not afford to pay for the car, the truck, or whatever it was.
And the bankers did not really have a coherent response. They said these stories have
stopped totally. Some guess that it has to do with wealth effects from the stock market,
the equity taken out from refinancing homes, and debt consolidations. They mention
various reasons why they conjecture that those “stretched” consumers no longer exist.
But no one had any stories to tell.
In agriculture, conditions in our area sound a little better than in Mike Moskow’s
District. Bankers and one agricultural supplier have told us that it has been a very good
planting season; all the planting has been done. They experienced falling seed, fertilizer,
and energy prices during the planting season and--assuming they get appropriate amounts
of rain--they are optimistic at this point about having a good year, the first in three years.
We still hear references to, in one person’s words, “outrageous prices” being paid for
farmland. The reports are that it is not the neighbor farmer buying the land but somebody
coming from somewhere else, and often these are cash deals. Another banker said that he
tracks what he calls the debt service per acre of farmland and it is the highest level he has
ever seen.
Let me turn to the national scene for a moment. I always have trouble using the
word “inflation,” mainly because of the way people also use words like “deflation.” So
instead I think in terms of the purchasing power of our currency and I try to give some

5/18/99

32

meaning to the expression “price stability.” What we mean by price stability is that
people make decisions in the expectation that the purchasing power of a dollar in the
future is going to be the same as it is today. When that condition is met, we get efficient
allocation of resources at the business level and the household level, and we get
maximum growth in our standards of living. We have had the experience of people
revising downward their expectations for the future about what we call inflation, though
perhaps not by as much as the decline in the reported numbers for late last year and the
early months of this year. And that was, in words that we used some time ago, a period
where we could have exercised “opportunistic disinflation policy” and locked that
progress in. We clearly missed that opportunity and did not lock it in. It’s much more
likely that people expect the purchasing power of the dollar to decline faster in the future
than has been the case in their recent experience. I think we have to anticipate that from
this point forward people are going to expect higher rather than lower inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in the Kansas City
District remains quite strong: Employment edged up again in March; retail sales remain
generally strong; and construction indicators are quite strong.
The price of construction materials has increased significantly so far this year,
both in the region and more broadly. As a side note, I will tell you that about 10,000
homes and businesses were destroyed or severely damaged by the recent tornadoes in
Oklahoma and Kansas. While the short-term effect is obviously devastating, that does
imply some additional building boom coming our way. That will be a factor in our
District. More specifically, though, one of our directors who is in the construction
industry has seen sizable price increases on materials in that industry since the beginning
of the year. Prices of rock, gravel, and aggregates are up 10 percent, lumber 6 percent,
concrete 4½ percent, and sheet rock, of course, is up about 50 percent.
While manufacturing activity has been a little sluggish in the District up until
recently, it is picking up. Some of our manufacturers are seeing an increase in demand
from Asia, and that includes China, despite some of the other developments in that
region. Also, at least from our directors’ point of view, some of the recovery in
aluminum prices reflects increased demand in Asia. Energy activity within the District

5/18/99

33

has steadied in the sense of not declining any longer; firms in that industry are waiting to
see to what extent these energy price increases will stick before making their own plans
for future activity.
Wage pressures appear to be increasing in the District, at least somewhat. Our
unemployment rate is about 3.4 percent and we have a very high participation rate, so we
have very strong pressure on our labor markets. In fact, in the construction industry,
which is obviously under the most pressure, and in the crafts industries such as carpentry
and plumbing, contracts for wage increases of 5½ percent per year for the next three
years have recently been signed in our area.
Retail prices have edged up, as someone else mentioned. And I would echo
the point, based on talking with business people in our region, that there is a hint of a
different attitude toward price increases. There is a sense of challenging the status quo
and seeing if perhaps price increases will stick this time, with more of an expectation that
they will. Whether that will occur will only be known in time, I realize.
The farm economy remains fundamentally weak. Supplies are large and
export demand has not picked up that we can see. Despite this, farm finances remain
strong, and there is a lot of anticipation about what will come out of Congress this year
on that issue. Our land values have remained resilient despite these kinds of pressures,
although our last survey indicated about a 1 percent decline in land prices in the
aggregate.
Turning to the national economy, I see another year of strong economic
activity. While growth in GDP may moderate, I think it is going to moderate to a rate
well above its longer-term trend and remain significantly stronger than the FOMC central
tendency forecasts from our February Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. I must say that I am
struck by the strength of the domestic economy. Over the last four quarters private
domestic spending has grown about 6¼ percent and we are forecasting that it will grow
about 5 percent this year. If one put trend productivity at a very optimistic 4 percent-­
higher than I think one might expect--and added on 1 percent for labor force growth, that
would result in potential output of, let’s say, 5 percent. And private domestic spending at
least has been growing faster than that. Offsetting this, of course, has been the weakness
in net exports; in a sense the deterioration from the external sector has been the relief

5/18/99

34

valve. But I think some of the relief now is coming from domestic demand rather than
the weaker external or foreign demand. That is something we have to keep in mind in
terms of the pressures on global resources going forward.
In sum, what I am saying is that I see increasing upside risks to our forecast.
Look at the Greenbook forecast, for example, which shows a $450 billion deficit in net
exports by the end of next year--though I know the staff may reduce that--and still good
growth in the 3½ percent range. Should our domestic demand or foreign exports pick up,
we could have even stronger growth. The point is that against this background I have
become, as I think Al Broaddus has, increasingly worried about the current stance of
policy and our ability to maintain low inflation going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Little has changed in the Eleventh District economy since our
March meeting. Overall, the economy in our region continues to show healthy growth.
Over the last six months employment growth has averaged about 3 percent, and the nearterm outlook is for more of the same. Activity in both commercial and residential
construction has been robust. In recent weeks concerns about commercial overbuilding
have become more common as the credit strains that developers faced last September and
October have eased. Just in the last month or two the residential market, particularly in
the Dallas area, has heated up. For the first time in many years used homes have been
selling the day they are listed, sometimes above the listed prices. Were it not for the
continued shortage of cement and some other building materials, building activity would
be even stronger, and perhaps we would see less upward pressure on existing home
prices. To some extent the shortages will get worse in the coming months as crews and
materials are diverted to Oklahoma to rebuild areas destroyed by tornadoes a few weeks
ago. Efforts to relieve some of the short-term capacity constraints are in the works. U.S.
Brick completed a new and entirely automated plant adjacent to its existing facility; the
$17 million plant will produce 60 million bricks a year, tripling output at the site. Fifteen
new jobs will be created, a testament to productivity increases. Texas Industries, a firm
on whose board Governor Kelley used to serve I believe, is also expanding capacity that
will make its facility the largest cement plant in the United States. That $200 million

5/18/99

35

project will increase cement capacity from 1.3 to 2.8 million tons per year by the fall of
the year 2000.
The energy industry continues to consolidate and contract in spite of the higher
oil prices in the last few months. The Texas rig count is at a 30-year low and our
projections are that Texas drilling activity and oil and gas employment may not have
bottomed out yet. The rebound in oil prices has surprised our industry contacts and they
remain skeptical that these prices will last.
The computer and telecommunications industries have rebounded slightly.
However, we are beginning to hear complaints that more and more sectors of the business
are becoming commodities with falling prices and shrinking, razor-thin margins. A few
years ago it was DRAM chips; more recently it’s pagers. Now there is talk of saturation
in the market for inexpensive computers.
The higher oil prices together with a stronger peso have boosted consumer and
business confidence in Mexico. Our border cities have been seeing very strong retail
demand from Mexican shoppers. In spite of ever-tighter labor markets, we are hearing
less and less discussion of upward pressure on wages. With capital becoming
increasingly substitutable for labor, tight labor markets are less likely to add to
inflationary pressures unless the cost of capital rises significantly.
The main development in the national economy was the giant mood swing in
financial markets in April. Suddenly everyone decided that the crisis countries had
bottomed out and that, given the flattening in commodity prices and the rebound in oil
prices, the best days on the inflation front were behind us. Interestingly, the bad news on
oil prices for the country has not been celebrated as particularly good news in our area.
As I said, our industry contacts didn’t expect the rebound and they question its durability.
The blockbuster, of course, was Friday’s CPI report. I will have to concede that it was
only one month’s data; however, the risks have shifted upward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the Eighth District are largely
unchanged. The only significant development is the announcement, which I think
everybody is aware of, that Boeing will be laying off about 7,000 workers from a defense

5/18/99

36

plant. But, of course, that business is going to go to some other defense plant; those
aircraft, though different models, will be built someplace else.
My contacts at FedEx and UPS reported that conditions were largely
unchanged domestically but that the volume coming out of Asia was substantially
stronger. They both made a point of emphasizing to me the pickup in Asian markets.
And both said that Latin America remained weak while Europe was solid--neither strong
nor weak, but just solid.
My FedEx contact reported that their labor situation is easing a little due to
aggressive recruiting, but the company is still short of labor. The UPS representative said
that the labor market in Louisville is the tightest the company has ever seen. One other
point about FedEx I thought was interesting: Domestic volume for shipments of autorelated parts has expanded substantially. I guess Fed Ex does a lot of last minute delivery
of auto parts coming out of Mexico and from within the United States. And that would
confirm the other evidence we have that the auto industry is operating at a fairly high
rate.
As for the national outlook, I think that depends critically on our policy, so I
am going to delay my discussion of the outlook until I fold it into the policy discussion in
the next go-around. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you. The District economy remains robust, which is not
a change in conditions. That is true virtually across the board, whether one looks at
consumer spending, tourism activity, or manufacturing activity. Construction is very
strong, both residential and commercial, and houses are selling as soon as they hit the
market. The one obvious exception is agriculture, which remains in the doldrums.
Despite the problems in that sector, I think it is worth remembering that they are not
nearly as severe as they were in the mid-1980s nor do they have the implications for the
banking system, at least at this point, that they had back then.
I had a meeting recently with a range of representatives from the financial
services industry in the Twin Cities, and generally they confirmed this very positive view
of regional conditions as well as broader conditions. There was a sense in their
conversations about the economy that is a bit different this time from past experience.

5/18/99

37

One might expect that from some of the financial people, at least those who are close to
the equity market. I think one reason they feel that way relates to the international
situation. They see the U.S. economy as being able to tap into capacity abroad, both
traditional manufacturing capacity as well as labor. They also feel, of course, that the
United States is playing a particularly critical role at the moment in the global economy.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, I believe the prospects for real
growth are favorable. I don’t think there’s much question about that. Aggregate demand
is strong and I am relatively optimistic about aggregate supply. I agree that we have a lot
of problems in measuring productivity, much less forecasting it. But I ask myself what I
think determines productivity. If one approaches the analysis in that way, there is reason
to believe that productivity is on a more durable and positive trend. And I think it is
worth bearing in mind that business people have been saying for quite some time--well
before it started to show up in the statistics--that they were getting sizable increases in
productivity.
As far as inflation is concerned, that CPI number captured lots of attention, I
think justifiably. It is worth reminding ourselves, though, that we have been anticipating
a modest acceleration of inflation. In my judgment the problem with getting too
comfortable with that observation is that that modest acceleration may depend crucially
on monetary policy assumptions. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Southeast economy continues
to operate at a very high level of utilization and that constrains us from experiencing the
kind of growth rates that we saw earlier in the expansion. Recent retail sales gains in our
area have been modest, and single-family housing activity has been up only slightly. At
the same time, office and other commercial construction has been a bit stronger since our
last FOMC meeting. Manufacturing has picked up. Our important tourism industry
continues to do well, especially along the Mississippi Gulf Coast where another huge
gambling casino has just opened. That grand opening and the associated demand for
another 5,000 casino workers have given rise to the latest tight labor market story. The
casino operators reportedly bought or leased a complete apartment complex to house

5/18/99

38

workers they are now bringing in from other less tight labor markets throughout rural
Mississippi.
Of the specific areas of regional weakness that I noted last time--namely,
energy, agriculture, and trade--problems in our energy sector have moderated slightly to
the extent that wells are no longer being capped; but we have not been experiencing
increases in production and drilling yet. There is no sign of a turnaround in the District’s
trade deficit with Latin America or with Asia for that matter, and agriculture continues to
suffer from low commodity prices.
Anecdotal information on regional price pressures is quite similar to what I
have been reporting, as have others. Labor markets are clearly tight. Business people are
complaining about finding workers. Our directors and other contacts continue to
emphasize the growing role of nontraditional compensation--bonuses, signing bonuses,
and incentive pay--with those non-base salary types of compensation being pushed
further and further down the organizational level in many firms. One director reported
that truck drivers are being paid a $5,000 signing bonus in order to get more trucks on the
road. Benefits are also being made more widely available, especially in small companies,
but at the same time some companies are restructuring some benefits, notably medical, to
control their costs.
Two final observations from our regional contacts: First, one large regional
retail chain has reportedly scheduled several van loads of spring goods from China for
delivery two months early as a hedge against possible Y2K disruptions; and secondly, to
build on Al Broaddus’s comment a few minutes ago, our bank examiners tell me that they
see some evidence of a deterioration in credit quality. From their field work they have
found that lenders are concerned about over expansion in the hotel/hospitality industry
and some relaxed credit standards and increased credit risks in the health care sector.
At the national level, like others, I have continued to enjoy observing and
talking about this good ride that we are experiencing. That’s something that someone at
the last meeting reminded us all to take the time to stop and do. Like others, my staff and
I continue to think through the arguments for why some slowing of the pace of growth
and consumer and investment spending should begin to show through. Compared with
the construct of the Greenbook, we’re inclined to attribute a bit more of the strength in

5/18/99

39

consumer spending to current income, some of which we suspect we may not be fully
capturing and measuring, and somewhat less to the wealth effect.
Although I would not argue that the fundamentals have changed significantly
since our last meeting, I find myself still, and perhaps increasingly, uneasy about the
inflation outlook. My staff, most other forecasters, most other people who have spoken
around the table this morning, and now it appears the bond markets see some gradual
deterioration in core inflation looking ahead to 2000 and 200l. The perceived recent
improvement in inflation by some measures has to be viewed in the context of the
technical adjustments that have masked some of the upward pressures.
It seems to me that there is good reason to be concerned about the inflation
outlook regardless of which economic model one subscribes to. We are already seeing
some reversal of the favorable trend in commodity prices, and some part of that very
likely will begin to feed through to prices sometime soon. Labor markets are very tight
and unemployment is below even recent estimates of the natural rate. The money supply,
as several people have already noted, has been overly expansive for the past two-and-ahalf years, and that may begin to show through in inflation pressures.
The seesaw pattern of productivity gains over recent decades, even allowing
for the sea change that may have taken place most recently, leaves me at least somewhat
cautious about counting on the extraordinary productivity gains we’ve experienced most
recently to offset most or all other upward cost pressures. Of course, the trick is to know
when to say when, as the commercial suggests. It seems to me that if we come to a
shared sense that it is time to begin at least leaning in the direction of tighter policy, we
have a window of opportunity to do that right now. The international situation is at least
somewhat less fragile than it was the last time we contemplated a tightening. The U.S.
economy is still sufficiently balanced that a tightening move is not likely to be terribly
disruptive. If we were to move today or lay the groundwork for a possible move at our
next meeting, we could get ahead of what I think we will come to see as a problematic
period later in the year, when I imagine we will give considerable weight to preparing for
Y2K uncertainties and possible volatility and will prefer policy stability. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.

5/18/99

40

MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The regional economy of the
Philadelphia District remains on an upward trend. Manufacturing is strengthening.
Retailers report growth in sales. Construction has been increasing. Business lending has
picked up. Labor markets remain tight in most areas. Apart from oil and tobacco prices,
inflation is benign and pricing power remains largely nonexistent according to most
business contacts. The outlook for the regional economy is positive.
Turning to the national economy, the strength in domestic demand continues
unabated and prospects mostly are for more of the same. There may be a moderating
trend out there, but it is elusive. Financial markets, fixed-income markets in particular,
look increasingly normal following their seizing up last summer and fall. Developments
abroad, although mixed and still worrisome in some areas, look better or at least not as
bad as feared a few months ago.
Taken together, these developments--robust domestic demand, more normal
financial markets, and less bearishness abroad--indicate to me that the balance of risks
has more of an upside tilt than at our last meeting. At the same time, inflation remains
quite benign despite recent headlines. Core CPI, absent tobacco, is very tame. The
broader measures of inflation are mostly decelerating. Compensation and productivity
are still in a virtuous cycle.
So, while risks on the demand side of the economy have shifted somewhat to
the upside since our last meeting, developments on the supply side remain largely
favorable. To me that means a somewhat heightened state of alert for policy is called for.
How that heightened state should be expressed is better discussed later in the meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. New England’s economy
remains much the same as it has been for the last several meetings. The region’s job
growth continued to be slower than the nation’s but the unemployment rate is well below
the nation’s as well. The supply of labor continues to be a concern. Jobs would grow
faster if there were people to fill them. Wages, however, still don’t reflect this lack of
supply; in fact, almost everywhere one is greeted with anecdotes about how business is
coping by offering largely non-wage incentives--training and that sort of thing--to keep
employees. Manufacturing jobs continue to decline at a faster pace in New England than

5/18/99

41

nationally. However, merchandise exports are picking up, particularly to the Asian
region. Manufacturers also report raw material cost increases and not just in oil.
Aluminum, copper, silicon, oil-based products, chemicals, paper, leather, and other such
inputs are all rising in price. Some manufacturers are now beginning to talk about trying
to increase profit margins. They are perhaps not ready to raise prices as yet, but there is
talk about price increases in the range of 3 to 5 percent.
Residential real estate markets are very active, especially in the Boston area.
Rents are rising precipitously and house prices are up. New home building, particularly
in the suburbs, is focused on very high-end homes. Commercial real estate is healthy as
well. We are beginning to see new hotel and office building construction in Boston
proper and in the surrounding areas, as well as some speculative building.
Over the course of the last several weeks we’ve had many opportunities to
discuss Y2K issues with banks and businesses, large and small, around New England. In
general, banks are confident about their own readiness and that of their large customers.
On the inventory side, by no means is there a consensus on the need to build inventories
as the year comes to an end. Rather, most comments reflect a rather balanced view, and
many see the challenge not so much in Y2K terms but in the normal inventory planning
for year-end. Cash inventories at banks seem to be a special case, however. In that
regard there is much concern about consumer panic and much encouragement for
whatever proactive statements or action the Fed can take to calm things down.
We recently held a meeting of the Bank’s Academic Advisory Council which,
as you all know, includes two or three Nobel Prize winners and people from Harvard,
MIT, Yale, and so forth. The discussion focused on issues related to productivity growth,
labor market tightness, and asset market bubbles. The group was lively, to say the least.
But some consensus was reached on the need for action that might take the wind out of
asset markets, even in the absence of tighter monetary policy, perhaps through increased
margin requirements or increased supervisory oversight on credit extended, particularly
in the day trading operations.
On the national scene, the Greenbook forecast with its higher growth, stable
and very low unemployment rates, and inflation that only creeps up in 2000, strains
credibility. Yes, we can agree that productivity has improved over the last two or three

5/18/99

42

years or so, and that for a time anyway the potential of the economy to grow without
inflation might be 3 percent or so versus the roughly 2½ percent we had thought.
However, even given that, with about the same growth we see unemployment falling to
the high 3 percent area and inflation ticking up by year-end 1999. Even if that forecast is
viewed with some level of agnosticism--and here I should say “wolf” along with Al
Broaddus--credit conditions are now coming back to the narrower spreads and are
reminiscent of the ease we had last summer. At the same time, corporate debt is soaring
along with household debt. True, affordability is better than in the late 1980s and banks
are supplying less of the credit and are better capitalized, but the signs of excess are
beginning to show. Stock markets, real estate markets, and corporate and personal debt
may not all be similarly extended, but they are getting there. Thus, whether one comes at
this economy with concerns about inflation or concerns about imbalances and excesses, I
think the concerns are real and actions related to policy corrections need to be considered,
if not taken.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Second
District’s economy continues to grow at a sturdy pace, with few signs of increased price
pressures. Private sector employment grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate in the first
quarter; that’s down from 2.2 percent in the fourth quarter of last year. Retailers report
that sales were at or above plan in March and April, but a bit less robust than in January
and February. They also note modest declines in selling prices. Residential and
commercial real estate continue to flourish in the New York City area. Home prices have
risen sharply and both new construction and remodeling activities gained momentum in
the first quarter. While Manhattan’s office market remained tight in April, rent inflation
has slowed markedly from a rate of more than 20 percent in 1998. Purchasing managers
indicate that manufacturing activity continued to expand in April, though at a slower pace
than in March. Those in the New York City area report an uptick in commodity prices
and persistent increases in the cost of service inputs. The latest Banker’s Survey shows a
pickup in loan demand, tightening lending standards on commercial and industrial loans,
and further declines in delinquency rates.

5/18/99

43

Looking outside the Second District, let me speak first of the growing view
that the international crisis, which began in July 1997, is substantially over. There is no
doubt that the crisis is less severe by a reasonably large degree than it was last fall, but it
surely isn’t over. I believe Japan has made virtually no progress in restoring growth and
has increased its public sector debt to a level that is dangerously high, especially
considering the strains on the Japanese public sector that their aging population will bring
in the very near future.
At our last meeting I raised a concern about what I called
in China as a sign that the massive economic restructuring of the state-owned
enterprises is not going as well as Premier Zhu Rongji had hoped. The orchestration by
the government of the very strong response to the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade heightens my concern. I believe that the leadership felt--for some reason not
connected with the restructuring but rather to the happenstance of a memorial date in
Chinese history of a student uprising in the last century on the fourth of May--that they
had no choice but to allow the young people to demonstrate. But the size of the
demonstration I believe also indicates that the leadership felt they had to use it to let off
pressure from the domestic situation. And that makes me even more concerned.
Korea is growing, but unfortunately one of the results of the growth has been
that the restructuring of the Chaebols, which is absolutely necessary for the long-term
health of the economy, is very much less certain. And in the best of cases it will not be as
complete as one might have hoped it would be.
Thailand’s recovery is spotty even though it is slightly positive. But the
principal author of the recovery, the finance minister, seems to be in increasing political
jeopardy.
Europe’s growth is sluggish at best, with Germany very weak. As for Russia,
even with a bit of luck, I think the most we can hope is that it will hold itself together
financially and politically until the very uncertain outcome of the Presidential and
Congressional elections next year.
The performance of the domestic economy I think gives us a difficult, if
delightful, challenge, perhaps especially in how to describe it. Until last Friday’s CPI the
performance of the economy had been characterized by good, solid growth fueled by

5/18/99

44

productivity. Now outside economists talk of growth as being somehow dangerous. But
it seems to me that our job as central bankers is in fact to seek sustained, noninflationary
growth. In this regard, I think we have to be rather careful in our public speeches and
statements to remember that we know a lot more than our audiences do. We have to be
very careful to note that the enemy is inflation. It is not solid economic growth and it
certainly isn’t people finding jobs.
Now, what does last Friday’s report of an increase in the core CPI tell us?
Clearly there is a lot of noise in the data, and one could decide to dismiss them and just
wait for another month to see what happens. However, we’ve tried to take apart the data
statistically to see if there is any considerable likelihood that an increase of that amount
could be giving some sort of signal that we ought to be concerned about. And we’ve
come to the conclusion that the statistical probability is sufficiently high that the increase
actually is telling us something important that I believe we definitely have to take it into
consideration in our discussion of policy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the last meeting, and indeed for
some time before that, it seemed that the risks to the outlook were balanced, with a slow,
steady drift to the upside. That continues with little sign of a significant moderating trend
setting in. Like others, I have been expecting such a shift for a long time, but I would
like to be more confident than I am now that it will emerge spontaneously.
Industrial production has resumed vigorous growth. We’ve continued to
generate a quarter of a million jobs per month, which is wonderful of course. Inventories
are low, and major cyclical swing factors like housing, autos, and capital spending, which
should have eased before now, simply have not done so. Of course, I should note that we
have some contrary news on housing this morning. The stock market continues to create
wealth. Inflation remains remarkably quiescent, but here again I would like to be more
confident that this will continue. The April CPI was a jolt of yet to be determined
significance. But beyond that commodity prices may have begun to turn and, of course,
energy prices already have turned up. Foreign growth should improve and will have an
impact on commodities and other import areas. And unemployment in the United States,
driven by demand pressures, appears to be headed to 4 percent or lower. The magnificent

5/18/99

45

productivity gains of recent quarters, even if they are largely continued, cannot be
depended upon to hold these forces at bay indefinitely.
At the last meeting two factors seemed to inhibit the Committee from
considering any action and both of those have dissipated. Six weeks ago any change by
the Fed would have been a great shock to the market, but not today. The Balkans was an
important unknown then but, for better or worse, it now appears to be headed for a standdown. To be sure, there are still downside risks and we have no clear and present
inflation danger. And we could bask in this virtuous cycle for some time yet. The
question before us, of course, as it has been, is how best to help prolong this excellent
economic era for as long as possible. The emergence of an inflationary surge with some
gain in momentum would surely mark the beginning of the end of that. No actual move
would appear to me to be required today, but it may well be time to assess how best to
start leaning into the wind. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the last few meetings, I
have been trying to determine rules of thumb or guides for how we should be making our
decisions. The Taylor Rule, a favorite of many academic economists studying monetary
policy, does not work well when it is difficult to define operating targets for inflation or
unemployment. As we have discussed often in this room, this difficulty may now be
showing up particularly with respect to the unemployment term, given the problems in
identifying the NAIRU. One could make a case that the NAIRU is 6, 5, or 4 percent.
There are several substitute approaches. One is just to drop the unemployment
term from the Taylor Rule, in which case the rule becomes an inflation-targeting rule.
Under this modification, the Fed would move against inflation deviations or in the
present circumstances accelerations of inflation. Another approach, which I have
championed here, is to go to a change rule. Assuming both inflation and unemployment
are in their desired band, the Fed would try to lead the growth in aggregate demand to be
equal to the long-term growth in aggregate supply. This rate used to be about 2.5 percent
per year, but now may be as high as 3.25 percent if one is a productivity optimist. A third
approach is Bob Parry’s nominal GDP standard. I haven’t thought about that thoroughly,
but I think most of the time that would give the same suggestion as my change approach.

5/18/99

46

Whatever the approach, I felt we were in policymaking equilibrium up to our
last meeting. As long as inflation was not accelerating--and it did not seem to be seven
weeks ago--the inflation-targeting approach called for no change in the funds rate. As
long as the forecast rate of growth in aggregate demand was under 3.25 percent, as it was
then, the change approach did not either. But seven weeks can make a difference. The
recent bad news on the CPI, even if one adjusts for special factors, suggests a possible
acceleration, as do the balance of the Reserve Bank anecdotes. But the news on inflation
suggests only a possible acceleration because the numbers are for only one month and
anecdotes are anecdotes. Yet, there is a definite new inflation threat in the data. The
change rule is also pointing differently because the Greenbook growth forecast now
averages slightly above 3.25 percent until this growth is contained later on by a rise in the
funds rate included in the baseline forecast and by Y2K. The Blue Chip forecasters are
even more out of line. Their forecast rate of growth is 3.8 percent, even further above the
long-term trend. We focus on the disturbing CPI numbers, but in fact it is true that a
number of additional signs are beginning to point in the direction of a tightening of
policy. This reasoning is either based on very recent information or on forecasts, so I
suppose there is some time before we have to act, but not too much. As has been pointed
out often in this room, the good recent performance of the economy is no doubt due
partly to a feeling that the Fed will move against inflation. We risk losing this credibility
if we tarry too long. There are strong arguments for doing something pretty soon,
perhaps a modest step but a clear step. The market seems to expect us to and we’d miss
Jack Guynn’s window of opportunity if we didn’t.
Let me address one final matter. Suppose we move; does this box us in? If we
were to take the modest step of introducing a tilt, in more than half the recent cases an
upward tilt was not followed by a rise in rates. So I don’t interpret that as boxing us in.
If we took the more drastic step of actually raising rates, we might find that a bit harder to
undo; but I would still repeat an argument I have made here before, which is that a huge
policymaking advantage for monetary policy is its flexibility. We could take advantage
of this flexibility. So, I personally do not find the box-in argument very persuasive.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.

5/18/99

47

MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, like others, have come to
recognize that the forecast outcome is quite desirable, but I think the risks are really to
the upside. A number of people have already talked about the CPI. I agree with Mike
Prell in that the latest CPI number does not to me indicate that the day of reckoning has
arrived. If one looks at the details, besides apparel, owners equivalent rent, lodging away
from home, and airfares seem to be the drivers, along with the category called “other
services.” None of those is unimportant, but on the other hand they don’t necessarily
suggest that inflation--or if you will, the wolf--is at the door.
To go to another view, there are some straws in the wind that I think we do
have to be focused on. First obviously, as Governor Gramlich has indicated, almost
regardless of what one thinks the NAIRU is, it is probably somewhat higher than 4.2
percent. Therefore, one should expect some increase in labor costs at some point. The
most recent ECI would not bear that out, but that index was obviously driven in part by
the fact that commissions and bonuses turned down, perhaps because of a slowing in
some of the underlying activities. On the other hand, a complementary measure, the
NIPA measure, showed quite an increase in labor costs, and I don’t think we can
necessarily reject that. That is at least one of the cautionary flags that labor costs may be
rising.
The other thing that one might look at, of course, is the aggregates; a few
others have talked about the behavior of the money supply. I was looking at commercial
bank credit, which showed strong loan growth across the board in the fourth quarter of
last year and continuing, though somewhat abating, growth in the first quarter of this
year. There clearly seems to be a great deal of demand for credit out there and, indeed it
turns out, a great deal of availability of credit.
If one looks to the international side, I also think some of the risks that we have
been most concerned about have abated. The fat tail that we were concerned about at the
end of last year has become a lot thinner. I agree fully with the Vice Chairman’s
comment that the difficulties abroad certainly are not over yet. All things have not settled
down internationally, but a start has been made. If one looks at the stripped Brady bond
yield, there is some indication, at least from the markets, that they expect some
turnaround in that area.

5/18/99

48

One might also look at import prices and at the BLS indicators. All suggest,
particularly industrial supplies and capital goods, that the decline in import prices has
bottomed out. It is a forecast in some cases, but I think it’s a reality as well. So that is
another one of these trends. President Minehan and others have talked about increases in
the prices of a number of different commodities. Indeed, if one looks at spot prices, those
are pushing in the same direction.
I strongly agree with the comments that the Vice Chairman made. I don’t
think it is our job to lean against growth; I don’t think it is our job to stop the creation of
jobs or the creation of wealth necessarily. But I believe that we do have to be concerned
about how nominal GDP is split between solid, sustainable growth versus inflation. And
my concerns now are that the risks are moving a little more to the inflationary side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I continue to be impressed by the
recent exceptional growth in productivity. The case for an increase in trend productivity
growth is now more compelling after the strength in productivity over the last five
quarters--and especially after the last two quarters--than it was based on the data for 1996
and 1997. And I believe the staff’s pattern of incremental upward steps in trend
productivity growth makes sense, with some acceleration in productivity beginning in
late 1995 and a further acceleration in 1998. My problem with the staff forecast is that its
projection of a 2¼ percent productivity trend over the forecast period is just too
aggressive for my taste. This revision to the productivity forecast basically drives their
entire forecast. It allows a significant upward revision in growth over the two-year
horizon with little effect on the unemployment rate and, hence, on inflation.
It is important to note, however, as the Greenbook makes very clear, that the
revision of the productivity trend delays but does not remove the day of reckoning that is
still implicit in the staff forecast. It is interesting that this “day of reckoning” seems to
have become the theme of this meeting. The tight labor market gets still tighter. The
favorable price shocks are still dissipating further. Ultimately, the very tight labor
markets and the dissipation of supply shocks put inflation on an upward trend. This is an
important message. Growth does not cause inflation; excessive utilization rates do. But
another unexpected shift in the productivity trend, as assumed in the Greenbook, imparts

5/18/99

49

another disinflationary bonus and allows rapid growth to be accommodated for a while
longer with relatively stable inflation.
My less optimistic assessment of the underlying productivity trend essentially
moves forward in time the rise in inflation that current initial conditions make so likely. I
do believe that we are at an important turning point in this episode. Inflation, after falling
throughout the last few years, is stabilizing in the near term, I believe, and is poised to
move higher going forward. That’s how I read the recent CPI data.
The continued favorable financial conditions and high level of consumer
confidence are helping to sustain robust demand. While I still expect growth to slow
somewhat going forward, I believe it is more likely that growth will be above trend than
below trend in the near term, and that growth will not spontaneously slow enough over
the forecast horizon to prevent a rising trend in inflation.
It might be useful to recall the forecast that motivated the easings in monetary
policy last fall. At our September meeting, the staff projected a 1.2 percent growth rate
in 1999, assuming an easing in monetary policy. The current staff forecast has growth
almost three times as fast. The unemployment rate by this point was projected to be
4¾ percent, ½ percentage point above where it is today. It was projected to rise toward
5½ percent by the end of 2000, 1¼ percentage points above the current forecast. And
equity prices have rebounded by about 40 percent from their trough in early October. To
be fair, the other major developments since the September forecast were the muchsharper-than-expected increase in productivity growth in 1998 and the upward revision to
trend productivity going forward. Productivity growth over 1998 turned out to be almost
double what the staff projected at the September meeting--2.7 percent versus 1.5 percent.
And the trend productivity assumption is ½ percentage point higher now in the staff
forecast than the 1¾ percent assumed at the time of the September meeting.
One question we have to ask is whether we have become sufficiently
optimistic about the productivity trend going forward to justify keeping in place the full
amount of the decline in the federal funds rate that was motivated by a forecast that has
since been so significantly revised and by a set of financial conditions that have so
dramatically improved. The second question we have to ask is whether we should
maintain the current policy setting for the funds rate if growth continues strong and labor

5/18/99

50

markets tighten further while inflation remains steady in the near term and is projected to
increase thereafter. I will pick up from here in my policy position statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. I was quoted in a recent New Yorker article, one of the flood of
articles on our Chairman and the new era, as being “mystified in a pleasant way by the
recent performance of the economy.” I think that describes the mood that has captured
this group for quite a while now. Now, we weren’t mystified about everything. Much of
what was happening was explainable: the global pressures on commodity prices; the
decline of agricultural prices; and the weakness of exports to Asia, which now seems to
be turning around. Much of the domestic growth was explainable: the strength of
consumer demand as employment and incomes rose and stock prices soared; the housing
boom as interest rates fell; the durables boom as people furnished those houses and
bought new cars. Also explainable was the downward pressure on prices from the strong
dollar and commodity prices--that fierce global and domestic competition.
Other parts of the puzzle seemed less clear, basically pleasantly mysterious.
Why was wage growth so subdued in the face of labor market tightness and the persistent
anecdotes around this table about reported wage increases and shortages of workers?
Above all, why did productivity accelerate so rapidly in the last two quarters? There
were plenty of plausible reasons, but no certainty that the reasons were the right ones or
that they would last. There were cyclical factors, capital deepening, the timing of the
technology revolution, and new management skills and attitudes. None of it was very
conclusive but the numbers were there. Through all the pleasant mystification, our
collective common sense kept saying things like “good things don’t last forever.” Some
of the positive forces, such as the strong dollar, will turn around--supply and demand
laws still work. Eventually we’ll run out of workers and wages will push up costs and/or
consumer prices will begin to rise for some exogenous reasons--oil or whatever--and
keep going up. And then we must be prepared to act.
Are we at that point or close to it? The CPI is worrisome, but it’s only one
month’s number and we are used to a good deal of volatility in that measure. Cost factors
still seem quite benign. Wage growth, though, is not accelerating, at least in the statistics.
Productivity is on a roll. The ECI still seems to be coming down with profits rising.

5/18/99

51

Market alarm at the CPI has sent long rates up a bit more, to do our work for us. So the
question is: Do we need to reinforce this with a hint or a tilt? I would be inclined to
wait, but I can see the case for telling everybody that the Fed is awake.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I think coffee awaits!
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At your last meeting, many
of you remarked that you were concerned that inflation would eventually
turn up and you therefore saw monetary policy as more likely to firm than
to ease, though you weren't sure when such action would be appropriate.
The question for today's meeting would seem to be whether the time has
drawn closer--perhaps even close enough to tighten or, at least, to shift to
an asymmetric directive and let the public know right away that the
Committee’s concerns about inflation had increased significantly.
Many of you may view the period ahead as an especially important
one for the inflation outlook. As Mike noted, some of the one-time price
declines that have played a role in damping inflation are expected to be
ebbing or reversing. Among them, energy prices have already risen
substantially, the prices of other important commodities have turned
around lately, and declines in other import prices should come to an end as
the effects of a more stable dollar since last summer and strengthening in
foreign economies are felt. How domestic inflation responds to these
developments may help to resolve questions about the causes of the recent
inflation performance. And the decision you make could be important in
determining the degree to which these price level changes become
embedded in inflation expectations, thereby affecting longer-run inflation
trends.
However, judging the need for a change in the stance of policy has
been complicated by uncertainties about the supply side of the economy
and the associated lack of confidence in forecasts of inflation. Preemptive
actions that turn out to be unwarranted would tend to create unnecessary
variations in economic activity and increase uncertainty, impeding
planning by businesses and households and impinging on economic
growth. At the same time, however, waiting for compelling evidence of
an actual upturn in inflation before changing policy also would lead to
sizable adjustments in financial conditions and economic output. In the
circumstances, the Committee presumably will want to be as forwardlooking as possible, searching for early signs of changes in inflation
prospects and acting, perhaps forcefully, when it detects tendencies that
could reasonably be expected to impair economic performance over time.

5/18/99

52

Since the last FOMC meeting, developments on the demand side of
the economy would seem to weigh on the side of greater concern about
future inflation. Demand has been strong and economic growth has
continued at a pace in excess both of prevailing expectations and of most
estimates of the long-run expansion of potential. Moreover, indicators of
a prospective moderation in spending are still quite tentative. Unless
productivity is even stronger than the upward revised estimates of the staff
forecast, growth will have to slow appreciably from the pace of the last
few quarters, if labor markets are not to come under increasing pressure.
Changes in financial conditions over the last six weeks probably have
not materially added to the restraint on demand needed to moderate
expansion. Rather, the run-up in yields on Treasury securities in recent
weeks seems to owe in part to the rolling back of the earlier flight to
quality as investors appear to have reduced their concerns about risk and
increased their appetite for assuming it. As a result, the nominal cost of
business credit has remained about flat on average over the intermeeting
period. And equity prices have climbed further, boosting wealth and
spurring consumption.
More troubling, the movements in Treasury interest rates likely also
evidence some deterioration in inflation expectations, as yields on indexed
debt have edged lower and the foreign exchange value of the dollar has
slipped off some even as the interest advantage of U.S. nominal
instruments has widened. Of course, some caution in interpreting this
deterioration seems warranted. To some extent, you may only be looking
in a mirror and merely seeing the market’s perceptions of the Federal
Reserve’s concerns, rather than an independent assessment of emerging
price pressures. In addition, inflation fears may not have penetrated Main
Street, where the spending decisions are made, judging from the lack of
movement in price expectations in the Michigan survey. But those
judgments are difficult, given the inertia in household decisionmaking and
the lags in surveying.
Lastly, developments in international markets may also suggest the
increased potential for greater inflation pressures. At a minimum, the
resilience of foreign markets and economies suggests that the
asymmetrical downside risks that concerned the Committee last fall have
greatly diminished. As already noted, the dollar has edged off recent
highs in the exchange market; a persistence of this trend would put upward
pressure on prices and demand in the United States, reversing the
stabilizing role that the strong dollar and deteriorating trade balance have
played over the last several years. For now, the relatively flat dollar
means that productive resources in the United States will not be shielded
from the additional demand brought about by policy easings and returning

5/18/99

53

confidence abroad. As a consequence, the staff forecast now embodies a
sustained growth in exports.
But, the economy has demonstrated a remarkable capacity to absorb
demand without generating cost and price pressures. Four percent growth
in output over the last four quarters has barely nudged down the
unemployment rate. Moreover, some broad measures of nominal wage
and price increases fell further through the first quarter. The extraordinary
increase in productivity that has enabled demand to be met without
appreciably lowering unemployment has also helped to keep cost
pressures subdued. Unit labor costs show no sign of picking up, despite
an unemployment rate at or below 4½ percent over the last year.
Moreover, except for energy we have seen only small and very recent
increase in the prices of commodities and intermediate goods in the
pipeline.
If, in light of this mixed evidence, the FOMC does not wish to tighten
policy at this time but still sees the inflation risks as having risen, the
Committee should consider whether to adopt an asymmetrical directive
toward tightening and whether such a directive should be announced.
It is difficult to predict how markets would react to an announcement
that has no precedent. And details will matter in that the response will
depend in part on the wording of the associated announcement. The
market’s reaction will be influenced by the height of the hurdle the
Committee set for itself when it reaffirmed its disclosure policy. The
Committee said it would reserve such announcements for significant shifts
in its thinking, especially where the absence of an announcement risked
seriously misleading the public and the markets. With the bar set at that
relatively high level, the market is likely to build in substantial odds on
tightening at the June or the August meeting if the Committee announces a
tilt, perhaps on the order of 50-50. Friday’s data moved market
participants in the direction of expecting an announcement of a tilt today
and raised their assessment of the chances of policy firming in coming
months. But market prices do not yet incorporate 50-50 odds of a
tightening until the fall. The Committee may well be in a situation in
which, because of its announcement policy, it cannot leave markets
unaffected by its decision today, even if it follows the strong market
consensus and makes no change in the stance of policy. Announcing the
Committee’s heightened concern about inflation is likely to raise rates;
omitting such an announcement is likely to lower them.
If in fact the Committee is now more concerned about inflation and
hence more likely to give serious consideration to tightening at the next
few meetings, it might consider adopting and publishing an asymmetric
directive. In the context of greater inflation risks, the resulting further

5/18/99

54

back-up of yields and restraint on equity prices would tend to contribute to
economic stability; a reversal of recent rate increases and equity price
declines would be counterproductive. Indeed, not publishing a tilted
directive might be seen as misleading markets in that it would lead to a
structure of market interest rates that inadequately reflected the
Committee's assessment of the economic situation. A tilt would be taken
as indicating that the Committee might be especially sensitive to
information suggesting that price pressures were likely to build. With the
markets on notice that policy action was under consideration, responses to
incoming data are likely to be relatively intense and markets volatile. But,
to the extent participants understood your concerns and hence could
anticipate your actions reasonably well, the resulting price movements
should be constructive and stabilizing, on balance.
If, on the other hand, the Committee were not so sure inflation risks
had risen appreciably, it might choose to retain the symmetrical directive.
The Committee might be hesitant to act before it had more concrete
information that prices were likely to accelerate. Such evidence could
come from data on costs and prices or from added pressures on resources-­
that is, a further decline in the unemployment rate. Because neither of
these sets of indicators has moved much of late, the Committee might
believe that it was unlikely to get definitive enough evidence in the next
few months on these pressures to take action. If this were the
Committee’s view, then publishing a tilted directive and encouraging the
market to build in expectations of tightening could ultimately be
misleading and could lessen the power of asymmetry to convey
information over time. Indeed, some rally in credit markets, which would
be expected to accompany no announcement, might well accord with such
a less concerned view of the inflation outlook, particularly if the
Committee saw the sharp reaction to Friday’s data as overdone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
MR. HOENIG. Don, since you spent a fair amount of time on whether we
should go asymmetric or symmetric, my question has to do with the wording in the
directive that relates to the tilt. The way the current wording reads, the tilt applies to “the
intermeeting period;” it does not say that we might act on the tilt at the next meeting or
the meeting after that. How important is the fact that it is confined to the intermeeting
period and not longer term in influencing your thinking of whether we should put that
language in the directive?
MR. KOHN. The Committee has discussed at length whether it should change
the wording in the directive to be less specific about the intermeeting period and has had

5/18/99

55

trouble finding a consensus about how to make that change since everybody seemed to
have a different interpretation of the meaning of asymmetry. I think that problem could
be handled in the announcement that accompanies a shift to asymmetry if that’s the way
you choose to go. First, I wouldn’t mention the words “over the intermeeting period” in
the announcement; secondly, I might put in wording about looking at information “over
the coming months.” If the announcement is clear, I doubt that people will care about the
specific wording in the directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don? If not, let me get
started on the policy side.
I would like to differentiate between history and forecasts. The history at this
particular stage, with only very slight variations that have surfaced anecdotally in the last
two or three weeks, is unequivocally that of a period of declining rates of increase in unit
costs. In fact, the numbers for the nonfinancial corporate sector have gone down to zero
change in total unit costs over the four quarters ending in the first quarter of 1999. I
don’t recall a four-quarter number that low in the current expansion. The zero change
reflects quite subdued growth in unit labor costs and a decline in the level of unit
nonlabor costs. Prices generally are flat, but they have been associated with a rise of
modest dimensions in profit margins, on average, in the past few quarters.
In the manufacturing area where we have data through April, we see similar
results in that unit costs remain very subdued. Indeed, the monthly numbers on costs are
quite soft and profit margins were rising significantly further in April. All the reports on
projected profits that we pick up from security analysts point to an improvement in the
second quarter. I don’t mention that as a forecast but as a report of what people are
saying. The data indicate that productivity continues to accelerate. Indeed, we have very
little evidence as yet that the upsurge in cyclically adjusted productivity has leveled out.
The first sign that that is occurring may be reflected in the long-term earnings forecasts of
the security analysts, which as you know have moved up about 2 percentage points. The
earnings forecasts and productivity growth rates may differ, but the two are interrelated.
Because we are talking about a forecast with no change in labor’s share, an increase in
expected earnings over five years has to show up either in an acceleration in the rate of

5/18/99

56

inflation, in the rate of productivity growth, or in the rate of hours growth. The latter is
extremely unlikely, strictly as a matter of demographics.
There is very little evidence to date of a pickup in inflation expectations, and
until very recently the notion regarding pricing power in the business sector has been
uniformly that it is zero. Theoretically, it is possible that foreign affiliates are increasing
their share of the earnings. But given what has happened to oil, that seems doubtful.
Therefore, we are led to the conclusion that the earnings expectations are essentially
projections of productivity growth. The rate of growth in productivity has been rising
during the past several years. In the past two or three months, however, we have seen
some indications that the growth rate might be leveling out. That suggests that
companies are no longer telling security analysts that productivity growth is on an ever
rising trend.
If we look strictly at the current data, what we end up with are increasing profit
margins and noncredible reductions in the rate of increase in average hourly labor costs.
The latter come from the figures on aggregate wages and salaries in the NIPA data
divided by hours or they come from the average hourly earnings in the payroll data; both
show a very dramatic drop in the rate of gain in average hourly labor costs. I believe it
was you, Roger, who was raising the issue of the NIPA data; those data are obviously
picking up a larger aggregate hours figure. The trouble with the NIPA data is that we are
dividing an uncertain numerator by an uncertain denominator, and the result is
perfection!
MR. FERGUSON. That’s a fair point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble unfortunately is that, as a number of
you have commented, the ECI cost data are probably not picking up a number of the
nontraditional ways of paying people--training costs, stock options, and a few other forms
of compensation. But leaving aside the uncertainties that are involved in measuring
wages, the interesting issue is why wages are not rising faster if productivity is doing
what all the evidence suggests it is doing. We have a unique anomaly.
Nonetheless, granted all of this, we still have erosion in the pool of people
seeking work who do not have jobs. To be sure, that number has not gone down as fast
in the last year as it did in preceding years, but it is still going down at a 500,000 annual

5/18/99

57

rate. That is a substantial decline. The current level is at or below its previous low in the
history of this series, which goes back to 1970. We know that has to have inflationary
consequences at some point even if the acceleration in productivity has damped the
influence of tight labor markets on wage increases.
I also find a bit of an anomaly in the anecdotes concerning what is happening
to prices. A number of you have referred to anecdotal reports that it is now easier to raise
some prices. I suspect that may be right, given the extent of overall vibrancy in this
economy. Nonetheless, participants in the Business Council meeting in Williamsburg
said the other day that such pricing behavior absolutely was not occurring and that they
had not seen it for quite a long period of time. I don’t know whether that phenomenon is
just starting to be built into the pricing structure.
There is some evidence that commodity prices may have tilted up to some
extent after declining earlier and then flattening out. Copper and aluminum prices are up
modestly, but they are well beneath their recent highs. Steel scrap prices are little
changed. It is hard to find anything resembling upward price pressures on non-oil
commodity prices. Nonetheless, I can’t get away from the fact that the growth in
aggregate demand still exceeds the rate of increase in productivity and is continuing to
put pressure on the system. I find it very difficult to uncover any useful evidence that
suggests the increase in aggregate demand is slowing. Obviously, we are absorbing
goods from abroad at an unprecedented pace.
This situation could go on for a while, as Governor Kelley has said, but
credulity gets strained more and more the longer it goes on. It is hard to avoid the
conclusion that there is an increasing imbalance here that we have to address. While I am
not ready to move rates, I do think that those of you who have raised the issue of moving
to a tilt toward restraint have the arguments strongly on your side. And if we do go to a
tilt in this particular environment, I can’t see how we can avoid announcing it. I think
failing to do so would be exceptionally confusing to the market. As far as I can see, we
do not have strong evidence of rising inflation, especially if we move away from what I
consider to be a flawed consumer price index. If we look at the implicit PCE deflator, the
numbers don’t look as bad. Indeed, the April rise in the PCE deflator is 0.3 for the core
and 0.5 for the total. The three-month average for the core PCE is a rise at an annual rate

5/18/99

58

of 1.1 percent. This is not evidence that somehow we are far behind the curve, that
inflation pressures are mushrooming, and that we had better move.
I see very little to be lost at this stage in going to an announced tilt except
perhaps in using a tool that we might be able to use more effectively later. What it does
in my view is to position us to move in light of a lot of small indications in the CPI that
may suggest a rise in inflation. I suspect that is the case but I do not know for certain. In
other words, even adjusting for the measurement problems in the CPI with regard to the
abnormal weight that it puts on apparel and on owner-occupied rents, there are
indications in the latest numbers that the decline in inflation is coming to a halt. There is
very little evidence that I can see that the rate of inflation is still moving down. But we
also have seen very few, if any, signs that it is turning up. And therefore I think we will
be in a position where we can move if necessary at the next meeting or the meeting after
that and not be caught by what I consider to be a relatively low, but by no means zero,
probability of having to move suddenly. We have been in a situation for so long where
we have seen labor markets tighten continuously with nothing happening to prices that
we may lull ourselves into the belief that markets don’t turn quickly. They have turned
quickly in the past. Such behavior will not show up in our models largely because
models, by having fixed coefficients reflecting average characteristics, cannot produce a
rapid change. But markets can. And even though I think such an outcome has a low
probability, I believe it finally is time for us to start to position ourselves. I am far from
convinced that we will need to act on an asymmetric directive in the near term. But not
having such a directive in place and then being forced to act by events that come upon us
fairly quickly, which may mean acting during an intermeeting period, could in my view
create market forces that might ultimately be destabilizing. So while I sense that it is
definitely premature to move rates, it is by no means premature to move toward a tilt and
to announce it as well. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I fully support your
conclusions and the associated reasoning. I believe it would be very ill advised to raise
rates today. Such a move would be taken as a knee-jerk reaction to the CPI number
regarding which all of us have some questions. But to fail to adopt an asymmetric
directive toward firming also would be ill advised, and it would be very ill advised not to

5/18/99

59

publish such a decision. Oddly enough, by publishing a tilt toward tightening, I think we
actually will have more flexibility. It is not necessarily the case that we will in fact have
to tighten, though I am a little more inclined to think we will have to do so than you just
suggested, Mr. Chairman. But I believe adopting a tilt and shocking the market without
preparing it would create some very serious problems for the economy, which we can
easily avoid by announcing the tilt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your proposal. I don’t see strong
economic reasons for not waiting another month before making your proposed change
even though only a tilt is involved. After all, the only really disturbing economic news is
the core CPI for one month. But we may have to move in the next few months and, if so,
I have concluded that psychologically there are some good reasons for moving to a
published tilt now. Indeed, if a slowdown in the expansion is in prospect and we
reinforce its probability with the higher rates and lower equity prices that might follow
our announcement of a tilt, the markets may do our work for us and we may not have to
move at all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, what you are proposing is certainly a step
in the right direction, but my preference would be to go ahead and move the funds rate up
¼ percentage point today. I would respectfully disagree with Bill McDonough about the
interpretation of such a move as a knee-jerk response. Some people might read it that
way, but I really don’t think it has to be seen that way.
As I have said at some earlier meetings, I believe there has been a case for
tightening our policy for some time now on a lot of different grounds. We have talked a
lot about productivity trends at this meeting. To me it seems increasingly likely that
trend productivity growth is rising. Some may see that as a reason to stand pat on policy,
but higher trend productivity growth will lead at least some households and businesses to
expect higher incomes in the future. Some are going to try to act on that expectation now
by borrowing to increase their spending even though the actual increase in output is not
yet available. In that situation, interest rates need to rise to keep demand from becoming
excessive. The extraordinary growth in domestic demand of late seems clear if one looks

5/18/99

60

at a measure like private domestic final purchases, which grew at an annual rate of 7½
percent in the first quarter after growing at a rate of 6½ percent last year. That has to be
above any reasonable estimate of the sustainable growth in output, and it is one reason for
tightening policy.
Beyond that, as Governor Meyer mentioned earlier, when we last reduced the
funds rate in November, I believe a lot of people around this table saw that move as extra
insurance, so to speak, against the possibility that the financial difficulties we had
experienced would undermine the general economy. Those fears clearly have not
materialized, so I think there is a case for taking back that last rate reduction.
With regard to the CPI for April, again it is only one number. But it comes at a
time when we are already on the lookout for rising inflation on the basis of a variety of
other developments and at a time when financial markets clearly are taking the risk of
higher inflation seriously. We have fought long and hard to win the credibility we now
have, and going forward I think our credibility can be an enormously powerful weapon
for keeping inflation under wraps at minimum cost in terms of lost output and jobs. I
don’t pretend to know exactly what we have to do now to preserve that credibility, but I
have a sense that we need to show the flag, get back in the ball game--whatever metaphor
you want to use--and to do so more decisively than by just moving to a tilt. So, I would
favor alternative C.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. Your recommendation of announcing a tilt captures my sense
of what we ought to do today. I think it strikes the right balance between showing that
we are indeed awake at the switch and at the same time showing the appropriate restraint.
Even more importantly, I believe it positions us either to act on the tilt in the future,
should that be necessary, or not to act. But I do think it sends the right signal, and I fully
support what you are proposing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. I support your recommendation as well, Mr. Chairman, and I
would echo the comments that President Boehne has just made. I also identify with
President McDonough’s comment that we may get an added kick from the announcement
effect since it will be the first time that we inform the public about a change in the tilt

5/18/99

61

immediately after a meeting. In addition to the arguments that you made, I am pleased
that such an announcement will not leave all of us vulnerable to having our individual
public statements or even our body language picked apart over this next period. I think a
leak would be a most unfortunate way for people to learn about a change in the tilt, and I
see that risk as a very important reason to make the announcement. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I felt last time and I feel now that we could
appropriately identify an immediate move as an unwinding of our earlier effort to
stabilize financial markets--an effort at which we were successful. I would prefer that
explanation. At the same time, I would buy your recommendation today in terms of the
tilt. I would be careful about what the announcement says with regard to the period to
which the tilt may apply, whether it is the intermeeting period or some longer period, but
I certainly would accept your tilt recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly concur with your
recommendation. I am a little concerned, however, about the interpretation of the tilt. In
my view the Committee should not feel that it locks us in to an early move. Everyone no
doubt recalls that last summer our directive was asymmetric toward tightening for three
meetings from late March until mid-August and we never did tighten. Subsequently, of
course, we eased in the fall. Something unforeseen could happen again. We should be
open to that possibility and remain flexible.
One further thought, Mr. Chairman: I would hope that in our public statement
we will de-emphasize the April CPI number and stress the underlying trends that I think
are really motivating us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your recommendation for
no change in the federal funds rate target and enthusiastically support your recommenda­
tion for a move to an asymmetric directive that would be announced after the conclusion
of this meeting. The balance of risks in my view is toward continued strong growth,
possibly even tighter labor markets, and ultimately higher inflation. As other members of

5/18/99

62

the Committee have noted, a case could be made for an increase in the funds rate to
reverse some of our easing during the fall in light of the upward revision to the forecast
and the improvement in financial conditions since that time. It is especially important in
my view for us to respond to any further tightening in labor markets or to any increase in
inflation because I believe the unemployment rate is more likely to decline than to rise in
the near term. And because I think it is more likely that inflation will be rising rather
than falling over the next several months and quarters, I believe an asymmetric directive
is appropriate at this time.
Long-term interest rates have risen in response to the Chairman’s recent speech
and in response to the recent CPI and industrial production data. Some might argue that
this rise in long-term interest rates alone provides a desired restraint and removes the
necessity of Fed action. However, the rise in long-term interest rates reflects the
expectation of bond market participants that monetary policy will tighten in the not too
distant future, presumably in response to the considerations that I have just outlined. The
bond market is in effect pricing in relation to the market forecast and our perceived
policy reaction function. Such preemptive pricing in the bond market is in my view
desirable and stabilizing, but it will occur only if we consistently ratify the expectations
on which it is based when those expectations match our own.
There has been some concern that the first time we move to a bias and
announce the change will have an unusually large effect on the market. But today’s
meeting provides an opportunity to implement such a move with a relatively modest
effect precisely because the bond market has already priced in some expectation of a
near-term policy move. While there is very little or no expectation of a change in the
federal funds rate target at today’s meeting, financial market participants are to an
important degree expecting the FOMC to move to an asymmetric directive. In fact, I
would expect that the response to no announcement, which might be viewed by the
market as implying that there was no change in the bias, might be greater than the
response to an announcement of a change in the bias. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, I too think that your recommendation is a
step in the right direction. But, like President Broaddus, I would be more comfortable

5/18/99

63

with an increase of 25 basis points in the funds rate that would in effect undo the last
decrease that we made last fall. I think such a reversal could easily be justified in our
public statement without reference to the CPI increase; we could say that it reflects the
stability--in fact, the improvement--that has occurred in our financial markets since last
fall.
Looking back to a year ago, we had an asymmetric directive toward tightening
for three months or so, as Governor Kelley has reminded us. We were facing an outlook
at that time that we never expected to be as good as the situation we are facing now. We
have witnessed a recovery from many of the problems that the economy was
experiencing during the fall. I for one hope they cannot be repeated, at least in terms of
their seriousness. At this point I think we are looking at underlying levels of demand and
labor market pressures that are far greater than those we were seeing last year at this time
and a monetary policy that is definitely easier.
So in my view there is a good case to be made for increasing the funds rate and
taking back that last decrease. If we go ahead with the tilt, which appears to be the likely
action at this meeting, I agree that announcing our decision would be desirable. Don
Kohn made one striking comment, I thought, about the fact that there would undoubtedly
be a rally if we did not make an announcement. That is the last thing we need at this
point. So, if we go ahead with the tilt, we definitely should publish.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your recommendation.
The most important thing to me in all of this is that we make an announcement because I
believe it is very important at this stage that we give the public some sense of our
thinking in the current environment. I would second Mike Kelley’s emphasis on
inserting some thoughts in that statement about longer-term trends as opposed to focusing
on the latest CPI number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation, although I still hope we
won’t have to follow through anytime soon. Also, I don’t see why we couldn’t make a
modest change in the directive to refer to the “coming months” rather than to the
“intermeeting period.”

5/18/99

64

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I believe that the reference to the tilt needs to be
announced this afternoon. That is the correct thing to do. I also associate myself with
those who believe that a modest firming should be put in place now.
I’d like to talk briefly about the analysis that underlies my views on policy. I
don’t think there is any question that financial conditions are accommodative as
measured by money growth, the ease of financing in markets, and the behavior of the
equity markets. The issue is how fast the economy can grow, assuming there is an ample
amount of money. We have talked a lot about productivity, but I think it is important to
keep in mind that one thing that economic theory tells us about productivity growth is
that it determines the gap between wage growth and price growth; it does not determine
the level of either one. With the uncertainty about productivity growth, I believe we
ought to be splitting it about down the middle. That is, if we have a favorable upward
surprise in productivity growth, we should let half of it go into wages and half of it come
out of prices rather than try to hold price inflation where it is and let it all show through
in faster wage growth. There is an argument for taking some of it out of prices. In any
event, there is no question that the outlook for productivity is subject to a great deal of
uncertainty going forward.
There are lots of different ways of formulating this. To make it very simple
and straightforward, if we look at this in terms of a Phillips curve issue, there is a lot of
concentration on growth or on the gap or whether the natural rate of the NAIRU has
changed. In fact, I think the expectations component of the Phillips curve is at least as
important and that the best way to understand what has happened in the last couple of
years is to say that expectations have trumped the gap. The reason that we have been
able to run an economy as well as it has unfolded is that there have been firm
expectations of continuing low inflation. But expectations will not continue to trump the
gap forever. The underlying realities of the pressure on resource markets will gradually
take hold; and once we lose the advantage on expectations, I believe it is going to be
painful and difficult to get it back.
So, my policy recommendation stems to a large extent from the view that
allowing any substantial risk that price expectations will get away from us is a very great

5/18/99

65

risk to run. In the staff’s inflation forecast--though we can always quibble over the point
estimates here because we all know what the standard errors are--I think the probability
of an outcome ½ point higher on the inflation rate is substantially higher than the
probability of ½ point lower on the inflation rate. And given that assessment of the
probabilities, it seems to me that we need an appropriate policy bias to reflect that bias in
possible outcomes.
If we do not tighten policy soon and if for whatever reason we are unlucky and
the rate of inflation rises, we will then face the real risk that expectations will start to turn
against us. We will find ourselves playing catch-up. And once the market comes to
believe that we are falling behind, our effort to catch up is going to be very painful for the
market and for us. On the other hand, if we tighten and inflation remains low, I believe it
would be easy for us to reduce the funds rate later. That is part of the analysis underlying
my view that to raise rates in present circumstances is in some sense a safety play.
I anticipate a tightening trend. Some people have expressed the hope that we
won’t have to move, but for those of us who believe that some tightening is going to be
required, I think we need to have some idea of how much that is going to be. That to me
is important because once we are seen to be in motion it is possible that the markets will
move long-term interest rates higher than we might consider justified. I think we are now
at about the outer time limit of being able to make a credible case that we are simply
undoing some of the policy easing from last fall. The more distant in time that becomes,
the less credible it will be to appeal to that as a way of providing some cap on market
expectations of where this tightening process might take us. But if we have some bad
luck on some of the inflation numbers coming in over the next few months, I believe we
will find it difficult to manage under those circumstances. And that is why I believe it
would be better to get ahead of the curve now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendations of an
asymmetric tilt and an immediate announcement. I am concerned about the high level of
aggregate demand and the related outlook for inflation. It is important that we show we
are concerned about inflation and are ready to take action. In my view, this step will help
us to maintain our credibility.

5/18/99

66

There were a couple of considerations mentioned by Don Kohn that I thought
were important. He said if we change the tilt we should announce it if we think: (1) it is a
significant change in our thinking; and (2) if the absence of this step would mislead the
public. My assessment is that the current situation fits both of those criteria. So, I think
it is important that we change the tilt and announce it right away.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, since we met in March we have had a number of
conflicting signals about the future course of core inflation. Taken as a whole, however, I
believe there are upside risks to inflation, although they may not be sufficient to warrant
an increase in the funds rate at the present time. I must admit it would not take much
more evidence of upside risk to convince me to raise the rate. So, I would be enthusiastic
in supporting an announced upward tilt to the directive at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, like others, support your
recommendation for a publicly announced tilt toward tightening. I believe the risks,
supported by some very early signs in the data, are sufficient for us to change at least our
tilt. In my view publicly announcing the tilt will give us sufficient room to move if the
cost pressures do emerge, but they are not, as you observed, yet evident. That doesn’t
mean that we should wait until they become full-fledged inflationary pressures, but I do
think we have a little more time.
As others have indicated, the markets have already priced in some of this
policy tightening, so we need not be concerned about an outsized reaction on their part,
although there may be some as Don Kohn has indicated. Like others here, I would be
concerned that if we don’t move to asymmetry and announce it now, there might be an
undesirable reaction in both the equity and the fixed income markets. Also, I believe not
changing the tilt would, in fact, be viewed as an indication that we are not being vigilant
to early inflationary signs and that might lead to some small erosion in our credibility.
For all these reasons, I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As probably everyone knows and
as Peter Fisher’s charts showed, the level of intermediate- and long-term government

5/18/99

67

yields in May of 1999 is almost exactly where it was in May of 1998. So, in looking at
nominal interest rates and the yield curve, we are right back where we were a year ago,
and I thought policy was too expansionary then. I still am from the school of thought that
believes a steeper yield curve indicates a more expansionary monetary policy rather than
one that is less expansionary, and the yield curve is distinctly steeper today than it was a
year ago. Governor Meyer said that the markets moved the rates back up in expectation
of our tightening policy--raising the funds rate. I hope so because I don’t like the
alternative explanation. That explanation would be that the markets don’t expect us to
tighten, and for that reason interest rates have risen and will keep on rising. That would
be especially disturbing.
The shock of last August and September was exactly that--an external shock
that is unpredictable by its very nature. Those things happen. They have happened
before. For a time they lead the central bank to suspend the normal considerations that
go into its monetary policy decisions. I strongly suspect that it happened to the
Committee with the onset of the Gulf War in 1990. It certainly happened in the fall of
1987 with the stock market crash in October of that year. I dread all Octobers, and since
we are having a meeting this October, I am going to dread it, too. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. Let’s all go away for October!
MR. JORDAN. Right, let us just skip October. But I still believe in long lags,
in variable lags too, but especially in long lags. I think our policy stance on balance has
been more expansionary than was necessary or desirable for the environment in which we
found ourselves. I say that even though we would have had to interrupt the policy that I
would have thought appropriate a year ago because of what happened in August and
September. Now, we should get back on the track that we otherwise would have been on.
We are not back on that track and in my view monetary policy right now is more
expansionary than desirable.
With regard to the issue of announcing a change in the tilt, I am bothered by
the idea of saying we have cocked the gun but hope that we don’t have to use it. That
bothers me a lot. I don’t like that practice in foreign policy let alone monetary policy,
namely telling people that if one more thing happens--I don’t know what that one more
thing is--we are going to use this tool. Also, once we adopt an asymmetric directive and

5/18/99

68

announce that decision--with the understanding that we are providing information about a
shift in our thinking about policy--then I assume at a later point we would have to
announce a decision to remove the tilt if we determine we will not use it. To do
otherwise would be to misinform the marketplace. Announcing the adoption of a tilt and
not being very clear about the circumstances under which we would or would not use it is
in my view going to lock us into making further announcements. I am not sure whether
such a practice will give better information to the markets or not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll support the notion of
instituting a tilt and announcing it. I am very glad we established this disclosure
procedure because I think it gives us the ability to communicate more clearly. I am
sitting four-fifths of the way from you to Al Broaddus both geographically and
policywise. [Laughter] I have something like four-fifths agreement with him and also
with Bill Poole, Cathy Minehan, and Jerry Jordan that we should be raising rates. Fourfifths is not 100 percent so I won’t dissent, but that’s where I am.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is a consensus among the voting
members in favor of alternative B asymmetric and an announcement. There is a question
about the reference to the “intermeeting period” in the directive. I have a preliminary
version of a press statement that we would use if the vote on changing to asymmetry is
affirmative. It does talk about “the coming months” as distinct from “the intermeeting
period.” Does anybody have strong views as to what we might or might not do about the
language in the directive on the presumption that we go ahead on the asymmetry? We
have to decide that now because legally we have to vote on a specific directive. Don
Kohn, do you have a recommendation as to how we ought to handle this?
MR. KOHN. Well, as my answer to President Hoenig suggested, I think you
could go ahead with the present wording of the directive. It strikes me that people may
not want to change the wording on the fly but would prefer to have a chance to think
about the pros and cons before reaching a decision. So the Committee may want to retain
the current wording for now as long as the press statement makes the intent clear.

5/18/99

69

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, why don’t we just leave the directive as
is, but leave the issue open in the event that we want to go further. So, read the directive
as is.
MR. BERNARD. I am reading from page 13 of the Bluebook: “To promote
the Committee’s long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable economic growth,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 4¾ percent. In view of
the evidence currently available, the Committee believes that prospective developments
are more likely to warrant an increase than a decrease in the federal funds rate operating
objective during the intermeeting period.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll please.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan 

Vice Chairman McDonough 

President Boehne


Governor Ferguson


Governor Gramlich 

Governor Kelley


President McTeer


Governor Meyer


President Moskow


Governor Rivlin


President Stern


Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me read a proposed statement and get your
reactions to it. “While the FOMC did not take action today to alter the stance of
monetary policy, the Committee was concerned about the potential for a buildup of
inflationary imbalances that could undermine the favorable performance of the economy
and therefore adopted a directive that is tilted toward the possibility of a firming in the
stance of monetary policy. Trend increases in costs and core prices have generally
remained quite subdued. But domestic financial markets have recovered and foreign
economic prospects have improved since the easing of monetary policy last fall. Against
the background of already-tight domestic labor markets and ongoing strength in domestic
demand in excess of productivity gains, the Committee recognizes the need to be alert to

5/18/99

70

developments over coming months that might indicate that financial conditions may no
longer be consistent with containing inflation.”
MS. MINEHAN. That’s good. It gets in all the elements.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that acceptable?
SPEAKER (?). Excellent!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will issue this at 2:15 p.m. Our next
meeting is June 29th and 30th and we adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING

