December 13, 2005

1 of 100

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

December 13, 2005 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., at 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday,
December 13, 2005. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 

Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 

Ms. Bies 

Mr. Ferguson 

Mr. Fisher 

Mr. Kohn 

Mr. Moskow

Mr. Olson

Mr. Santomero 

Mr. Stern

Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Guynn and Lacker, Mses. Pianalto and Yellen, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Minehan, and Mr. Poole, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist 

Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary

Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Ms. Johnson, Economist 

Mr. Stockton, Economist 

Messrs. Connors, Freeman, and Madigan, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Oliner, Rosenblum,
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Slifman and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. English and Sheets, Assistant Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and
International Finance, respectively, Board of Governors

December 13, 2005

2 of 100

Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Zakrajsek, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Kumasaka, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Rasche, Sniderman, Weinberg, and Williams, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis, Cleveland,
Richmond, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Cunningham, Ms. Mosser, and Mr. Sullivan, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, New York, and Chicago, respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

December 13, 2005

3 of 100

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
December 13, 2005

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Mr. Kos, will you start us off,
please?
MR. KOS.1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the handout that is in
front of you. With the year-end approaching, I thought I’d look back at 2005 a bit.
One of the more surprising market developments has been the steady—if low-key—
appreciation of the U.S. dollar. That strength is all the more surprising after the dollar’s
depreciation in 2004 when it appeared that the current account imbalance had hit a
threshold that was impacting exchange markets. But, as shown on the top of page 1 of
your handout, the trade-weighted dollar has appreciated by 8 percent since the start of
2005. The dollar’s strength was broad-based against all major currencies. As shown in
the middle left panel, the dollar rallied from below 105 yen to 120 yen. That last 10
yen—from 110 to 120—came in a nearly straight line and was coincident with Prime
Minister Koizumi’s victory in the September elections and the ongoing improved
sentiment about the Japanese economy. Risk appetite among Japanese investors seems
to have risen and capital outflows have accelerated, as investors look to pick up yield in
fixed income markets not only in the United States but also in markets such as the U.K.,
Australia, and New Zealand.
As shown in the middle right panel, the dollar has also risen against the euro. At
the start of 2005 the euro was trading at about $1.35. Today it is below $1.20.
Sentiment toward the euro has been poor, given lackluster growth and the widening
interest rate differentials with the dollar—but I’ll comment more on that later. Among
the few currencies that the dollar depreciated against were the Mexican peso and the
Brazilian real. Both countries have substantially higher nominal and real interest rates,
and both central banks in recent months have been easing policy.
At this point, you might be asking yourself: Whatever happened to the issue of the
current account deficit? Weren’t the imbalances supposed to lead to a weaker dollar?
Certainly, that explanation appeared to work last year when the dollar was falling. The
bottom panel of the first page graphs the trade-weighted dollar—the red line—and the
current account balance for the United States as a percent of GDP since 1980—the blue
bars. Ideally, this should show that when the deficit is high, a weak dollar follows.
While there have been a couple of periods when growing current account imbalances
were followed by a subsequent bout of dollar weakness (for example, in the period after
1985), there are examples of just the opposite as well. The dollar strengthened in the
early 1980s and also the late 1990s in the face of high and rising current account
deficits. When looked at quantitatively, the correlation between the current account
and the next year’s exchange rate is weak.
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

December 13, 2005

4 of 100

What, then, explains the dollar’s strength? The most compelling explanation—
and this is tentative, I should say—appears to center around the economy’s strength
relative to other major economies. That difference in performance is, in turn, reflected
in interest rate differentials, as shown on page 2. This page graphs the sovereign G-7
yield curve in green, the U.S. Treasury curve in blue, and the G-7 curve excluding the
United States in red. The composite yield curves are based on GDP weights for each
country. At the beginning of 2004, U.S. short-term rates were lower than those of other
major countries and the U.S. curve was steeper. By the beginning of 2005, and with the
tightening cycle here already well along, the entire U.S. yield curve had shifted above
the others, as shown in the middle panel. That interest rate differential continued to
widen during 2005, with the prospect for further widening if futures markets in the G-7
are to be believed.
Of course, all that tells us nothing about the future course of exchange rates.
Perhaps growth and interest rate differentials will continue to drive exchange markets.
Or perhaps the current account will finally hit some threshold where a sharp
depreciation is triggered. Unfortunately, reviewing past relationships does not help
answer that key question.
Turning to page 3 for a closer look at recent monetary policy expectations in the
G-3, the top panel graphs the 3-month cash rate for the dollar and euro—in the solid
blue and red lines, respectively—and 3-, 6-, and 9-month forward rates in the dashed
lines. This graph depicts the widening of differentials between dollar and euro interest
rates during the year. But it also shows the recent uptrend in rates in the euro area, as
the ECB finally tightened by 25 basis points earlier this month—although that uptrend
was contained by the ECB’s deliberate attempts to signal that this was not the first of a
string of moves along the lines of the U.S. cycle.
Short-term rates from forward-rate agreements for Japan, shown in the middle
panel, suggest some backing off from earlier expectations about how quickly the Bank
of Japan [BOJ] would enter a new tightening cycle, with 9-month forward rates falling
about 10 basis points over the intermeeting period. Although the BOJ has signaled an
intention to exit its quantitative easing policy in the second quarter of 2006, there has
been substantial push-back from politicians. Furthermore, the BOJ itself has said
explicitly that even after the exit from quantitative targeting, short-term rates would
stay at or close to zero for some time afterward.
Despite actual or expected further tightening of monetary policies in many
countries, risk appetite remains robust. As shown at the bottom of page 3, stock
markets have rallied in most regions. In fact, in local currency terms, the S&P has been
the laggard. However, when converted into dollars, the returns on foreign markets are
reduced, given the strength of the dollar; and after that adjustment, the S&P’s
performance looks a lot more like stock market performance elsewhere in the
industrialized world. Emerging-market equity markets have been booming in local

December 13, 2005

5 of 100

currency terms. And for specific markets such as Brazil and Mexico—whose
currencies have appreciated— returns expressed in dollars have been turbocharged.
Turning to page 4 and continuing on the theme of healthy risk appetites, the top
panel graphs the high yield and EMBI+ [Emerging Market Bond Index Plus] spreads
for the year to date. High yield spreads have stabilized at around 380 basis points—
higher than levels observed last spring but still low by historical standards. In contrast,
since the last FOMC meeting, emerging-market debt spreads—the green line—have
continued to tighten to all-time lows.
Investment grade spreads—in the middle left panel—show a similar pattern.
Excluding the troubled auto and airline industries, corporate financial health remains
strong. Earnings and cash levels are both high, and leverage is relatively low. That
said, a bit of re-leveraging is in the pipeline, judging by the increasing flows in LBO
deals and announced stock buybacks.
The big credit story in November, of course, was the worsened outlook for GM.
CDS [credit default swap] spreads for GM, shown in the middle right panel, are now
trading about 1200 basis points over Libor, compared to just over 300 basis points for
the high yield CDX index. Near-term prospects for GM have deteriorated significantly,
so much so that the credit yield curve for GM has inverted. In other words, it is more
expensive to buy credit protection against a GM default in the next 12 months, than it is
to buy credit protection against a GM default over the next 5 years. In addition, sellers
of CDS protection on GM have started to demand up-front payment from buyers of
protection. They are “front loading” their coupon payments of the swap because of
fears that GM will default before they have received any payments from protection
buyers. The worries about GM were likely reinforced by yesterday’s announcement
from Standard and Poor’s that it had downgraded GM to single B.
Recent declines in volatility in both equity and debt markets reinforce this low
risk concept and are consistent with the strong risk appetite in markets. While the VIX
has shown some periodic spikes this year, the movements this year are very small
compared to historical changes. Fixed income volatility is also low, as shown in the
bottom right panel.
Turning to page 5, let me say a few words about the System Open Market
Account [SOMA]. The top panel graphs the growth of SOMA in dollar terms for each
year since 1995. So far, SOMA has expanded by a bit more than $25 billion in 2005—
somewhat less than the growth in recent years. The main driver of SOMA’s growth is
growth of currency in circulation. As shown in the middle panel, currency growth—
again, measured in dollars—has been trailing off in recent years and is likely to have its
weakest year of growth since the late 1990s. We don’t know the cause of that falling
growth rate, although greater use of credit cards, debit cards, and other forms of
electronic payment may at least partly explain this development.

December 13, 2005

6 of 100

Looking at shorter periods, the bottom left panel graphs for 2005 the year-on­
year growth rate for currency. Currency growth has decelerated from a 5.5 percent 

growth rate at the beginning of the year to about 3.5 percent. The noisy panel on the 

bottom right shows the growth of currency in the year-end period for each of the past 

four years as well as this year through last week, with projections for the remainder of 

this year in the burgundy dots. During the 2001 year-end—the blue line at the top—

currency grew about 4 percent from November to the peak in late December before the 

reflows began. The following year the year-end seasonal bulge was less pronounced, 

and that pattern has continued in each year since. Again, it’s not clear what is driving 

this process, but greater use of alternative forms of payment sounds reasonable. In any 

case, the smaller hump in seasonal demand will, if it persists, make the management of

reserves more straightforward in the future. 

Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations by the Desk. I will need a vote to
approve domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With respect to your yield curves on page 2, implicit there are
three observations from which you could presumably get what you’re trying to get at, namely, some
form of weighted interest rate differential for the three observations. These do move the exchange
rate. What happens if you take this back in time? Is there any explanatory power in this relationship?
MR. KOS. I didn’t look at it that closely. I suspect that if one looks at the relationship over a
long enough period, probably not a whole lot. That’s a suspicion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought we found approximately zero.
MS. JOHNSON. This is a longstanding paradox in international economics. When you run
uncovered interest parity and embody the forward rate as the expected future spot rate, you actually
get the coefficient with the wrong sign in those regressions if the time series is long enough. And you
never get it to confirm interest rate differentials related to exchange rates only in the positive direction
and with the magnitude that you expected. There are all sorts of reasons for that. My short one is that
you’re running two endogenous variables on each other and, therefore, the regression doesn’t make
any sense, and so the results don’t make any sense.

December 13, 2005

7 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is a very interesting chart, and I like the colors. But
what does it tell us? [Laughter]
MS. JOHNSON. Well, there are times when interest rate differentials seem to be the right
story, and this is one of them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I do suspect that the price of pork bellies on occasion—
[Laughter]
MS. JOHNSON. In defense of this chart, let’s just say that there are also theoretical reasons
why at times there is this relationship.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then there’s a question of whether the theory has any fact
behind it.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. We need to believe in something! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyway, let me move on to my second question. You
mentioned with regard to the performance of equity markets that on the bottom of page 3, if you took
the S&P exchange-rate-adjusted, it would look more like the rest. But you already do that when
you’re showing everything in U.S. dollar terms.
MR. KOS. That was my point. I’m sorry, I was not clear. My point was that the S&P looks
as if it underperformed the others, but when you look at it in common terms against the dollar, the
S&P doesn’t quite look like the laggard that it does in local currency terms.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. You commented on currency growth slowing down as a consequence of
domestic issues, but is it still true that about half of our currency is held abroad? Probably a lot of it
circulates in places like Russia that have been unstable. So, one explanation could be that there’s a

December 13, 2005

8 of 100

growing stability in some of these areas that have been heavy users of dollars and that some of this
currency may be flowing back. That’s just a guess.
MR. KOS. Yes, that’s a good point, and we’ve had that discussion here in the past. In fact,
the estimates are that two-thirds of the currency is overseas.
MR. POOLE. Two-thirds? Okay.
MR. KOS. We have good data on shipments. The shipments data say that the currency is
coming back. What we don’t know is how much is going out by other means, whether legal or illegal,
through things like remittances, for example. If one looks at the other indicator that is used, which is
the number of $100 bills issued, and makes some assumptions about how many of those go overseas,
then that reflow from overseas is tamed. It’s damped a bit.
So I think there’s some truth to what you say, but it’s hard to quantify. And in any case, the
interesting thing about this bottom right chart, at least, is that it’s probably driven mostly by domestic
factors because there is evidence of the domestic holiday fluctuation.
MR. POOLE. In terms of the seasonal?
MR. KOS. In terms of the seasonal, yes.
MR. MADIGAN. I might add, President Poole, that we do make estimates of the growth rate
of the domestic component as well as the growth rate of the foreign component. According to our
estimates, the deceleration over the past several years has occurred in both components. But we
estimate that growth for the domestic component would be about flat or slightly negative for this year
for the first time in many years—maybe ever—whereas the foreign component, according to our
estimates, has slowed from growth rates of around 9 percent earlier around the turn of the decade to a
little less than 6 percent recently. Of course, these estimates have to be taken with a big grain of salt
for the reason Dino indicated.

December 13, 2005

9 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, Vice Chair, would you kindly make
the appropriate motion?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, the transactions of the Desk are approved.
Mr. Stockton.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the spirit of the season, I am

tempted to report that I bring you great tidings of comfort and joy. However, this is, 

after all, the Federal Reserve, so it is probably more appropriate to simply note that 

tidings have improved modestly over the intermeeting period. While not quite in the 

miracle category, we have raised our projection for the growth of real GDP over the 

next two years and lowered our projection of price inflation. 

As you know, we revised up our estimate of the growth in real GDP in the third 

quarter by more than a percentage point and left fourth-quarter growth unchanged. As 

a consequence, real output is now projected to expand at an annual rate of nearly 4 

percent in the second half of this year—about ½ percentage point faster than we were 

forecasting in October. The surprising strength in recent months has been widespread. 

But clearly, one of the standout areas of strength has been consumer spending. To be 

sure, sales of light motor vehicles were a bit softer than we had expected, but that was 

more than offset by considerably stronger consumer outlays in other areas. 

This morning=s retail sales report for November provided further evidence of the 

underlying strength in consumption. Although spending in the retail control category, 

which excludes sales at auto dealers and building supply stores, dropped 0.6 percent 

last month, that decline was more than accounted for by lower gasoline prices. In real 

terms, we estimate that spending was up more than 1 percent for the month. That 

figure is somewhat stronger than we had expected and would likely cause us to revise 

up the growth of consumption nearly ½ percentage point at an annual rate in the fourth 

quarter. 

Business spending also has been strong of late. We are now projecting that growth
in real spending on equipment and software will average 6½ percent at an annual rate in
the second half of this year, an upward revision of nearly 3 percentage points from the
October forecast. The surprise was concentrated in capital spending outside the
transportation and tech sectors, where the incoming data on orders and shipments of
capital goods suggest that the earlier lull in spending has ended. After being about flat
in the first half, we are projecting real outlays in this category to rise 5 percent at an
annual rate in the second half of this year. As you know, we had been puzzled by that
earlier weakness and had been anticipating a recovery of spending in this category. In
the event, that recovery has occurred a bit earlier and with more force than we had
reckoned six weeks ago.

December 13, 2005

10 of 100

In light of the 1 percentage point upward revision that we made to real GDP growth
in third quarter, it may appear a bit surprising that we only carried the higher level, and
not a higher growth rate, into the fourth quarter. But part of our upward surprise in the
third quarter was in non-auto inventory investment. With stocks appearing reasonably
well aligned with sales in most sectors, we didn=t see the need to make any further
upward adjustment to this aspect of the forecast. Moreover, some of the third-quarter
strength in GDP reflected defense spending that seemed likely to have been pulled
forward from the fourth quarter. Both of these judgments appear to have been
supported, and then some, by incoming data in the past two days. Yesterday=s Monthly
Treasury Statement and this morning’s reading on retail inventories suggest that both
defense spending and inventory investment are likely to be even weaker in the fourth
quarter than we had written down. Balancing these softer readings against the stronger
retail sales data would leave our forecast for real GDP growth in the fourth quarter
unchanged at about 3½ percent.
In contemplating the forecast for 2006 and 2007, we had to make some assessment
of the sources of the strength in activity in the second half of this year. As we had
anticipated would be the case back in September, we are now in the position of having
to interpret whether the errors in our forecast of aggregate activity reflect misestimates
on our part of either the hurricane effects or of the underlying behavior of the economy.
We do believe that some of the surprising strength of activity is probably
attributable to smaller negative effects from hurricanes than we had previously penciled
in. To be sure, production in the energy sector is coming back a bit more slowly than
we had expected, especially production from the off-shore platforms in the Gulf of
Mexico. But outside of energy, production appears to be recovering more quickly.
Output of chemicals, paper, rubber and plastics, and some areas of food processing
improved noticeably in October and November. And we look to be getting a bigger
plus from the production of construction supplies. On the spending side, the hits to
consumption of housing services, food, and gasoline—areas that we had thought would
be affected by hurricane-related disruptions—appear to have been smaller over the past
few months than we had incorporated in our previous couple of forecasts. Of course,
most of this remains educated guesswork and needs to be taken with a grain of salt.
But all in all, we are inclined to attribute a few tenths of the surprising strength in
second-half growth to smaller hurricane effects.
We have interpreted the remainder of the surprise as suggesting that underlying
aggregate demand has been stronger at prevailing interest rates than we had previously
projected and that, all else equal, some of this strength will carry forward into next
year. Spending receives a further boost in the projection from the upward revisions that
we made to stock market and housing wealth, which totaled about $1 trillion over the
forecast period. All in all, it=s a stronger demand picture than we were envisioning at
the time of the last meeting.

December 13, 2005

11 of 100

However, the information that we have received over the past six weeks has not
been confined solely to aggregate demand. Developments on the supply-side of the
economy also appear to have been more favorable than we had expected. The surge in
output growth last quarter was accomplished with almost no increase in hours worked.
Consequently, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose at a 4½ percent
annual rate in the third quarter and is now estimated to have been up more than 3
percent over the past four quarters. As optimistic as we have been, the data have
continued to outflank us on the upside in recent quarters.
In response to this continued good news, we revised up our estimates of structural
labor productivity. In addition to an upward adjustment to the level this year, we
boosted the growth of structural labor productivity about ¼ percentage point to a bit
above 3 percent in both 2006 and 2007. Capital deepening is making a slightly larger
contribution to this estimate, but most of the upward revision has occurred in
multifactor productivity. Despite being nearly a decade into this favorable productivity
wave, there are few signs that the efforts or abilities of businesses to implement greater
technical and organizational efficiencies are flagging.
On balance, the revisions that we made to aggregate demand were a touch larger
than those we made to aggregate supply, and we estimate the output gap to be slightly
narrower, on average, over the next two years than in the previous forecast. In response
to these developments, we raised our path for the funds rate another 25 basis points, to
4½ percent by early next year.
Despite these modest adjustments, the basic contour of our forecast remains
unchanged. After increasing 3¾ percent this year, the rise in real GDP slows to 3½
percent in 2006 and 3 percent in 2007. That pattern reflects several powerful
crosscurrents. We expect activity to be boosted early next year by rebuilding efforts in
the Gulf Coast region. Moreover, with energy prices projected to level out after
increasing sharply over the past two years, the drag on aggregate demand from the
earlier run-up in prices should begin to ebb. But these positives are more than offset by
fading fiscal stimulus, the lagged effects of tighter monetary policy, and a gradually
diminishing impetus to consumer spending from equity and housing wealth.
In sorting through the details of our forecast, it should be pretty obvious that a
flattening out of activity in the housing sector is one of the principal sources of slower
aggregate growth. After contributing about ½ percentage point to growth in real GDP
per annum over the past four years, we are projecting residential investment to be a
roughly neutral factor over the next two years. But that is still all forecast. To date, the
hard data on housing have remained solid. Housing starts have remained at elevated
levels, new home sales hit a record high in October, and house prices as measured by
the OFHEO purchase index continued to increase at a double-digit pace through the
third quarter.
That said, reports of cooling in the housing markets seem to me to be more frequent
and more widespread than was the case six months ago. As we noted in yesterday=s

December 13, 2005

12 of 100

Board briefing, a variety of indicators of housing activity have turned down in recent
months. Household attitudes toward home buying have dropped sharply; builder
ratings of new home sales have deteriorated; the index of mortgage applications for
home purchase has fallen off; and the inventory of unsold homes has moved up. Taken
in isolation, none of these measures has an especially reliable statistical relationship to
housing activity. But taken together, they could be indicating that we are at the front
edge of some cooling in these markets.
I offer one more piece of evidence that I think almost surely suggests that the end is
near in this sector. While channel surfing the other night, to the annoyance of my
otherwise very patient wife, I came across a new television series on the Discovery
Channel entitled “Flip That House.” [Laughter] As far as I could tell, the gist of the
show was that with some spackling, a few strategically placed azaleas, and access to a
bank, you too could tap into the great real estate wealth machine. It was enough to put
even the most ardent believer in market efficiency into existential crisis. [Laughter]
Only time will tell if these indicators are giving us a head fake or are the start of our
long-awaited slowdown in this sector. For now, we are sticking with our call that
housing activity will level off next year. Moreover, we continue to anticipate that a
more visible deceleration in house prices will be in evidence by the middle of next year,
and the associated slower growth of household net worth contributes to the projected
up-tilt in the personal saving rate. In our view, both of these developments are critical
for damping growth by enough to prevent the economy from overheating.
To date, the news on inflation does not suggest that we have overshot the mark on
potential, though our ability to make that assertion with any confidence in real time is
admittedly very tenuous. To begin, measures of core consumer prices came in a bit
below our expectations. We also had a faster unwinding of the earlier hurricane-related
increase in retail energy prices. Survey measures of inflation expectations have
retraced virtually all of this autumn=s run-up, and TIPS [Treasury inflation-protected
securities] -based measures of inflation compensation have retreated as well. On the
cost side, lower hourly compensation and faster growth in structural productivity imply
less pressure from labor costs, and the markup of prices over unit labor costs has risen
further, pointing to a somewhat larger cushion between costs and prices.
These developments led us to reduce our projection of core consumer price inflation
for 2006 by ¼ percentage point to about 2 percent and to trim our forecast for 2007 a
tenth to 1¾ percent. The contour remains much the same. We still are expecting a
slight pickup in core inflation as we enter next year, reflecting the direct and indirect
effects of higher energy prices this year. In that regard, the core PPI for intermediate
materials increased 1¼ percent in both September and October, with the price increases
concentrated among goods that are heavily dependent on petroleum and natural gas.
And higher prices for these inputs as well as higher prices for transportation services
seem likely to place some mild upward pressure on core inflation in the months
immediately ahead. Still, I think this forecast is best characterized as one in which
inflation pressures are in the process of topping out rather than continuing to build.

December 13, 2005

13 of 100

Obviously, there are some very important risks on both sides of our forecasts for
real activity and inflation, and we tried to highlight some of the more prominent ones in
the Greenbook. I recognize that our baseline forecast, in which the economy=s growth
slows to about trend, output settles out at a level very close to potential, and inflation
pressures ease a bit, all with just a little more tightening of policy, seems too good to be
true. No doubt, events will conspire to force adjustments, both major and minor, on the
staff projection. Perhaps I=ve just written the “flexibility and resilience” speech for the
Chairman so often over the past few years that I=m suffering from something akin to the
Stockholm syndrome—the tendency of hostages over time to sympathize with the
views of their keepers. [Laughter] But as I look back over the past year and observe
how well the economy performed in the face of some pretty substantial shocks, I don=t
think our optimistic outlook is unwarranted.
Karen will continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. This is the time of year when folks young and old look forward to
receiving a pleasant surprise or two—and not necessarily something that can fit inside a
single stocking. We in the International Division have found ourselves pleasantly
surprised by the strength of global economic activity during the third quarter, which is
now evident in the data, and the indications that some of that strength is continuing.
Accordingly, we have revised up our estimate of foreign real GDP growth for 2005 to
near 3½ percent, about the pace we were projecting early last year. The baseline
forecast this time calls for economic activity abroad to continue expanding at about that
pace through the end of 2007.
The greater-than-expected buoyancy of the global economy was widespread and
does not appear to be explained by one or two special developments that have limited
implications for future growth. Among the industrial countries, the strong performers
such as Canada had another good quarter, with Canadian Q3 real GDP growth at 3.6
percent. But more sluggish regions, for example the euro area, also did moderately
well, at 2.6 percent real growth. Labor markets have either continued to improve or
remained solid. And German and Canadian orders data portend continued solid
expansion. Among the Asian emerging-market economies, China, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, Korea, the ASEAN countries, and India all performed well in the third quarter.
In Latin America, a sharp rebound in Mexican GDP growth raised the average for the
region despite a very weak quarter in Brazil.
Some elements of recent foreign activity do raise questions about whether strength
is transitory or will prove more persistent. In the United Kingdom and some smaller
economies such as New Zealand, further increases in housing prices appear to be
contributing to sustained or accelerating consumption. However, an end to the inflation
of housing prices could trigger a sharp slowing of consumption. Euro-area growth
remains dependent on export demand and lacks support from domestic consumption.
And the rebound in Mexico was primarily in the agricultural sector and did not include
a significant bounceback in manufacturing. These factors suggest a transitory element

December 13, 2005

14 of 100

in the recent data. In contrast, in the major regions of the global economy, inventories
do not appear excessive and in need of reduction. Private fixed investment has shown
vitality in Japan, the euro area, the United Kingdom, Canada, China, and Mexico.
These elements suggest the expansion will prove durable.
In most foreign economies, financial conditions remain very favorable for growth.
Equity prices, in particular, have risen substantially over the year, providing support for
both private investment and consumption. Since the end of last year, equity prices have
recorded double-digit increases in the foreign G-7 countries, with the more than 30
percent gain in Japan being particularly noteworthy. Among the emerging Asian
countries, stock prices in Korea have surged over the year. In Latin America, Mexican
and Brazilian stock prices have risen very sharply. Except for Canada, the major
foreign industrial countries have all experienced expansionary depreciations of their
currencies on balance over the year. For these countries, long-term interest rates
remain low, ranging from about 1½ percent in Japan to 4¼ percent in the United
Kingdom.
We interpret the positive surprise in the pace of third-quarter activity as indicating
somewhat greater fundamental economic momentum abroad than we recognized in the
previous Greenbook. That momentum, in combination with the generally supportive
foreign financial conditions, should sustain foreign real GDP growth, and we have
accordingly raised our forecast for 2006 slightly. We expect that this continued
moderate real output growth will be accompanied by little change, on average, in
inflation abroad as the flat path projected for global crude oil prices over the forecast
interval should result in some shifts down in headline inflation. Of course, risks of an
acceleration in consumer prices abroad, owing to second-round effects from previous
oil price rises, remain. Both the Bank of Canada and the ECB raised policy rates
during the intermeeting period to counter any upward drift in inflation pressures or in
inflation expectations. We expect further policy tightening in Canada in the next few
quarters, more limited additional action by the ECB, and an end of the Bank of Japan=s
policy of quantitative easing some time in 2006.
By itself, somewhat stronger activity abroad should work to narrow our external
deficits in 2006 and 2007. But we have also slightly raised the forecast path for the
dollar in this forecast from that in the October Greenbook, and the level of U.S. real
GDP has been revised up as well. Together, these last two factors outweigh the effects
of stronger activity abroad and, as a result, we expect a greater U.S. current account
deficit during the next two years, with the upward revision reaching about $50 billion at
an annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2007. About $30 billion of the increased deficit
is expected to be accounted for by a wider trade deficit, with the remaining $20 billion
arising from a downward revision to net investment income. Our outlook incorporates
a deterioration of more than $100 billion in U.S. net investment income from the
second quarter of this year to the final quarter of 2007, with negative net income
expected for the current quarter. With the current account deficit soon to reach $900
billion and projected to cross the $1 trillion mark in 2007 and with net investment
income significantly negative, market attention to the burden of the U.S. external

December 13, 2005

15 of 100

deficits could increase. This feature of the December forecast is not such a pleasant
surprise. Given today=s prices for energy, perhaps we would be better off with a lump
of coal.
David and I would be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is Comedy Central! [Laughter]
I have the impression, and I don’t know whether the hard data actually confirm it, that the
emerging countries, adjusting for policy, politics, history, whatever, seem to be doing a good deal
better than one ordinarily projects. The EMBI spread has continued to come down through all sorts of
developments. We have the spectacle of the Mexicans a couple of years ago or so being able to sell
for the first time a long-term peso-denominated debt instrument. Brazil just sold one denominated in
its domestic currency, and Colombia did as well. The Argentinean debacle never resulted in the really
awful consequences that were supposed to occur there, and industrial production is up sharply in
Argentina despite all of their other problems. Venezuela should be shutting its doors by now, granted
what they’re doing there, but it’s not doing all that badly. Is something fundamental happening that
explains all of this?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, two or three things come to mind. No one of them alone would seem
to explain it, but in conjunction they may be a partial answer to your question. One is that following
the Asian financial crisis, and no doubt in part in response to what has been happening in the United
States, particularly since say, ’95 or ’96, most of these countries have been running current account
surpluses and acquiring international reserves. The Asian countries have been doing it to the extreme.
They’ve been piling up reserves and protecting themselves from being dependent upon the whims of
foreign investors ever since that crisis. And they’re still doing it, although I noted an article in today’s
Wall Street Journal quoting some Chinese officials as saying that maybe they now had enough. So I
took that to be an interesting sign.

December 13, 2005

16 of 100

The Latin American countries—for many of the same reasons, but without quite the same
capacity—have nonetheless put themselves in a position of an external plus instead of a minus. Now,
the Latin Americans, in particular, and some of the Asians have outstanding debts, so they have
payments schedules they have to meet. It’s not as if they are not in some sense still embroiled in the
consequences of their histories and so forth. But their position vis-à-vis global capital flows has
turned around enormously, and they have never gone back to policies that reflect an attitude of “the
crisis is over, full steam ahead.” They have retained this preference for keeping themselves net
lenders in a flow sense in the international capital flow. There are many reasons to view that as a
problem as much as a good thing, but it explains, I think, why Argentina didn’t have much contagion
effect and why these countries seem to us to be doing better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there considerably more exchange rate flexibility now?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, most of their exchange rates are floating, yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that’s what I’m saying.
MS. JOHNSON. Yes. So very few are trying to peg to an overvalued exchange rate. Even a
country like Malaysia gave up on its pegged exchange rate. So the floating rates have certainly
improved the situation. But, you know, the peso and the real are strengthening vis-à-vis the dollar.
So it’s not mercantilist. It’s not that these countries have somehow allowed their exchange rates to
become and remain undervalued and that they are benefiting from that. But again, I think the flow
changes the risk character of these countries and their ability to interact with international investors.
I think a second fundamental is that Asia, largely because of China but also because of India
to some degree—because of the Asian Tigers, as we used to call them—has become a second
independent source of vibrant global economic activity. It was derailed a bit in the late ’90s, but
actually only a pretty short period elapsed before they were back on their feet. And their capacity to

December 13, 2005

17 of 100

succeed economically is very great. They are a high-saving, highly productive, strong work ethic part
of the world. And unless something happens to forestall that, they’re going to be an economic region
that’s growing.
And, third, they’re becoming more market-based. The orthodoxy, so to speak—the increased
reliance on markets, the additional flexibility, and the more stable macro prices—is paying dividends
in these regions as well. You still get a country like Venezuela that, but for its oil reserves, would be
totally in some tank somewhere. And its politics are leading it in crazy directions, but it’s the
exception at this point; the others are more as I’ve just described.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that’s actually a fairly encompassing explanation. It
implies that the lessons from 1998, when they were trying to fund in dollars and lend in the domestic
currency—trying to unwind the rules of accounting, which got them all into very serious trouble—
have been learned, essentially.
MS. JOHNSON. There are still shortcomings, no doubt. It’s still the case that Asian market
capitalism is not Anglo-Saxon market capitalism. And China could still find that the enormous task it
has set itself of changing that economy at a very rapid pace could run into troubles. These are not
guarantees, but I think it’s in some sense a description of where we’ve been. And even all the shocks
that we’ve all talked about so much—9/11, Enron, stock market collapses, et cetera—which were
every bit as much global as they were U.S.-only, have been absorbed remarkably well, not only here
but abroad.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. David, could you give us a risk assessment on your consumer spending
forecast? In 2006 and 2007, you have consumer spending growth of 3½ percent, while the housing
market cools and savings are accumulating. Would you just comment on how comfortable you are

December 13, 2005

18 of 100

with that forecast? You made reference to it in the formal comments, but I wonder if you are quite
comfortable with the forecast or a little uncertain about it.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I’m certainly uncertain about it. [Laughter] There’s no doubt about
that. But I actually see some risks on both sides of that forecast. On the upside, we are banking on a
rather steep increase in the saving rate over the next two years. If our large-scale quarterly
econometric model wants to extend the surprisingly low saving rate that we’ve seen over the past
couple of years forward into the future, that suggests the possibility of a greater step-up in consumer
spending. So there is some upside risk.
On the downside, some of the step-up that we have in consumption over the next two years is
related to our forecast of an acceleration in compensation per hour, which, thus far, has remained very
low. And if we don’t get that step-up in compensation growth, we’re not going to have the labor
income immediately to support this pickup in consumer spending going forward. And I think that
constitutes an important downside risk.
So I feel comfortable that we have the risks reasonably well balanced, but there are some big
question marks, I think, on the consumption forecast going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I want to go back to the conversation with Karen. It seems to me that it would
be helpful in the Greenbook to have much more analysis of the capital account than we do. In the
Greenbook Part 1, there’s a brief mention—you repeated it now—of the growing current account
deficit. And I think we all understand that things that can’t go on forever won’t. But on the other
hand, we might be able to have an idea as to some growing tensions there if we understood more
about what’s going on with direct investment and, say, how much of the capital flow is simply
passively financed by governments that are pegging their exchange rates, like China and others.

December 13, 2005

19 of 100

There is definitely not much analytical material on the international capital account. So I
would have a suggestion for more information there because the capital flows so dominate the
shorter-run effects. A particular question in that context is: How much of the strength of the dollar
this year might we attribute to the special tax break for this year? Certainly, corporations have been
moving capital back into the United States. I don’t know quantitatively how important that is.
I also have a suggestion for David. Looking ahead, the major share of GDP growth is going
to be from the supply side of the economy. We’re at close to full employment. And if you look at the
Greenbook, the analysis there is very heavily weighted toward an understanding of demand factors.
By my calculation there is, at least in one place, a half page on productivity in the labor market. But I
think as we look ahead, we need a deeper understanding of the determinants of such things as
structural productivity growth and labor force participation. So I would make a plea for beefing up
that section of the Greenbook Part 1.
MS. JOHNSON. Just as a quick answer, we have put assumptions into the Greenbook about
the size of those capital flows, as a financing of our deficit. They don’t influence the current account
because the earnings on U.S. investments abroad are booked as occurring on a flow basis—when they
happen—whether they are repatriated or not. So the repatriation in light of this special tax break that
will ultimately expire would be a financing flow, not a change to the current account. And probably
the numbers are big enough to be meaningful but not huge, not dominant.
What we don’t know—probably can’t know—is the extent to which the flows back to this
country are already in dollars in some sense. Are they earned in dollars or are they transferred into
dollars over some long period of time? If they are sort of sitting there waiting to come back in dollars,
they wouldn’t have any particular role in explaining, say, the run-up in the dollar over the last six
months or so. Without very disaggregated data, we can’t really tell that. And the turnover in the

December 13, 2005

20 of 100

exchange market is so huge that numbers on the order of magnitude that this tax break involved
would never show up as a sudden outlier in a particular month, or something of that sort. We’ve put
something in there as an assumption, and it’s probably a piece of the story. It’s providing a little bit of
extra ease in financing the current account deficit right now and is, therefore, a bit of support for the
dollar. But I wouldn’t think it is a dominant factor.
MR. POOLE. My plea, obviously, is not so much about that specific event, but about the
analysis of the capital account in general, because I think it really does make a difference how much
of the capital flow is direct investment. And what’s going on there I think is very important for
understanding—
MS. JOHNSON. I certainly don’t dispute that it is useful to know things like the amount of
private versus official financing, and the nature of some of the flows, and so forth. But let me caution
you that, in the end, the actual data recorded for capital flows will conform to the current account
balances. There are certain market equilibria that imply certain identities. So the fact that the
numbers are what they are isn’t so important. What matters are the terms on which those flows occur.
So things like exchange rates, interest rates, and equity prices will tell you the characteristics of the
returns to assets that had to be realized in order to get the flows to be what the flows had to be.
MR. STOCKTON. We will certainly take on board your recommendation to expand more of
our analysis of the aggregate supply side. I would just say that this is an area where, in the past
several years, we have made very significant changes in the underlying structure of the way we’ve
produced the forecast. We present a great deal more detail in terms of the composition of the
aggregate supply side of our forecast than we were doing five or six years ago. So I think we’ve taken
steps in that direction.

December 13, 2005

21 of 100

I would also caution, just a bit, against page counting for judging the amount of analysis of the
supply side. To get to output, we’ve got to go through all the various pieces of the spending side to
get there. I hope in my remarks this morning I made it clear that we were interpreting much of the
news that we’ve received about spending to have supply-side implications and that the information
should not be taken just as a feature of aggregate demand. But we certainly share your desire to have
a better and more thorough understanding of what is happening on the supply side of the economy,
because it has proven over the last decade to be a very important source of macroeconomic variation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Very quickly, on the Chairman’s question to Karen. Clearly, there is virtue to
massive competition. My most delicious irony is the fact that similarly dated Vietnamese debt now
trades on a price basis richer, and on a yield basis lower, than that of Ford Motor Company.
[Laughter] It wasn’t too long ago that we were killing each other. But we do have, increasingly, an
independent central bank in Mexico. We have better reporting techniques in Brazil. And I would
submit that while it may not be Anglo-Saxon capitalism, part of this is just a matter of realizing the
value of capital and the desire to attract capital. Moreover, the improving at-home conditions make
many of these countries increasingly attractive as an alternative. And the competition is good.
My question is to David, and maybe Brian or others. I wonder if you could—not now but
with some kind of briefing or a paper at some point—give us a sense about the issue you mentioned
of the lags in the effects of monetary policy tightening. I’m curious about the dynamics in a
tightening scenario such as the FOMC has been pursuing here. How do you calculate the impact and
the likely lag time intervals in the progressive process that we’ve been going through as opposed to a
one-time shock? I assume that your models include a dynamic. I’d like to understand it better, and

December 13, 2005

22 of 100

maybe some of my other colleagues would as well. So it’s not a question to be answered now, but if
you’d be kind enough to do that, I’d be grateful. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Well, at the risk of going back into a discussion that I think President
Santomero began and President Poole picked up on, I was struck by the slow pace of hiring that is in
your projection. You have job gains going from 85,000 a month in the second half of next year to
50,000 per month in 2007. Having come through the last three or four years, numbers like that in
monthly employment data would be cause for concern, and yet we still have growth not that far below
potential. We have structural productivity growing, a narrowing of the output gap, and
unemployment staying about stable—the difference being this rise in compensation per hour creating
enough income to support the demand side of it. You probably have talked enough about this but I
found that slowness in the pace of hiring a little disturbing after what we’ve been through. And I
wondered what your thoughts were about it. Maybe I’m just asking the same question that Tony was
asking in terms of the risks to consumer spending.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I’ll just add a couple of further comments that relate to your
concerns. One is that, given our forecast of labor force participation—which is pretty mild, as you
know—we think you should be lowering your sights as to what the underlying trend employment
growth would be on the establishment survey. We’re now putting that at roughly 90,000 a month, so
that—
MS. MINEHAN. To keep pace with the growth in the labor force.
MR. STOCKTON. To keep pace with our slight downward trend in labor force participation.
So if we’re right about that—and as you know, there is considerable uncertainty about that piece of
the forecast—then you’re going to have to start thinking of 90,000 as a pretty good number. Now,

December 13, 2005

23 of 100

we’re actually able to manage above 90,000 over the course of the next several months and into next
year, in part because we do think labor force participation is still below its trend. And as we move
back toward trend, we can get growth in overall payroll employment at a little above trend. So we
don’t really see the eventual slowing of employment gains as signaling a significant weakening in the
labor market. But we do have growth a bit below trend further out when GDP growth drops a little
below potential. So that’s also an element of the forecast.
Now, you’re right in some sense. If that were to occur in the context of gains in compensation
per hour that are roughly equal to what we’ve had, rather than the step-up that we’re projecting, we’re
going to have a shift in income distribution toward capital income and away from labor income.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.
MR. STOCKTON. And we think that shift would have a small negative effect for aggregate
demand. The negative effect is not as big as you might imagine because, obviously, to the extent that
the income distribution is going toward capital, the stock market would be strong, so the wealth
effects on consumption would be a little larger or capital spending would probably be stronger. Still,
if we’re wrong about this piece of the forecast, I think it goes in the direction that things could be a bit
weaker in terms of overall spending by 2007 than we’re forecasting.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes. I wondered about that as a downside risk. The numbers jumped out at
me, even recognizing your take on labor force participation. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I share President Poole’s longing for more understanding of the productivity
forecast. My understanding is that what you call “structural” is essentially a moving average. I’m
interested for this forecast, since there is such a big markup in that, to know the extent to which the
markup in the structural productivity outlook is merely an arithmetical consequence of a moving

December 13, 2005

24 of 100

average that had some recent upside data come into it. And the description about how you’ve altered
your forecast included a reference to a technical factor that I think went over my head. Can you help
us with that?
MR. STOCKTON. I’d be happy to, if you’re really willing to listen to it! [Laughter]
MR. LACKER. If it’s too much, we could do it offline. And more broadly, I’m interested in
understanding the framework you have for forecasting this. It’s not clear how that works. If there is a
memo or paper that you could refer me to that laid out all the machinery, I’d really appreciate it.
MR. STOCKTON. We’d be happy to do that as well. In principle, the upward revision in our
forecast for structural productivity growth this time was due to two factors. One was that productivity
was a lot stronger than we thought. But it wasn’t just that productivity was stronger; so it’s not just
this moving-average error term. It’s also the fact that we’re at a point in the business cycle, with labor
markets having tightened as much as they have, when we would have thought productivity growth
would be running a little below trend. So our previous estimate of the trend of 2¾ percent, with actual
productivity growing 3 percent, implied that productivity was being driven even further above trend.
And in our underlying model, in which there is a cyclical and a trend component to productivity, that
didn’t really seem sensible to us at this point, given that we think labor markets are close to balance.
We arrived at that view not just from looking at the employment rate but at plenty of other indicators
of labor market activity, which suggested to us that the underlying structural trend in productivity
probably has been faster than we thought. So we narrowed that tension by raising structural
productivity rather than continuing to forecast that actual productivity was going to slow back toward
our trend. I think that’s the principal source of that element in the forecast.
Now, as far as the technical factors go—I’ll be very brief here—our analysis of structural
productivity uses nonfarm business output and hours as measured from the establishment survey.

December 13, 2005

25 of 100

Potential GDP is a measure of output measured using GDP—not output in the nonfarm business
sector—and hours from the household survey—not the establishment survey. So there are two
technical factors that tend to account for the wedge: the output growth in the nonfarm business sector
versus GDP, and the growth in household hours versus establishment hours. And both of those
factors have been significantly negative over the course of the last several years. That is, output, as
measured by GDP, has been slower than nonfarm business output. And growth in hours, as measured
by the household survey, has been considerably stronger than in the establishment survey.
So you need both of those factors, in essence, to reconcile structural productivity and potential
output. That is why you might be puzzled as you look at the forecast wondering: Gee, they’ve got 3
percent structural productivity but only 3¼ percent growth in potential GDP. But, in fact, that’s the
way we do that element of the analysis. We’re more or less forced into that particular position.
MR. LACKER. Okay. If I could just follow up for a second: In the late ’90s, your forecast of
productivity growth seemed to display a cyclicality—almost a responsiveness to recent productivity
growth—that in hindsight took it up above where productivity growth came in and then down below
it. Are you worried about the sensitivity of your forecast to recent data?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, the answer to that question is yes. [Laughter] But actually I’m not
terribly worried that we’re doing that in this kind of filtering, which uses the structural model and
some statistical filters. We are downweighting the most recent observations because they haven’t
been through annual revisions. And there are plenty of reasons for thinking that the information
content in that third-quarter GDP number is not as large as the information content of productivity
measured in 2003. So we try to account for that as well.
MR. LACKER. Okay. I didn’t realize that. Thanks.

December 13, 2005

26 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, before we do the roundtable, let
me reiterate something that I think has been communicated—namely, that Brian is going to discuss in
some detail some of the back and forth that has been occurring here in recent days on the language of
the statement. So please abstain from commenting on the statement in the first round until Brian has
made his comments. Given that, have I discouraged anybody? [Laughter] President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. We’re a resilient group, Mr. Chairman. [Laughter] We don’t get
discouraged easily.
Developments in the Seventh District have been mixed. The data released since our last
meeting indicate that manufacturing expanded at a moderate pace, while housing slowed and
employment continued to be weaker than the national economy. That said, our contacts seem to be
more upbeat. We continue to hear reports of labor markets becoming tighter, leading to potential
wage pressure. One of the national temporary help firms in our District mentioned that they are
increasingly unwilling to guarantee their clients an hourly wage rate for the entire year. Another
indicated that entry-level wages are going up 3 to 4 percent but that at the mid- to upper-skill level
wages are rising 5 to 7 percent.
So I want to discuss two notable restructuring stories that point to the flexibility of the U.S.
economy, albeit with government presence, notably on the pension front. One is United, which is at
the end game, and the other involves GM and Delphi, which is just beginning. United’s CEO is
optimistic about their prospects, as they expect to exit from bankruptcy in February. Their business
has continued to improve, and forward bookings suggest that strength should persist in the coming
months. United is gaining market share, while the industry overall is reducing capacity. Having
unloaded their pension liabilities on the PBGC and restructured their labor contracts and other
contracts, they expect to be able to compete with the low-cost carriers, such as Southwest.

December 13, 2005

27 of 100

Incidentally, the CEO of United admitted to me that Ned Gramlich was right. He said that Ned’s
position on federal loans forced United to do it the right way and to get the needed concessions from
workers, suppliers, and creditors, and assistance from the PBGC.
Turning to the auto industry, as I mentioned last time, Delphi’s bankruptcy could result in
some meaningful restructuring of labor contracts. But there is a significant risk of a strike that could
seriously disrupt the auto industry, particularly General Motors. The negotiations are at a delicate
point with three key players—Delphi, the UAW, and GM. Approximately 15 to 20 percent of GM’s
parts come from Delphi, and GM has provided some guarantees to the Delphi workers for their
pensions and health care benefits. Clearly, the UAW is in a difficult position. A strike could well
cause Delphi to close its U.S. operations and reemerge as an international firm with a far smaller
union workforce. A prolonged strike at Delphi could also hobble GM. In a worst-case scenario, this
could force GM into bankruptcy, which would hurt the UAW workers at both GM and at Delphi. As
a result, all three parties have a strong incentive to avoid a strike.
There have been some positive signs. Delphi has postponed the deadline for an agreement
from December 16th to at least January 20th, and GM has given some concessions to Delphi on
prices. In my conversations with Rick Wagoner, the CEO of GM, he felt that while a lot of
antagonistic public statements have been made, the most likely outcome was that sanity would prevail
and a strike would be averted. But to avoid a strike, all three parties must throw something into the
pot. And he could not rule out some wildcat strikes at individual Delphi plants. Of course, a
settlement here does not solve GM’s longer-term problem, which is loss of market share. And, as
Dino mentioned, S&P downgraded GM’s corporate debt—not GMAC, but their corporate debt—
again yesterday by two notches.

December 13, 2005

28 of 100

In terms of the near-term outlook for auto sales, the consensus of 28 forecasters at our recent
annual economic outlook symposium was for a small decline in sales in 2006 from this year’s
expected pace of 16.9 million units. GM and DaimlerChrysler’s forecasts were in line with this
expectation, but Ford’s internal forecast is considerably lower, at 16½ million units.
Turning to the national outlook, economic activity continues to grow at a solid pace. Like the
Greenbook, we see growth at or slightly above trend over the next two years, and this is also roughly
in line with the consensus from our outlook symposium.
The prospects for inflation present greater risks. There are two plausible scenarios going
forward. In the first one, the increased energy costs in 2005 lead to a transitory increase in core
inflation in ’06, but in ’07 core inflation comes back down. This is the Greenbook baseline scenario.
In the second scenario, the increase in core inflation is more persistent, in part because there is less
slack in the economy in 2006. Furthermore, monetary policy has been accommodative for a long
time and there has been an accumulation of liquidity which ultimately could show through to higher
nominal spending. For these reasons, both inflationary pressures and inflationary expectations could
remain elevated for longer than envisioned in the first scenario.
Our statistical forecasts, based on the Stock-Watson methodology, are more in line with the
second, less optimistic scenario. Both scenarios are plausible, but the costs of the second one are
higher. So from a risk management perspective, we need to put adequate weight on the second
scenario. This may require more tightening next year than assumed in the Greenbook. But at this
point, we just don’t know. Consequently, we should make sure that the statement does not give a
premature signal that we’re near the end of the tightening cycle. But, as you requested, Mr.
Chairman, I’ll hold off further comments on the statement until the second round.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Hoenig.

December 13, 2005

29 of 100

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d describe the outlook for the U.S. economy as
solid, as the Greenbook has described it. Obviously, several factors contribute to this, including the
forward momentum that’s in the economy, the lagged effects of past monetary accommodation
(which we’ve talked about in the past), very supportive financial conditions, and stimulative fiscal
policy.
I would say that the evidence from the Tenth District is consistent with this broader outlook as
well, but we also are seeing some slowing in certain areas. Energy activity in our area continues to
expand at a very substantial pace. There is still a shortage of workers to support some of the
expansion that’s being sought. Manufacturers remain upbeat about future activity and plan increases
in capital spending over the next six months. In addition, consumer spending, after dropping
following the hurricanes, has rebounded solidly in our region. However, there is the point that David
mentioned about housing activity, which does appear to be leveling off in our region. And while
manufacturing activity continues to expand, it is at a somewhat slower pace. I would make note of
the fact that we also are being affected by some of the GM issues, since GM is closing its plant in
Oklahoma City and that will idle about 2,400 workers.
Turning to the inflation outlook, I expect core CPI inflation to be in the area of 2.3 percent
next year, as higher energy prices pass through to higher overall core inflation and as the effects of our
past accommodative policy show through. However, I expect that the increases may be temporary, as
productivity growth remains strong and as energy prices recede from where they have been, if that
continues. Nevertheless, I still would expect the inflation number to be in the 2 percent or slightly
higher range.

December 13, 2005

30 of 100

But that said, I think there continues to be a good case for further tightening at today’s
meeting. Beyond that, I would say it is less certain, as Michael said, and I think in our statement the
matter should be couched in the near term. And I’ll stop there as well. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me share a few thoughts on what we’re
seeing in our Southeast region. Overall, growth in our District continues at an acceptable pace, with
most of the data and most of the anecdotal reports from directors and other contacts being positive
across almost all sectors.
Recovery from the hurricanes is proceeding about as we expected, although it’s hard to track
all related economic activity, as many residents are still living in—and many businesses still operating
from—the new cities to which they fled. Businesses in the affected areas that are open are now
reporting brisk sales of autos and clothing, as belongings destroyed by the storm are replaced.
Economic activity for major rebuilding and replacement of housing-related durables has not really
started in any significant way. And if there is any new realization about the timing of that, it is that
the rebuilding process—and consequently the economic impact—will be considerably more
protracted than I first thought. It will probably be a process of five years or more. Almost half of
electricity and telephone customers in the area still have not had those services restored.
Since we last met, there have also been more and more frequent reports of a definite chill in
the residential construction activity and speculation in the frenzied coastal real estate markets. While
that is yet to show through in any convincing way in regional and national statistics, those reports of a
measurable shift in attitude and activity are coming from lenders, developers, and real estate
salespeople.

December 13, 2005

31 of 100

Perhaps most relevant to the near-term policy considerations, we’re still getting numerous
reports of price pressures and determination to try to relieve those pressures by passing through the
added costs. At our meetings last week, two directors from large national companies described what
they characterized as new windows of opportunity to get price increases—windows they have already
jumped through and gotten significant price increases that are sticking. They reported that even their
tough customers, like the Wal-Marts of the world, had accepted those increases. It was also reported
that while regular gasoline prices have come down, prices of diesel fuel had declined relatively less.
And while some rollback of fuel surcharges may be occurring, that is not yet evident.
Finally, on a regional level, early holiday sales are reported to be satisfactory. And our
director who is chief financial officer of UPS reported that deliveries are running above plan at this
point. Yet there is a realization that tracking total holiday sales may be more difficult than ever, as
consumers shift their buying patterns from traditional, more easily measurable stores to a larger use of
the Internet for purchases.
I also find the new information since our last meeting on the national front encouraging. The
latest numbers on third-quarter GDP were a bit better than I expected and describe what I, too, would
characterize as a solid expansion. We seem to have good balance across sectors. While it’s
reasonable to expect some marginal change in the mix of activity as we move into next year, I expect
more of the same in 2006.
While the significant fallback in oil prices from their recent highs, the continuing strong
competitive pressures, and the robust productivity gains have all worked to constrain inflationary
pressures, it’s my judgment that we could still see a rise in inflation as businesses continue to try to
recoup their higher input costs. And leaning against those potential pressures should be our priority,
at least for now.

December 13, 2005

32 of 100

Against that backdrop, I would argue that by some measures our current policy setting, at least
going into this meeting, is still accommodative. And whether we choose to describe it as such in our
statement, I favor staying on our policy path at least a bit longer. I think I look forward to our later
discussion of what the statement should say. [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, Texas and the Eleventh District are even more surprisingly
strong than the surprisingly strong rest of the United States. We see growth in retail sales and
manufacturing employment, strength in housing starts, and high occupancy rates. Houston is 100
percent occupied in terms of apartments, as part of the resultant fallout from President Guynn’s
District. In every single dimension, the Eleventh District economy is solid.
There is price seepage from natural gas and other products. The most alarming will be utility
bills, which are expected to jump by 40 percent next year. But what is taken from Peter often goes
into Paul’s pocket or, as we say, what is taken from Pedro goes into Pablo’s pockets in Texas. And
the best example I can give you is from the CEO of American Airlines, who told me yesterday that
their fuel bill over the last two years has increased $3 billion. As he put it, “The blood is being sucked
out of me, and it’s going to our friends down the street.” In this instance, that is literally the case
because Exxon is a couple of blocks away down the street. In terms of our local economy, this is
healthy for us because we’re energy neutral. In the activity surrounding energy, the rig count is up 23
percent this year. Energy company profits are soaring, as I referred to earlier. Oil royalty streams and
mineral rights holdings are expected to rise dramatically, so we have a wash as far as energy prices
are concerned. The bottom line is that Texas is a very happy place, the Eleventh District is a very
happy place, and our economy is strong. And it shows you the dynamic nature of our country.

December 13, 2005

33 of 100

Nationally, both the Greenbook and anecdotal evidence indicate that the economy is equally
solid. We see it in the retail sales data, as David reported today. But one of the aspects of those retail
sales numbers, according to our interlocutors at the big box distributors, is that less than half the goods
sold in what they call the “November frenzy” were deeply discounted goods. In other words, the
sales were solid.
I spoke to sixteen CEOs and CFOs in preparing for today. I basically heard only one new
concern, Mr. Chairman, which goes back to the point that Karen was making earlier about
globalization. Also, I want to point out that one of the big homebuilders—Hovnanian—confirmed
what you said, David. As he put it: Investors—meaning speculators—are exiting the business and it
is returning to normal. But the common concern coming from the retailers, the rails, the shippers, the
shipbuilders, and so on, was the following: Everyone I’ve talked to continues to try to figure out ways
to exploit globalization. Each of them, from the IT [information technology] guys to the big box
retailers to the specialty chemical firms to the service firms, wants to have offshore supply. One of
the CEOs said, “We have a long way to go in exploiting China.” We’ve heard that forever. And one
of my favorites was the comment, “China, India, and Indonesia can make Italian ceramics better than
Italians can now or could 200 years ago.” [Laughter]
The problem that I’m beginning to hear seeping into the conversation, Mr. Chairman, has to
do with U.S. infrastructure. If you read the New York Times article two days ago about Shanghai’s
new deep water port, you have to realize that those facilities are being built to ship goods out of
China, not so much to ship goods into China. And consider this, as reported by one of the shippers I
spoke with: 50 percent of all the ships on order for construction are container ships. Capacityexpanding container business is increasing at 15 percent or more per annum to carry cargo from
Shanghai and other parts of the world to the United States.

December 13, 2005

34 of 100

Now, this is good news on the disinflationary front. As the CEO of Northern Navigation, one
of the larger shippers told me, “Transportation by ship will essentially be free when these numbers are
realized in the marketplace.” The bad news is stateside. We don’t have the capacity to absorb it.
Long Beach and the Northwest harbors are constrained. Work rules, according to our interlocutors,
are very slow to adjust. But there are ways to beat the bottlenecks, and I just want to mention two.
UPS reports that they have gone from 6 to 18—and now for next year 21—flights from China. WalMart just built a four million square foot warehouse in the Houston port, in order to shift part of the
burden from Long Beach. But it is evident that the enemy is us as far as exploiting globalization, and
I think that’s a long-term problem that we might want to take note of over time.
Presently, I argue that the economy is solid. We have very good growth. I’m still a little
worried about inflation, but I’m convinced that we’re nipping it in the bud by the action of the FOMC
and that we might want to pause sooner rather than later. But, again, we might discuss that in the
discussion of the statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Incoming data since our last meeting have been
quite encouraging. Economic growth over the next few quarters should be boosted by rebuilding and
the full return of energy production in the Gulf. As rebuilding winds down and the lagged effects of
monetary policy tightening take hold, it seems plausible that growth will slow toward potential,
keeping unemployment around the current level of 5 percent, the scenario envisioned in the
Greenbook.
The economy’s remarkable resilience in the face of devastating hurricanes and three years of
rising energy prices suggest that the expansion has gained footing and no longer needs support from
monetary policy accommodation. Instead, a key issue facing us over the next few meetings is

December 13, 2005

35 of 100

whether policy might actually need to move to a restrictive stance in order to forestall inflationary
pressures.
I will therefore focus my attention on the factors affecting the inflation outlook. To do that,
we need to look first at the here and now and remind ourselves that recent readings on core prices
have consistently come in at or below expectations. There are no signs of acceleration. In fact, core
PCE [personal consumption expenditures] price inflation has slowed over the past year; the most
recent reading of 1.8 percent over the past twelve months is down 0.3 from the preceding year. And
the downward inflation trend has continued through this year, with core PCE inflation running at only
1.6 percent over the past six months, which is about the middle of my preferred range. Of course,
even though recent core inflation data look pretty darn good, there may be forces at work that could
undermine price stability. In my remaining remarks, I’d like to comment on some factors that could
push inflation higher and consider their likely effects in the current situation.
The first risk to price stability is that, contrary to the Greenbook forecast, growth may not
actually subside toward potential. So labor and product markets could tighten further, pushing
unemployment below NAIRU, which current estimates place around 5 percent. This possibility is
illustrated in the stronger aggregate demand scenario in the Greenbook. That simulation shows that
monetary policy would, of course, need to tighten. But the inflation consequences would be modest,
given a reactive Taylor rule monetary policy response. So to deal with this risk, it seems to me that
policy need not be preemptive.
A sustained slowdown in productivity growth would pose a more challenging dilemma for
policy and the inflation outlook. Fortunately, however, productivity growth over the past year has not
slowed. Quite the contrary, it has been surprisingly robust. Output per hour in the nonfarm business
sector grew more than 3 percent over the past year, beating out previous estimates of structural

December 13, 2005

36 of 100

productivity growth of around 2¾ percent. As I discussed at our meeting a year ago, I think there are
compelling reasons why productivity growth may well remain elevated for some time, having to do
with the gradual diffusion of new technologies and workplace practices throughout the economy.
Therefore, I concur with the staff’s conclusion that the accumulated evidence indicates that structural
productivity growth is around 3 percent and with the corresponding upward revision in the outlook for
actual productivity. Given the sluggish adjustment of wages to changes in productivity, the stronger
path of productivity reduces the rate of growth of unit labor costs, putting downward pressure on
inflation. So productivity trends suggest a tempering of inflationary pressures, not an intensification.
Energy prices also pose a potential threat to inflation. But as I argued a few meetings back,
the empirical evidence does not support significant pass-through of energy prices into core inflation. I
won’t repeat those arguments today but simply note, once again, that core PCE inflation has actually
moderated, despite a nearly 30 percent increase in energy prices over the past year, on top of a 15
percent rise in the previous year. Moreover, energy prices on the whole have come down sharply of
late, and, therefore, the risk of significant pass-through to core inflation has moderated as well.
In addition, it appears that the Fed’s credibility has held up well this year, despite the supply
shocks associated with higher energy prices and hurricanes. Survey measures of longer-run inflation
expectations are about where they stood before the storms. Longer-run inflation expectations based
on Treasury securities have come down about ¼ percentage point since the last FOMC meeting and
are now below levels of a year ago.
Finally, it’s possible that wage growth could accelerate, putting upward pressure on the
growth of unit labor costs and inflation. And, indeed, the Greenbook forecast projects exactly such an
acceleration, reflecting lagged pass-through of earlier increases in both energy prices and productivity
into wages. In particular, the Greenbook forecasts that hourly compensation, as measured by the

December 13, 2005

37 of 100

employment cost index, will increase 4.2 percent in 2006, following a 3 percent gain this year. It
projects an even larger—1.7 percentage point—acceleration in compensation per hour in the nonfarm
business sector.
To gauge the likelihood of such an acceleration in compensation, my staff examined the passthrough of energy prices and productivity into wages. They used forecasting models in which wage
inflation is determined by lagged wage inflation, price inflation, productivity growth, and the
unemployment rate. Now, it turns out that when the sample period used in the analysis includes the
1970s, our empirical work finds clear evidence of pass-through from energy prices into compensation.
But when the sample begins in the 1980s, pass-through effects from energy prices to compensation
are dramatically weaker or insignificant. This result is consistent with the finding I reported
previously. There is no real evidence that energy prices pass through to core consumer inflation since
the early 1980s. With respect to the pass-through of productivity growth into compensation, our staff
finds evidence of only very gradual pass-through regardless of the sample period. Going forward, our
models predict significantly less increase in compensation growth than the Greenbook over the 2006­
2007 forecast horizon. We conclude from this empirical work that an increase in inflation due to a
sharp acceleration in compensation growth is, at most, an upside risk to inflation and not the most
probable outcome.
I opened my remarks by noting that a key issue facing us over the next few meetings is
whether policy needs to move to a restrictive stance in order to forestall inflationary pressures. While
we must obviously remain vigilant and respond to developments that threaten price stability, the
evidence that we have at this time, in my opinion, points to relatively low and stable inflation going
forward. Moreover, history teaches us that it is not easy to foresee the point at which past policy

December 13, 2005

38 of 100

tightening takes hold and the economy reaches a turning point. Therefore, it’s important that we keep
the lags of monetary policy actions in mind in our deliberations and not go too far.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think a fair reading of New
England’s economy is that it continues to be a bit weaker than the nation’s as a whole. To be sure,
this sense is skewed by conditions in Massachusetts, which alone accounts for about half of the
region’s employment. Nonfarm employment declined again in October after a somewhat bigger drop
in September, softening the region’s year-over-year job growth rate to about half of the nation’s as a
whole. But Massachusetts accounted for more than the recent net losses, with job gains in all of the
other states acting to offset drops in the Bay State. Other indicators of state health show similar
patterns. In particular, the Philadelphia Fed’s coincident index shows growth in Massachusetts
flattening while growth in the other five states is accelerating.
A question one could ask, and one that I’ve been asking myself, is whether employment data
and indices derived largely from measures of job growth correctly provide the best sense of the
overall climate of a regional economy—and in the case of Massachusetts, a state economy—that is
driven increasingly by high value-added industries whose employment patterns reflect cycles of
innovation more than traditional business cycles. Contacts in the high-tech, biotech, and software
worlds all indicate that business is solid and that money to expand is freely available. Depending on
the product, growth is either occurring or in the works, but often the related hiring is planned for
lower-cost states outside New England or other countries. These businesses want their headquarters
to remain in New England. They want to strengthen their links to the research being done in the
major universities, and they regard the highly skilled labor that they need in their research activities as

December 13, 2005

39 of 100

hard to find and increasingly expensive. But when they expand more broadly, they are choosing to
expand elsewhere.
Thus, there are areas of strength and weakness in some of the regional data. The states of the
region seem to be doing pretty well fiscally, and that reflects the profitability of many of these hightech types of businesses. But businesses that thrive on growing job counts, like commercial office
markets, seem quite slow. And personal income tax collections are lagging a bit, at least relative to
what the states have projected in their budgets. Somewhat surprisingly, consumer confidence has
ticked up a bit despite the flat job picture, and residential real estate markets still seem strong, though
the high end has lost a bit of steam. Travel and tourism has its tos and fros. The fall wasn’t
particularly good for leaf peeping, but the winter looks not bad because there has been some early
snowfall for skiing.
The region is going to bear the brunt of high energy costs this winter, given its dependence on
heating oil and expensive natural gas for electricity generation. That probably is the reason why
overall business confidence has softened a bit. In my expectation, the region may well continue to lag
the nation in job growth, but should prove resilient through the winter months. I think the mix of its
industries is not only providing resilience to the region but also an ongoing impetus to the productivity
growth we see for the nation as a whole.
Incoming data since the last Committee meeting were on the high side of our expectations and
provided welcome assurance that at least for the time being the energy shock, hurricane destruction,
and slight softening in housing markets did little to impede the underlying forward momentum of the
national economy. And the recent robust data on productivity growth provide even more assurance
that this pace of underlying momentum is occurring at a time when there may be more rather than less
capacity. Indeed, if one assumes less of a downward trend in labor force participation than the

December 13, 2005

40 of 100

Greenbook projection, which is certainly in the realm of the possible, available capacity could be even
greater.
Our forecast is perhaps not quite as optimistic as the Greenbook’s, but it does see the same
two rather distinct economic phases over the forecast horizon. In the near term, after a bit of a dip in
the fourth quarter, which may not be much of a dip at this point, growth accelerates as hurricane
rebuilding proceeds, federal spending increases, energy price growth rates flatten, and inventories are
rebuilt. Then by mid-2006, the economy slows, as tighter monetary policy puts a crimp in real estate
markets, the personal saving rate ticks up, as we hope it does, and the fiscal impulse wanes. During
the near term, inflation pressures are expected to be more significant, with some pass-through of high
energy costs to core inflation. Over the medium term, these pressures ease.
It’s certainly possible for surprises on either side of this baseline. That is, we could see
inflation around longer than we now expect or, on the opposite side, we could see demand falter, with
consumer retrenchment in the face of slower hiring. I continue to believe that managing the risks of
rising prices reduces the potential cost of mistakes, and that suggests some further tightening. But
how long that will be necessary, in my view anyway, is uncertain.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On balance, economic activity is growing at a
solid pace in the Fifth District, though auto sales are faltering and housing markets are cooling. On
the upside, employment conditions have been strengthening, with signs that the job numbers are
increasing even at District factories. Outside of autos and big-ticket items though, retail sales
strengthened substantially this month. Retailers indicate that holiday sales are solid, and they’ve
become more optimistic about prospects for the first half of ’06. Auto sales are weak, though, and
SUVs remain unpopular even after the season’s first snowfall. Services firms are also upbeat, with

December 13, 2005

41 of 100

revenues and employment growing over the last two months. Home sales remain at high levels but
we are receiving widespread reports that activity is decelerating, particularly in northern Virginia
where markets have been quite robust in recent years. A number of independent reports describe “a
return to normalcy” in residential real estate markets, with houses actually being on the market and
not getting multiple bids on the first day. Manufacturing continues to hold its own. Although
shipments and new orders were softer in early December, the hiring index was up for our District, and
firms have become notably more optimistic about their early ’06 prospects.
District price pressures seem to have eased somewhat in December. Although retail prices
were reported to have advanced at the same strong pace as in November, outside the retail sector
services’ prices have decelerated from October to December. Manufacturing price gains peaked in
November in our series, and our preliminary numbers show that both prices paid and prices received
slowed sharply this month.
Turning to the national economy, we’ve received a string of favorable data since our October
meeting, suggesting both that the economy had considerable momentum prior to this fall’s storms and
that the effects of the storms on economic activity outside the affected region and the energy sector
have not been as large as feared. I’m particularly encouraged by the continued strength in business
investment spending in the present quarter, as evidenced by capital goods orders and the ISM
numbers. I’m also encouraged by anecdotal reports of a cooling in District and national housing
markets. These reports are consistent with a continuing handoff from residential to business
investment. That said, I’m tempted to paraphrase Solow, though, and say that the slowdown in
housing appears to be visible everywhere but in the housing activity data. [Laughter]
Consumer spending has held up quite well. My sense is that the most important source of this
stability and strength is households’ beliefs about their real income growth in the near future. For this

December 13, 2005

42 of 100

reason, given the Greenbook forecast for income growth in the near term, I would not expect a
flattening of housing prices to seriously dampen consumer spending. Rather, I expect, consistent with
the Greenbook, consumer spending growth to come in on the strong side going forward, with the
saving rate rising only slowly.
The inflation picture has also improved notably since our last meeting, in my mind. The
October core PCE number was heartening, and inflation expectations have been well behaved. Both
survey measures and TIPS compensation spreads have come down off the post-Katrina highs they
reached earlier this fall.
While the inflation picture is somewhat better, it does leave some room for concern, in my
view. This Greenbook forecasts a 2.2 percent core inflation rate for the first half of ’06, less than the
last Greenbook, but it still makes me somewhat uncomfortable. With oil prices appearing to have
found a stable range in the neighborhood of $60 a barrel and with natural gas prices remaining high
and volatile, I think it will be several months before the risk of pass-through can be completely put to
bed. As for the econometric evidence about pass-through, I’d note that expectations regarding our
policy response represent a latent variable that of necessity is omitted in most econometric exercises.
I take less comfort from the econometric evidence than you do, President Yellen. Our preemption
may be required for the pattern you found in the ’90s to actually continue to be confirmed in the data.
In the meantime, I think we need to ensure that the public understands our resolve with regard
to inflation. And the real funds rate in the neighborhood of 2 percent is very likely too low for an
economy that’s in a sustained expansion with relatively full resource utilization. So I think it’s
appropriate to follow through today with a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.

December 13, 2005

43 of 100

MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has been little change in Third
District economic conditions since our last meeting. The regional economy continues to expand at its
potential pace, which is somewhat lower than in other parts of the country. Payroll employment is
increasing steadily in our three states, and the tri-state unemployment rate fell to 4.3 percent in
October, which is its lowest level since May of 2001.
Regional manufacturing activity continues to expand at a moderate pace. The index of
general activity in our manufacturing survey eased slightly to 11.5 in November from 17.3 in October.
Although there has been some month-to-month volatility in the index this year, it has generally been
near the average that was recorded in the 1990s expansion.
Retailers report a slightly better sales figure for October and November compared to the same
period a year ago. In general, sales of luxury goods and consumer electronics continue to expand
more strongly than other lines of merchandise, and discount stores had better results than mid-priced
department and specialty stores.
While construction continues to be a strong sector in our region, we are beginning to see early
signs of moderation in the housing market. These signs do not point to a sharp drop, only a slight
softening of demand. As elsewhere, permits have declined and real estate agents reported slower
sales in October and November. Some agents also noted that the number of existing homes on the
market has risen and that the numbers of offers per house and above-asking-price bids have declined.
There was also a slight easing in price appreciation in each of the three states in the third quarter, and
this moderation appears to be continuing in the fourth quarter.
We continue to see signs of higher prices for industrial goods in our region. There was a
sharp increase in the price indices in our manufacturing survey in October. This eased only slightly in
November and remains near a high point during this expansion. Firms also expect prices to remain

December 13, 2005

44 of 100

elevated. The future price indices are high relative to most readings during the expansion, and the
results of a special survey question indicate that cost increases are widely anticipated for all inputs
next year. These expectations are widespread across firms—and more widespread than during the
summer period when we asked the same question. Indeed, while our business contacts expect
continued moderate expansion in business activity, rising prices beyond those in energy have become
more of a concern for firms in our District.
Turning to the national economy, I note that the Greenbook forecast has been revised to show
more underlying strength in the third and fourth quarters compared to last time. It’s more consistent
with my own view on the national economy. Incoming data over the intermeeting period suggest that
the economy retained a good deal of upward momentum. The third-quarter preliminary GDP figures
showed broad-based strength in consumption and fixed investment growth, with strong productivity
gains. Despite the dislocation from Hurricane Katrina, we have sturdy underlying job growth and a
low unemployment rate. Consumer confidence has partially recovered from post-hurricane lows, and
consumer spending outside autos continues to advance at a moderate pace. Business spending has
also strengthened since the summer, and manufacturing productivity and business investment
continue to advance. In my mind, the risks to growth are slightly on the upside, as I read the data as
supporting continued underlying strength.
The official inflation numbers and readings on inflation expectations have been somewhat
reassuring over the intermeeting period. To date, we’ve seen little pass-through, as a number of
people have noted, of higher energy prices into core inflation, and we’ve also seen some decline in
energy prices. In addition, both near-term and long-term inflation expectations have declined a bit.
This news is clearly favorable to the inflation outlook. However, it seems somewhat at odds with
what we’re hearing from our business contacts. They indicate that they’re facing higher input prices

December 13, 2005

45 of 100

and have recently found it somewhat easier to raise their own prices in the current environment of
quite strong demand. This view has also been supported by our own and other manufacturing
surveys. So I remain concerned about inflationary pressures, and I believe that an uptick in inflation
is, indeed, a risk.
Therefore, a prudent course of action today, in my opinion, is to continue to gradually move
rates up. Whether such a move is closing in on the equilibrium real rate from below or whether such a
move will put the real funds rate above the equilibrium value or place it in the range of uncertainty
around the long-run value is an interesting question. So is how we will explain what we are going to
do. But I’ll defer my views on these issues until the second part of our discussion. Suffice it to say I
look forward to that. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What a difference six weeks can make. At our
last meeting, the Greenbook offered two alternative scenarios—stagflation and a consumer sentiment
slump—which at least from the Fourth District’s perspective seemed plausible and worrisome. In
early November, we had to consider the possibility that output growth might weaken even as inflation
accelerated. Fortunately, the output and productivity data that we’ve received since that meeting have
been on the upside, and the inflation news has been generally encouraging. Although there are still
various scenarios to worry about today, stagflation and a consumer sentiment slump no long appear to
be among them. My own information-gathering process during this intermeeting period leaves me
very comfortable with the Greenbook baseline, which now expects more favorable paths for output,
productivity, and inflation than it called for at our last meeting.
I have a few observations about each of these. First, output. The national pace of economic
activity appears to be on the upswing, even though in my own District the economy appears to remain

December 13, 2005

46 of 100

on a slower improvement trend. Bankers report that the commercial loan pipelines are filling up, and
competition among lenders is very strong. As I said, my District has been trailing the nation. The
automobile industry has a large weight in my District, and recent developments there, though not
unexpected, are pretty dreary, as President Moskow reported. The Big Three automobile companies
and their suppliers are under intense pressure to downsize and reduce costs, especially labor costs.
Many plant closings and layoffs have already been announced, and the dark clouds hanging over the
industry are already having adverse effects on many communities. But most business leaders I speak
with outside of the automobile industry are optimistic about their national markets as they look into
next year.
Next I’ll comment on productivity. The CEOs that I talked to are still working very hard to
generate profits by increasing productivity. I’m amazed by how frequently and uniformly CEOs talk
about efficiency efforts under way in their companies. A natural consequence of the productivity
culture, of course, is that business people are watching their head counts very closely, even as their
sales are expanding. Hospital executives are especially bullish about their ability to generate
significant productivity gains, and they’ve been ramping up their capital spending on equipment and
facilities. One of my directors works for a large commercial construction company and reports that
this is a nationwide trend.
Finally, inflation. Retailers tell me that they’ve trained their customers to shop for bargains
only too well. Consumers are relentless in their hunt for bargains, and Internet shopping is growing
rapidly in popularity and making that hunt for bargains easier. Retailers in the District tell me that
they expect consumers to hang back and wait until the bitter end for steeper discounts, and those
discounts are going to inevitably rise as Christmas looms close. Consequently, retailers expect to turn
over their inventories, but they anticipate having to give up some of the normal profit margins that

December 13, 2005

47 of 100

they seek at this time of the year. Discounting is extremely intense. Sales volume, then, should turn
out well, but profits may be disappointing.
Some manufacturers say that they are finally getting a little traction with price increases above
and beyond the energy surcharges. But most manufacturers that I talked to report that competition
remains very intense and they emphasize that they have little pricing power. Although businesses
have had to absorb price increases for many of their commodity inputs, several business executives
note that raw materials prices have stopped increasing for the most part and, in many instances, have
started to decline.
So as I look at the national economy, I’m very comfortable with the Greenbook baseline. I
expect productivity growth to hold up rather well next year, along the lines of that faster productivity
growth alternative scenario in the Greenbook. Although I indicated in my report at our last meeting
that we could see stronger pass-through of energy prices, I was not hearing that from my business
contacts in their reports this time around. In fact, many of them said that the energy and commodity
price shocks that we’ve experienced in the past two years could move through our economy without
elevating core inflation rates.
The disappearance of the stagflation and consumer sentiment slump scenarios and the
emergence of other risks serve as a reminder to me that the future, even the near-term future, is
uncertain. The 70 percent confidence range surrounding the Greenbook baseline projection is wide
enough to include all of the alternative simulations. I believe, as a couple of others have already said,
that with another move today our policy accommodation will have been substantially removed,
making the timing and extent of additional firming more uncertain for me. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Poole.

December 13, 2005

48 of 100

MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve been debating whether we should characterize
the expansion as vigorous or solid. I decided that it’s vigorously solid. [Laughter]
On the consumption front, to give you an idea how strong demand is, my Wal-Mart contact
says that 30 percent of the TVs they sell are now digital, up from 5 percent last holiday season. They
have greater sales also of other higher-end—medium and premium—price points. And he says that
inventory, if anything, is on the short side of desired levels, particularly for the higher-end items.
A pervasive theme in my discussions with business people is that construction costs are rising
rather rapidly. Wal-Mart says 10 to 15 percent, and that seems to be generally true across the
economy, according to my contacts. The transportation industry, I think, is stretched at this point.
For quite some time there have been problems with rail transportation of coal. Our contacts with a
power company in the St. Louis area said that they’ve been able to build stocks of coal at power
plants but the level is still well below the normal, desired level.
A contact with a major trucking company said that they have no plans to increase capacity in
their truck business, which is about 30 percent of the total. They plan a 5 percent increase in capacity
in the intermodal area—that’s the piggyback business—and 10 percent capacity expansion in the
dedicated truck business, which involves trucks for particular companies like Wal-Mart.
My UPS contact said that they have been stretched quite tightly this holiday season; he
mentioned that DHL has been having severe operational problems at its Wilmington, Ohio hub. UPS
could not find extra lift, as they call it, on an ad hoc basis and had to have work-arounds to have
enough capacity to meet the demand. UPS is planning to expand its China-to-U.S. capacity next year
by 26 percent, which reinforces what Richard said a few minutes ago.
There is a risk of disruption because of strikes. UPS—and FedEx is right behind—is coming
to the end of the negotiation with their pilots, which has not been going well. The pilots in those

December 13, 2005

49 of 100

companies are now the best paid in the industry because the passenger airlines have reduced pilots’
pay. The pilots’ union is apparently adamant in wanting a larger piece of the profits of the company,
so I think we should not by any means rule out the possibility of a strike at UPS early next year. My
contact there said that the level of frustration within the company about the various job actions by
pilots is very high. Pilots have been calling in and saying, for example, that they’re fatigued and can’t
fly, and they have caused a lot of disruption by tactics of that sort.
I think those are the only comments I want to offer. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don’t we break for coffee at this time and come back in
fifteen minutes.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me try to restart this discussion by saying, first,
that I largely agree with the Greenbook assessment of the economy and, in particular, with the overall
positive economic outlook it presents. This is consistent with the incoming data on the national
economy that we’ve received recently and with the preponderance of recent reports on the District
economy as well. Notably, the District is benefiting from an overall good year in agriculture,
sustained improvement in the manufacturing sector, and what I would call positive substitution effects
stemming from hurricane-related disruptions elsewhere, which have led, for example, to more
shipping out of the Port of Duluth-Superior than otherwise would have occurred, more volume for
local trucking firms, and so forth.
One minor difference I might have with the Greenbook outlook pertains to the labor market
and the unemployment rate. It seems to me that the forecast for economic growth in 2006 overall is
not terribly different from what we’ve had in ’04 and ’05. And cumulatively, the unemployment rate

December 13, 2005

50 of 100

dropped nearly a full percentage point from the end of 2003 to the end of 2005. Using that as a rough
guide or rule of thumb, I would think we’d get at least some modest further decline in the rate of
unemployment next year. I would hasten to add—and I think this is potentially a more important and
maybe also a more controversial point—that even if we get that drop in the unemployment rate, it
wouldn’t affect my inflation forecast. In fact, looking at the totality of the information available, I
don’t think that the risks to the core inflation outlook are skewed one way or the other, and I’m
inclined to agree with Dave Stockton’s assessment that inflationary pressures are close to topping out.
I say this because incoming data on core inflation have been relatively favorable, bond markets
suggest to me that inflation expectations remain well anchored, and a lot of policy accommodation
has been removed.
Indeed, summing up these factors as well as the results from most versions of the Taylor rule
presented in the Bluebook, calculations with Fisher-type interest rate equations, and the Greenbook
forecast itself, it seems to me that after this meeting we will at least be very close to the point where
we will have raised the federal funds rate sufficiently for now. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Our forecast for the national outlook has not changed
substantially since the last meeting, and relative to the discussions so far, I guess we’re slightly at the
stronger end.
The recent data have been encouraging both here and internationally. The underlying pace of
demand growth seems pretty good to us—good enough to raise the probability of the expansion
continuing at a pace at or slightly above trend. The inflation news has also been reassuring, though
underlying inflation is still running somewhat above what we’d like to see over time.

December 13, 2005

51 of 100

We believe these conditions justify some further tightening of monetary policy, perhaps
another 50 to 75 basis points. We are, therefore, comfortable with the expectations now built into the
market. And with that monetary policy assumption, we think the risks to the forecast and to our
objectives are roughly balanced. So, relative to September and October, we see somewhat less
downside risk to growth, perhaps even some upside risk, and somewhat less upside risk to inflation.
As this implies, our view is very close to the Greenbook.
Let me mention a few other points. The apparent strength in productivity should make us
more comfortable about the sustainability of the expansion and a bit less concerned about the nearterm inflation risks because, of course, if the productivity growth stays stronger longer, we can be
more confident that consumer spending will stay reasonably strong even if a more substantial
slowdown in housing materializes. Scenarios in which more-moderate house price appreciation or
some decline in housing prices leads to a sizable increase in the personal saving rate are probably less
plausible or less troubling in an environment where consumers are more confident in the outlook for
the economy or more confident in their future income growth.
The productivity news, combined with continued moderation in the core inflation numbers
and the moderation in measures of inflation expectations, make the inflation outlook somewhat more
favorable. But against these factors there are others that justify some continued attention. Of course,
overall inflation is still high, even though we expect it to moderate. Various measures of underlying
inflation are still above what we would be comfortable with over time. There probably is still some
energy cost pressure in the pipeline. And the TIPS-derived measures of inflation expectations over
the medium term, if you adjust for the carry effect, have not really moved down that much. With
compensation growth accelerating, we would expect eventually to see some upward pressure on labor
costs, though of course less than would be the case with lower productivity numbers. Moreover,

December 13, 2005

52 of 100

surveys and anecdotal reports of pricing behavior, as we read them, suggest that businesses are able to
pass on some share of their increased costs. So for these reasons, even with the additional tightening
priced into the markets, we probably face some modest upside risk to our inflation forecast and to our
objective, and we should continue to lean against this risk in what we do and what we say.
We don’t see evidence yet to support a concern that the path of the nominal fed funds rate
now priced into the markets risks going too far. Housing may be slowing a bit, but not really much.
Other spending indicators look strong—probably stronger than we thought—and the strength is
broader than it has been across the components of GDP. Expected real rates don’t suggest a high
degree of concern, in our view. It’s just some concern, but not acute concern about the downside risk
to future growth. If you try to take out expected inflation from forward rates, it looks as if real rates
move up over the 2- to 5-year horizon. Equity prices, credit spreads, and the implied volatility of
most asset prices don’t seem to suggest a lot of concern about significant deterioration ahead in the
pace of the expansion.
Although we don’t think the narrowing of the term spread itself or the low overall level of the
yield curve offers clear guidance about monetary policy—clear guidance in terms of arguing for a
softer or firmer stance than the other fundamentals might suggest—we’re somewhat more inclined to
take the view that this change in the structure of term premia suggests we will have to do more than
otherwise would have been the case. So all of this suggests to us that we should continue to tighten
further and signal that we think we have still more to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The news over the intermeeting period has
suggested some shift in the nature of the inflation risks faced by the economy. Low and stable core
consumer price inflation together with declining retail energy prices and some continued edging lower

December 13, 2005

53 of 100

of inflation expectations seem to imply a reduced threat from near-term feed-through of energy prices
to expectations or to core inflation.
At the same time, however, information on output and demand indicate that the economy
remains on a growth track which is expanding a little more quickly than potential supply. And this is
a trajectory that would increase pressure on resources at a time when those resources are already
being fairly well employed. The reasons for the greater-than-expected momentum in output are
unclear. Some of the strength may represent a more muted response to hurricane disruptions or
energy prices than anticipated, but much would seem to be related to underlying strength in aggregate
demand. The upward surprises in demand in the third quarter were global, not just in the United
States. Increases in industrial commodity prices and sizable gains in equity prices around the world
evidence widespread economic strength and expectations that it will persist.
Added demand and rising equity prices have provoked little, if any, offsetting tightening in
financial conditions in credit markets. Long-term interest rates globally were little changed on
balance over the intermeeting period, and risk spreads out the yield curve and across risk categories
continue to be low, reflecting the basically optimistic outlook of investors.
Perhaps the resilience of the global economy to oil price increases and persistent expansion in
global GDP, including in such laggards as Japan, are slowly increasing the confidence of nonfinancial businesses as well. In the United States, the growth of business investment has come into
line with past relationships with the cost of capital and changes in output, though the level of
investment still remains a bit lower than might be expected.
As a consequence of this strength, one question is whether the current constellation of interest
rates and asset prices, including expectations of the funds rate topping out in the 4½ to 4¾ percent
range here, is tight enough to produce the moderation in growth needed to keep the economy in the

December 13, 2005

54 of 100

neighborhood of its potential and to keep inflation stable. In the staff forecast and in the markets,
such a rise in the funds rate is seen as sufficient to contain inflation, and that strikes me as a
reasonable estimate, pending further information.
Although long-term rates haven’t changed much for several quarters, short- and intermediateterm rates have increased quite a lot and will continue to move higher as we firm policy. These
higher rates should exert increasing restraint on spending, especially for households that have been
relying on borrowing at low short-term rates to short-circuit liquidity and income constraints when
buying durables or houses.
The slowing in consumer credit growth and mortgage loan applications in recent months may,
indeed, indicate that higher short- and intermediate-term rates are beginning to bite. Moreover,
perhaps as a consequence of the rise in borrowing costs, we do see some signs of a cooling in housing
markets, as many of you remarked. Certainly the perceptions about housing markets of both builders
and buyers have deteriorated noticeably in recent months, and the shift in attitudes may be particularly
important when a significant portion of the activity in this market has been linked to investment
demand. Based on these indicators and others, a slowing of house price appreciation and a
moderation in construction activity next year seem to be a reasonable expectation. Such a slowing is
a critical element behind the moderation in growth next year in the staff forecast, and I suspect in the
market’s assessment as well.
Still, we need to see more concrete evidence that this channel is working as anticipated, both
in prices and in activity, before we can be confident that demand is likely to moderate. Nonetheless,
the incoming information also reinforces the notion that we can afford to retain the gradual path of
policy tightening as we look for signs that moderation is coming. With the upward revision to
estimated structural productivity growth, the economy is not expanding very much above its long-run

December 13, 2005

55 of 100

growth of potential. In addition, the better productivity and the downward revision to compensation
data show the increase in business costs being held in check better than had been evident. And the
higher rate of growth of structural productivity should help to hold down that increase in costs going
forward. Moreover, the markups of price over unit labor costs have risen appreciably in the last two
quarters for both nonfarm business as a whole and, within that category, for nonfinancial corporations.
And those markups are close to the record highs of the mid-1990s, suggesting that businesses have
some room and incentive to absorb some of the increases in labor costs that might be coming.
As a consequence of these developments, I think we can be a little less concerned about the
immediate threat of higher inflation, though we still need to focus on forestalling the potential for
supply-demand imbalances to develop over the medium run. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The concept of the known unknown came to
the national consciousness about a year or two ago, and I sense that it’s very much in this room today.
The baseline forecast calls for a very nice, soft landing to potential growth with contained inflation if
we just tighten our policy one or two more turns. I’m certainly prepared to accept that forecast for the
purpose of today’s meeting, but the uncertainties or the known-unknown factors around it are to me
quite obvious. To me the risks are clearly to the upside with respect to growth, but surprisingly may
be more balanced with respect to inflation.
It is easier to see an upside growth risk than a downside one, in large part because the
incoming data have been surprisingly robust, making a slowing just a quarter or two away seem a
little bit of a stretch. Much of the waning wealth effect on which the baseline is built is due to a
slowing in the housing market. It is true that some of the indicators suggest some moderation there,
including a slight edging off of mortgage applications and a souring of home-buying attitudes. But

December 13, 2005

56 of 100

when lined up against the actual strength shown in home sales themselves, both existing and new—
and also prices, which have continued to appreciate at a double-digit pace through the third quarter—
it is hard to say that the housing market is anything but robust.
A second element of the wealth effect that the Greenbook assumes is that the equity price
appreciation will be no more than needed to keep the current level of the equity risk premium about
stable. But again, it is easy to see some upside potential here. The equity risk premium is now above
average. The recent run-up in equity prices, coupled with sustained high levels of productivity
growth, an attractive profits outlook, and healthy corporate balance sheets all make it perhaps a little
more likely that equity prices will rise rather than fall, and indeed, rise more than expected. If this
were to occur, the earnings-price ratio would decline and the equity risk premium would return to the
normal range, and in doing so would provide more equity wealth impetus to the economy than
perhaps the baseline assumes.
Finally, global growth is a surprise to the upside. As Dino indicated, equity prices have
shown remarkable strength globally. Monetary policy itself has in many cases been somewhat
stimulative and generally financial conditions have been supportive of growth. All of this suggests a
bias toward faster global growth due to accommodative financial markets broadly.
On inflation, I judge that the risks to the baseline forecast are perhaps a little better balanced.
While the upside growth risk would certainly pressure resources with inflationary consequences, that
is not the entire story. For one thing, inflation has come in a little softer recently than we had
expected. Secondly, energy prices seem to have flattened, and market participants expect them to
moderate even further, providing a rapid diminution of the upward momentum to headline inflation.
Thirdly, import prices seem likely to remain contained; and for both energy prices and import prices,

December 13, 2005

57 of 100

pass-through has been relatively low. Finally and importantly, longer-term inflation expectations are
moderate.
I would also add in this regard something that has not been much discussed here: Labor
compensation itself has been on the weaker side, even as resource utilization has tightened. And
finally, the productivity growth story, I think, has shown continued robustness. In this regard I’d
point out that we talk a great deal about the upward adjustment to the structural productivity growth in
the staff forecast, but all they’ve really done is just to maintain what has happened from 2001 to 2004.
So maybe we’ve put too much weight on the temporary downward movement as opposed to just
recognizing that things haven’t changed very much.
So given this view of the risks around the forecast, why do I propose that we accept the
baseline for purposes of today’s decision and communication? First, I am mindful that policy works
with long and variable lags. While the risks for us are not totally balanced, the greater weight of the
evidence, I think, is still for a good outcome, given that we have moved rates up quite considerably.
And with inflation expectations still well contained, I think there’s no reason to adjust market
perceptions of what we’re likely to do going forward. If those two facts did not adhere, my judgment
might be different.
Secondly, one would have to say that while the housing sector story is yet to come, there are,
as we’ve heard around this table, a large number of anecdotes all pushing primarily in the same
direction—supporting, I would think, the baseline.
Third, I take some comfort in the fact that the baseline forecast is shared roughly by most
outside forecasters. The Greenbook does not seem to be out of the trend. The Blue Chip consensus is
that after more than two years of above-trend growth, activity in 2006 is likely to moderate to its trend
rate and perhaps a bit below by the end of the year. Importantly, the fed funds assumptions that

December 13, 2005

58 of 100

underlie the Blue Chip are not distinguishable dramatically from the Greenbook forecast. President
Moskow has already talked about what happened in Chicago at their outlook symposium. Again, the
consensus seems quite consistent with our forecast from the staff. And the NABE members we met
with in this room not too long ago also expect growth to be in the range of 3.25 to 3.5 in 2006.
Finally, I am willing to take the baseline as the basis for policy today because I recognize that
our language will convey the proper sense of caution to reflect the risks and leave us with the
flexibility to respond to other changes. I will delay any further comment on that, as you have
suggested, until the second part of our discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At each of our last eleven or twelve meetings there
has been a presumption in the analysis for several more moves of tightening. And while I agree that a
¼ point increase in the funds rate is appropriate for today, I no longer find in our analysis a
presumption of multiple moves to raise it further.
From Q4 to Q4, the rise in core PCE prices is estimated to be 1.8 percent in ’05, up to 2.1
percent in ’06, and back to 1.8 percent in ’07. Now, the alternative scenarios for core PCE include a
single option heavily driven by a presumed greater impact of rising energy prices on core inflation.
And as I indicated to President Yellen, I’m interested in going back and rereading that analysis. The
Greenbook forecast is for the fed funds target to rise to 4½ percent and be maintained at that level. I
just looked at the chart in exhibit 1 that was handed out at the break and compared it to the chart that
was in the Bluebook, and the market seems to be even more sure that we will overshoot and then
retreat with respect to the fed funds rate.
I share President Stern’s analysis with respect to the equilibrium real rate and the extent to
which our fed funds level relates to the range of values under the commonly used Taylor rules. I

December 13, 2005

59 of 100

think there’s a legitimate concern about the effect a premature pause would have on inflationary
expectations, and I take that very seriously. But, again, I do not see yet in our analysis where that
needs to drive our concern. Therefore, unlike in previous meetings, where there was a presumption of
multiple increases, I think that perhaps after today we would need to look for a justification for such
increases. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to echo Dave Stockton’s analogy of tidings of
great joy in this forecast. I think the upward revision in growth and the downward revision in
inflation are developments that we all welcome at this point in the economic expansion.
As I tried to assess some of the information to see where I would want to come out on policy,
I tended to take an approach similar to the one President Yellen took, in saying: Where do we stand at
this point in our effort to remove accommodation, and where are we going as we move forward? In
the alternative scenarios laid out in this Greenbook, there is really only one where long-term inflation
expectations lose their anchor and which therefore gives me much concern. As I looked at where we
are on inflation, I was struck that there is some good news and some bad news and that there are
currently risks on both sides. Last year we saw inflation coming up from extraordinarily low levels—
moving up from 1 percent to over 2 percent. It rebounded quickly, and I was one who was quite
concerned by how quickly inflation had moved up. In the last six months, though, it has been 1.6
percent, which sounds like a fairly good area for it to be in. But the fact that it rebounded so fast
clearly indicates that we always have to be very alert to developments on that front, because prices
can move rapidly.
The energy pass-through, I think, is a risk for higher inflation. I’d love to see the analysis that
San Francisco has done on that issue because, depending on what level of costs are passed through, I

December 13, 2005

60 of 100

think we could see real concerns about disruptions and risks to the economy going forward—as a
consequence, for example, of believing that energy prices are going to stay in a high range for several
years or seeing the possibility of outright shortages in areas like natural gas.
We’ve also seen that other central banks in the world are now expecting stronger growth and
higher inflation in their economies. The ECB [European Central Bank], as was mentioned earlier,
finally raised its policy rate, and even the Bank of Japan is coming out of a zero rate world. So some
of the cushion we’ve had worldwide may be moderating, and that could produce more risks on the
upside on inflation.
On the other hand, when I look at what has been happening with jobs growth and labor
compensation, I continue to be struck by how moderate the growth in compensation has been. The
productivity story is clearly one reason for this. The numbers continue to amaze me at this point in
the cycle. It’s easy to achieve productivity gains in a company early on when you have excess
capacity. But this many years into an expansion, it really takes a ton of attention and effort.
Another thing that often comes up in my conversations with business executives is this: They
are sitting at very high levels of profit and cash flow generation; and when you ask them about their
main challenges, they still say their primary challenge is to maintain profit growth. If you start to dig
into that, you find that it’s beyond just managing wage costs and looking at capital. The lessons they
learned in the ’90s in terms of really changing the way business processes are run are continuing to
play a role in all of the decisions they’re making on issues like inventory management—not tying up
capital either in inventory stored or in warehouse capacity.
As I looked at last month’s numbers, inventory-sales ratios hit record lows. So clearly,
businesses are continuing to learn more and more about how to keep inventory levels very, very
low—even though they’re trying to customize the delivery of products. And they are doing that

December 13, 2005

61 of 100

through better information systems and better order management systems. They also are focusing a
great deal on quality control, particularly in services and retail businesses, and in business services
where that is a key differentiator with the competition. But better quality also has major cost benefits
because it reduces errors and the need to redo work and it focuses on the timeliness of delivery. And
these are the kinds of values beyond prices that customers are rating as increasingly important. So
firms get both greater efficiency and value added for their customer base more than in the past.
And finally, outsourcing—and I’m talking not internationally but simply outside of the core
enterprise—is a business practice that evolved in the ’90s and has proven to be very important. In the
old days when you ran a big corporation that was vertically integrated, there were cost centers
throughout the organization and it was very hard for CFOs to get a handle on controlling costs. Now
that the culture has become “if it isn’t a core function, you ought to try to outsource it,” the process of
renegotiating with the contractors annually or semi-annually or every three years and of going out for
other bids puts continual pressure on attaining productivity improvements and a favorable cost
payback. But when the function was embedded in the bigger organization, the social politics
sometimes got in the way and made it difficult to wring out the costs. The fact is that firms now try
not to do everything, and to outsource functions unrelated to their core business. That this has
become an ingrained practice in many companies is another theme I’m hearing. So, in short, I’m
finding that changes in business practices are the focus of a lot of companies. And they believe that
despite higher costs, they are going to be able to improve the value with modest price increases going
forward.
Pulling all of that together, I tend to think that we are very close to the end of the increases in
interest rates that we need to implement. There are risks on both sides, but it strikes me, based on the
Greenbook forecast, that we’re getting to full potential in a very orderly way. And as was mentioned

December 13, 2005

62 of 100

a minute ago, according to the Bluebook, the real fed funds rate that we would have with a 25 basis
point increase today is at the midpoint of the range of the staff’s estimates of equilibrium. Also, it’s
above the funds rate derived from the policy rules for all of the alternatives. So we are close to where
I think we need to be, given the forecast. As a result, I think we really do need to talk about how to
make this transition and change our communication.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Madigan.
MR. MADIGAN.2 Mr. Chairman, earlier you referred to the comedic talents of my
two colleagues to the right. For my part, in drafting the Bluebook over the past week, I
fear that I may have been engaged in tragedy. [Laughter] That is, there certainly was
drama depicting a protagonist—yours truly—engaging in a significant struggle ending
in ruin or utter disappointment.
For the remainder of my remarks, I’ll be referring to the material that was handed 

out at the break. 

Over the intermeeting period, indications of considerable momentum in economic
activity led market participants to build in a little more near-term monetary tightening,
as shown in the upper left-hand panel of exhibit 1. Market participants now appear to
believe that the funds rate will peak at about 4¾ percent in mid-2006 but be rolled back
slightly thereafter. The consensus Blue Chip forecast released on December 1, not
shown, also indicates a median anticipation that about three more quarter-point moves
are in store, but those forecasters don’t have the Committee easing until early 2007.
For the near term, as shown in the upper right-hand panel, fed funds futures indicate
that investors are all but certain that you will firm another 25 basis points today. They
see about an 80 percent chance of another such step in January and put better-than-even
odds on one more move in March.
And seemingly everyone recognizes that your statement is in play today. The
financial press and market letters in recent days have devoted most of their monetary
policy analysis not to your rate adjustment but to your choice of words. As shown in
the middle left-hand panel, the Desk’s survey indicated that most primary dealers
expect that today you will modify or drop the references to “accommodative” monetary
policy and that half look for the “measured pace” language to be changed or deleted.
But there is little indication that market participants anticipate a structural change to
your risk assessment.
A case for firming policy today is outlined in the middle right-hand panel. 

According to staff estimates, the economy appears to have little remaining slack, with 

2

The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

December 13, 2005

63 of 100

the unemployment rate in the vicinity of the NAIRU and real GDP just a fraction of a
percent below the level of its potential. Moreover, the economy appears to have
considerable momentum that, without further firming, could carry aggregate demand
beyond the level of potential output. Such momentum might be seen as consistent with
a real federal funds rate that is still relatively low. As shown in the lower panel, the
real funds rate is within, but near the lower end of, the range of staff estimates of its
equilibrium. With some of the indirect effects of higher crude and natural gas prices
still in prospect and likely providing some impetus to the inflationary process, you
might be particularly concerned about the implications of resource pressures for
inflation. On the whole, though, incoming data over the intermeeting period have
seemed broadly consistent with your earlier expectations that the economy and inflation
would evolve in such a way as to warrant further measured firming. And financial
markets have inferred from those developments and your policy communications that a
quarter-point move today is a sure thing.
A more difficult question—one that could bear particularly on your statement this
afternoon—is how much more tightening is likely to prove necessary. Even
recognizing the substantial firming of policy to date as well as the lags in the effects of
policy—an issue flagged by a number of you this morning—you may still believe that
considerable further policy tightening lies ahead. If so, you might be attracted to the
language of the Bluebook’s alternative C, shown in the right-hand column of exhibit 2.
In the rationale section, row 2, this announcement would point to vigorous growth in
the real economy and would retain the references to policy accommodation and robust
underlying productivity growth. The recent strength in aggregate demand might
suggest a relatively high level for the equilibrium funds rate and thus imply that policy
remains accommodative. And, certainly, the remarkable figures for the third quarter
could support a judgment that underlying productivity growth remains robust. In row
3, alternative C would point to “relatively high levels of resource utilization” as another
reason for policy firming. In rows 4 and 5, this alternative would retain both the form
and substance of the Committee’s assessment of risks from recent policy statements,
including the judgment that policy accommodation could probably continue to be
removed at a measured pace. Markets would be quite surprised by such an
announcement, and rates would likely back up considerably.
If, however, you believe that the end of this tightening cycle is not far off—or if
you simply believe that the time has come to jettison the reference to accommodative
policy and some other stale language—then you may prefer the wording of alternative
B. This statement would differ significantly from recent announcements. As shown in
row 2, the Committee would indicate that the expansion appears solid despite the
effects of the hurricanes and high energy prices, while deleting the references to
accommodative policy and underlying productivity growth. In row 3, the statement
would again acknowledge that core inflation has been low of late and that longer-term
inflation expectations remain contained. It would express concern, however, that
“possible increases in resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the
potential to add to inflation pressures.”

December 13, 2005

64 of 100

The assessment of risks would be modified notably. Rather than making the
arguably tautological assertion that the risks appear balanced assuming “appropriate
monetary policy,” it would indicate that the “Committee judges that some further
measured policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of
both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.” I emphasize
“measured” because views on the Committee regarding the inclusion of this word
clearly vary. As a staff memorandum indicated last week, the Chairman requests that
in your comments in the upcoming round you express your preferences on this score.
In your consideration of this matter, you might see “measured” as representing a
needless restraint on your possible actions. But, as shown in row 5, the Committee
would in effect also indicate that—as has always been the case—the risk assessment is
not a commitment but a conditional expectation and that, should incoming data diverge
from expectations, the Committee would commensurately recalibrate its actual and
anticipated actions. Moreover, you might see little prospect that policy will actually
need to move in 50 basis point steps but be concerned that, if the Committee were to
drop the word now, especially in the context of the other proposed changes to the
statement, market participants could conclude that you saw the potential need for such
large moves.
One factor that could influence the Committee’s decision about the new
assessment-of-risks language is whether you anticipate any problem adjusting that
language as circumstances evolve in coming months. This appears unlikely to be a
major problem. If, contrary to current expectations, more aggressive policy tightening
comes to appear appropriate, the Committee could change the reference in row 4 to
something like “considerable further tightening.” Or, should the end point seem to
move out in time a little, the Committee could simply repeat the proposed assessment.
And, finally, if and when it appears that policy has reached a resting point, the
Committee could firm a final 25 basis points and change row 4 to something like the
following: “Under these circumstances, the Committee judges that the current stance of
policy roughly balances the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth
and price stability.” And at that point the “measured” terminology could be honorably
discharged from service.
Given the large number of changes in the announcement proposed for alternative B,
it is difficult to be confident in anticipating the market reaction that it would engender.
Indeed, investors also seem to be rather uncertain about the market effect of this
afternoon’s announcement, but markets are striving for completeness by offering
insurance on the direct effect of your imminent policy action. Specifically, an option is
being traded on the change in the 10-year Treasury yield in a two-hour window around
your announcement today. The pricing of that option suggests a one-third probability
that the 10-year yield will move one way or another by more than 4.3 basis points.
[Laughter] For our part, the staff’s guess is that the announcement proposed for
alternative B would likely boost interest rates, but not by much.
Finally, let me say a word about procedure. As you will recall, the survey of the
FOMC that the staff conducted last month regarding statement language included,

December 13, 2005

65 of 100

among other things, questions on the scope of the Committee’s policy vote—that is,
whether the Committee should vote on just the directive and the risk assessment, or
whether the vote should be expanded to cover all forward-looking elements or the
entire statement. In preparation for a possible change, Chairman Greenspan has asked
the staff to provide to the Committee early next year a memorandum that will discuss
the pros and cons of alternative approaches to this issue.
Thank you. That concludes my prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Brian? If there are no questions, it
implies that everyone agrees with everything you just said. [Laughter]
MR. MADIGAN. I expected no less. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s interesting to listen to the discussion around this table
today because the underlying facts are really somewhat different from what we had perceived at our
last meeting. There is evidence that the economy is moving at a pace and in a direction that I don’t
think we would have anticipated six weeks or two months ago, especially in the context of the
hurricanes. The underlying real rate of growth is really powerful.
We can see it in the United States but just as importantly, if not more so, we are beginning to
see it abroad. Japan is finally getting its act together, as best I can judge. For a long period of time
Japan had very poor financial results within its banking system; and while they had a nonperforming
loan statistic, it certainly wasn’t anything like the type that we would calculate. Therefore it looked as
though the economy was a fragile one, with a banking system that was largely reliant on real estate
collateral whose prices continuously plummeted. Moreover, the state of financial intermediation in
Japan was highly dubious because banking is the only vehicle they have for intermediation; there
really isn’t an alternate means of moving savings into investment. However, the Japanese banking
system has finally gotten to a point where it looks like a regular, old-fashioned banking system.
Intermediation is now going on. A lot of the pieces are beginning to come together. And the reason
this is important is that for a very long time we’ve been disregarding Japan as an international force,

December 13, 2005

66 of 100

even though it’s the second largest economy in the world. That’s because it just never moved. As a
consequence, the Japanese economy wasn’t an important factor in the global outlook but it now seems
to be moving in a favorable direction.
And we’re even getting stirrings in Europe, where Germany, though still in very serious
trouble, is clearly showing some signs of improvement. Obviously, their unit labor costs have
stabilized, and the impact of their very serious structural problems seems not to be getting worse.
When one looks around the world, most economies are improving. In the United States, some
of the old-fashioned data, as I was mentioning to David yesterday, are showing some very strong
signs. One example is that moribund industry which used to be the cutting edge fifty years ago, the
steel industry. Durable goods, no matter how you cut it, are still largely made of steel, and those
markets are quite strong. Scrap prices are up. U.S. Steel is booking its orders significantly far out
into the future. There is buoyancy there and also in the nonferrous metals markets—markets we
never used to worry about, but they still do matter.
The reason it is tough to get similar information out of, say, the high-tech industries is that
while they are growing very rapidly, the dispersion from one company to the other is dramatic. In
other words, if you get an industry growth rate of 15 percent, say, you might find that one company
grows 30 percent for two years and then its growth goes down to 2 percent and vice versa for some
other firm. So, with the technology changing so rapidly, you can’t get the anecdotal readings from a
lot of those companies the way you do on the old-fashioned industries where nothing changes all that
much and you have a reasonably good base for making judgments.
It’s hard to imagine an American economy that is as balanced as this one is. But most
importantly, through all of this, we are literally seeing some resistance to the upside pressures on
inflation. I find the most credible evidence on this in the forward tranches of the 10-year Treasury

December 13, 2005

67 of 100

note. Every time pressures begin to move up the implicit rate on the 1-year maturity being issued nine
years out, when the rate gets to somewhat over 5 percent it runs into resistance.
What I think is happening relates to the discussion that I put on the table last meeting about
the significant move of educated workforces into market economies from centrally planned
economies—specifically the old Soviet Union, and now far more importantly China, and to a limited
extent India, which still has characteristics of central planning as well. At the meeting six weeks ago,
we had no data at all about the rate of change at which that transition is occurring but it’s clearly a
level adjustment. And the rate at which it is happening is a determinant of changes in unit labor costs
and, therefore, price changes or inflation.
Some additional work has been done by Karen’s group, especially on China, in trying to get a
judgment about the movement of workers from the centrally planned sector of the economy to the
competitive free market sector. That work indicates in rough proxies—granted, these are extremely
crude data—that the rate of change has been rising for a number of years and that there does not yet
seem to be any evidence that it has peaked. Now, ordinarily that would not be a great insight because
the data are so poor. But if you’re looking for explanations of why we’re running into upside
resistance on prices—every time we get strong demand and increased short-term rates, long-term rates
don’t want to move—this globalization of the workforce seems to be a factor.
If you look at the charts on longer-term rates today, they go up, they run into trouble, they
come down. There’s a ceiling out there apparently, which suggests that at least for the time being
inflation expectations are clearly contained. But judging from the real-time price data, they’re also
soft. And they are soft around the world, not just in the United States. We’re now getting price
pressures in some places. In a couple of countries that are unbelievably expansionary and have
irresponsible policies, we’re seeing inflation rates getting up to 6 or 7 percent. The reason I raised the

December 13, 2005

68 of 100

issue before is that twenty years ago those rates would have been 20 percent. We’re not getting any
of that. So this is not a U.S. issue. It has to be a global one.
This suggests to me that we have a very unusual situation where conventional analysis tells us
very concretely the following: We’re running out of spare capacity; things are tightening up; and
wage rates are under pressure, though not so much in the skilled area in the United States as in the
lesser skilled area where we’re beginning to see wage rates rise. Indeed, that is evident in the series
we run using the wage and salary data in the NIPA [national income and product accounts]
accounts—which of course are tied to virtually full coverage for the unemployment insurance
system—and the employment and implicit hours data that come out of the establishment labor market
survey. That survey reports data on average hourly earnings for production or non-supervisory
workers. Using those data and the totals from the NIPAs, one can infer the average hourly wage for
supervisory workers or skilled workers—that is, the 20 percent of the workforce not included in the
average hourly earnings data. In the last several months, after having run well above 10 percent, the
supervisory hourly wage rate has come down quite significantly, so that the ratio of wages for
supervisory or skilled work to that for lesser skilled work is beginning to stabilize. And that suggests
that we’re beginning to get a little more pressure on lesser skilled wages and somewhat less pressure
on skilled wages. These data are very interesting in the sense that they’re based essentially on
aggregated data, and they are something we never really looked at previously. But I think they tell us
a great deal about what’s going on in the labor markets, and these data involve developments that we
don’t ordinarily look at.
This leads us to a very interesting question as to where policy should go from here. Let’s say
we knew for certain that inflationary expectations were held down and that core inflation was
reasonably well suppressed. The issue would still arise as to whether, with this global phenomenon,

December 13, 2005

69 of 100

we are constructing a situation in which interest rates are so low that we are encouraging, or indeed
causing, underlying speculative activity that will create really serious imbalances in the overall
system.
So we’re dealing with a little more than the question of where inflation is going because, as I
have mentioned previously, something that has become very evident in recent years is that overall
asset prices worldwide, both equity and debt, are rising a good deal faster than product prices. And
they are picking up because of—indeed, the rise in asset prices is being engendered by—the fact that
interest rates are getting ever lower. Interest rates in emerging-market economies are as low as one
can remember. And aside from the surprisingly high equity premium in the United States, we have
very significant upward momentum in asset values. This is where the very important question of
whether monetary policy should target asset prices comes in. The current situation is a very
interesting case because I would say that we ought to be tightening at this particular point but not
targeting the asset price increases. But it is clearly the potential for speculative activity—and its effect
on asset prices—which is generating an assessment that we need to move, as far as evaluating the
outlook for the overall economy.
So where I come out on all of this is that unless we move a little to tighten up a bit further, I
think we’re taking a risk of the system beginning to run faster than we would like. I conclude, as a
consequence, that we need to move today. I think we have to indicate, as the statement for alternative
B suggests, that we’ll move again in January. I would hope that after the statement comes out today
the March futures for the federal funds rate do not come down. I would prefer that futures rates move
up a bit, even if it’s our expectation—and it’s a plausible expectation—that the January increase will
be the end of our tightening. I can conceive of that occurring, but I think we have more here to be
concerned about than just the balance of risks in the United States and the issue of whether we are

December 13, 2005

70 of 100

getting product price inflation or not, and I think the odds are that we are not. But we are running into
the question of whether we are opening up a very significant potential for a major increase in asset
expansion. Remember that when we talk about liquidity, we’re talking about an increase in overall
purchasing power; and common stocks as well as bonds are, in a sense, currency. And if prices of
bonds and stocks go up, that will result in a very high degree of liquidity in the system, which may or
may not hit on product prices. Frankly, I think it’s unlikely to do so.
We have a global market and a global environment here, which I don’t think we yet fully
understand. In fact, I know we don’t fully understand. Nevertheless, I think we need to tighten to be
sure that we’re safe from these speculative incursions. I believe the risks of not doing so are far
greater than tightening a little bit more than probably in retrospect we would have had to do. So I
think we ought to move forward.
My own personal view is that we should not drop the word “measured” from the statement
because that would imply that we’re really beginning to see developments out there that are moving
very rapidly, and I think it’s too soon to conclude that. My arguments, I think, are largely
precautionary in the sense that there is something significant happening around the world that we
cannot as yet fully explain, but it is one of the possible scenarios that has a high element of risk in it.
And I think we have to address ourselves to that just from a risk management point of view.
So I conclude that we ought to move the funds rate target up 25 basis points, which I think is
the general consensus around here, and I believe the statement that we have in “B” fulfills our
objectives with regard to communicating that. I would be cautious about indicating at any time that
we are about to end the increases in the funds rate, even though we may well be doing that, because
that will bring mortgage rates down through the usual effect on the 10-year note. I think whatever
froth there is in the housing market is becoming contained at this stage, and it’s getting contained

December 13, 2005

71 of 100

largely because mortgage rates have moved up and are beginning to have an impact. Remember, it’s
not only the 30-year fixed rate but adjustable rates as well. And short-term rates have moved up quite
significantly and are impacting the market.
If we can contain the presumptive housing bubble, then we have a really remarkable run out
there. But the real danger, in my judgment—where I think the risks lie—is in moving rates down too
soon. When I say moving down, I mean that when we stop tightening, the long-term rates are going
to come down. And in my view we have to be careful about how that happens and what the impact is
on the economy. Indeed, our actions are going to have an impact on the world at large because they
will affect what everybody does. When I sit in the G-7 meetings, it’s very evident that what the
Federal Reserve does with respect to policy has a quite significant impact on the ECB and the Bank of
England. The reason I know that is they tell me that. So, what we do is going to be quite important.
So, my proposal is a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate target and the statement language of
alternative B. Who would like to open up the discussion?
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, and I guess I can go with the
language. The one thing that your comments raised in my mind relates to row 3, the rationale part of
the statement, where it talks about possible increases in resource utilization. I wonder if we shouldn’t
have a statement that talks about the carry-on effects of past accommodative policy because that’s
what you’re really talking about when you get into asset value issues. I’m not saying we have to do
that, but that came to my mind as I listened to your comments. Other than that, I’m fine with your
proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just respond. We have a problem if we move too
quickly in changes that we make. This statement is a very significant change.

December 13, 2005

72 of 100

MR. HOENIG. Right. I don’t disagree with you. That’s the only thing that occurred to me,
but I’m fine with your proposal. I think we need to keep going.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, and I support alternative B.
We’ve been engaged in a very constructive dialogue over the last week or two—or several weeks—
about how to remove some of the elements of our statement that have been mainstays for some time.
I think it’s important for the rationale paragraph to end with a reference to inflation pressures
remaining a concern. I think the risk statement the way it’s formulated in row 4 accomplishes its task
in the most sensible and straightforward way, by clearly just stating outright what we think is going to
be required to maintain balanced risks.
With regard to the word “measured,” when it was originally deployed it clearly meant less
than or equal to 25 basis points. I’m not quite sure it retains that strong an association to that. I think
it’s unlikely in the current situation that dropping “measured” would be interpreted as opening the
door for a 50 basis point move, but I don’t have a strong opinion one way or another. So I’m happy
either way regarding the word “measured.”
Looking ahead, I think that the challenge for us is going to be how to communicate a reaction
function, meaning how the pattern of incoming economic data is going to map into our choice of a
policy rate. In particular, the challenge for us is going to be how to communicate about that reaction
function when we get to a point where we want to rest for a meeting or two. That discussion is
obviously for another day, but I think it will be important to avoid language at that time that
encourages the public to place too high a probability on the rate remaining unchanged for an extended
period. I say that because if the public thought we were locked in for a long time, it might undesirably

December 13, 2005

73 of 100

dampen the yield curve’s sensitivity to incoming data. That would be unfortunate. So, those are my
comments on the statement. Again, I support your recommendations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I support your recommendation, too. You know, in the e-mail discussions
that have gone on with regard to the various iterations of this statement, I think a lot of interesting
ideas have come out. And they all revolve around where we are on the spectrum in terms of the
question: Are we close to the end of this current tightening cycle? Has the campaign really changed?
And it’s a campaign with a lot more forward momentum than some of us might have agreed with.
For quite a while I have been of the view that inflation trends, though they popped up with
energy, seemed moderate overall on the core rate. I’ve felt that low underlying interest rates were
encouraging risk-taking in markets that would be inappropriate at some point. And that’s been one
reason why I’ve thought that the track we’ve been on now for thirteen meetings or so was the right
track. I continue to believe that. And I was picking up some flavor of that in your discussion of your
thinking; I have some sense of agreement with what you said, to the extent that I followed all of it.
So I’m in the camp that’s perfectly comfortable with the alternative B formulation. I’m not in
the camp that thinks we might need a new campaign here. I would think that some further tightening
is consistent with risk minimization, given overall market psychology right now and given what we
see in our forecast.
As I thought about the various formulations of alternative B that we’ve been presented with, I
thought there were a lot of different issues at stake, not just the word “measured.” One was whether
we should remove the reference to “accommodative.” I came out on balance that we should remove
“accommodative,” given that I think we’re currently in a range where we’re unsure that we will need
a whole lot more tightening and, therefore, we’re probably less accommodative than we were two or

December 13, 2005

74 of 100

three meetings ago. Removing “accommodative” could be taken in the other direction, though. By
taking out “accommodative” markets could say, “Aha! They are on a campaign upwards.”
Regardless of where they think the current sense of policy is, they could believe that we might want to
be even more aggressive. But I think the rest of the statement moderates that possibility sufficiently
that taking out “accommodative” is consistent with my thinking.
Then there were some other alternatives that came up in the discussions back and forth. We
had been using productivity growth on the demand side as a demand accelerator. You can think of
the way we see productivity growth currently as an expansion of supply and, therefore, a cushion
against inflation. And a couple of people did suggest that. To me that had some appeal. I’m not
going to suggest modifying the statement online or in the meeting here, but if we continue to see an
expansion of productivity moving forward and it is a cushion against inflation, this is something we
might want to think about as a factor to add to our assessment of the current situation.
Should we use the word “some” to modify “measured policy firming”? A lot of people
thought we should, and it ended up getting into alternative B. I think that’s the right way to go.
Should we retain “measured”? I could live with “measured” being there; I could live with taking it
out. With the use of “some,” I think it’s a little easier to keep it in because to me it has less of a
feeling that “measured” means more than a couple additional policy tightenings.
And finally, the statement uses “likely” in the reference to further tightening moves—that
“some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed.” That may be a little more positive
about the number of further moves than I’m comfortable with. I can go with it. I could also go with
something like “some further measured policy firming may be needed,” which I think was President
Fisher’s formulation.

December 13, 2005

75 of 100

So all in all, I’m in agreement. I think we could go either way on five or six of these different
words. Taken together, the proposed language says what I’d like to say. That is, it says we’re at a
point where there’s enough uncertainty about whether we’re accommodative or not that we can take
“accommodative” out. And we’re sending a message that we may tighten a couple more times, but
we’re certainly going to look at the data and weigh both of our underlying goals. So that’s a longwinded way of saying I agree with you. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I’m going to be an outlier here. Let me
start by first saying that I agree with the 25 basis point increase. As for the language, I think everyone
in the room agrees that we don’t know at this time what the path of policy is going to be next year.
The data and the forecasts are going to determine that. We’ve said this many, many times. So to me
the objective of the statement is to give us maximum flexibility at this point and not lock us into one
course of action or another. It should not give the impression that we’re necessarily very near the end
of the tightening cycle.
I agree with your comments in that I think the risks are skewed toward the need for more
tightening, and I think we have to be very careful at this point for the reasons that you mentioned. To
me alternative B in the Bluebook goes much of the way toward accomplishing this. I think it was
artfully put together.
Now, to my ear—and I emphasize “to my”—the phrase “some further measured policy
firming” might be interpreted as implying that the sequence of rate hikes is nearly over. There’s a
possibility that it’s nearly over, but I don’t think there’s any assurance that it will be. So my
preference is to just say “further policy firming” without either “some” or “measured.” But of the two
words, if we take out one, I would take out “measured” at this point. “Measured” is now interpreted

December 13, 2005

76 of 100

in a way that I think is different from what we originally intended. Now its primary meaning is only a
25 basis point increase at the next meeting, and according to Vincent’s memo, the market seems to
think there’s a very high probability of two more increases. So in my judgment, since we’re now
making major changes in the statement, this is a good opportunity to remove the term “measured.” I
think it has outlived its usefulness.
As of today, we will have increased the fed funds target thirteen times in a row by 25 basis
points. So our statement signals further policy tightening, certainly, at the January meeting. And it’s
difficult for me to understand, after we’ve moved the funds rate up thirteen times in a row by 25 basis
points how market participants would expect us to increase it in January by more than 25 basis points,
even without the term “measured” in there. So in my judgment, this is the ideal time to take it out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If I could, I’d like to respond to that just to give you the other
side of the argument. The fact that we are making a significant change in the statement is the reason
why they might conclude that we’re also changing the 25 to 50, and I think that we want to keep
ourselves flexible in that regard. In my judgment, the risk of that interpretation getting into the
marketplace and causing a much stronger response than we’d ever expect is high. And I’m not sure
why we can’t remove “measured” in January, for example. In other words, there’s no rush to phase
out the statement. By March this statement will be long since gone, having had—how would you put
it?—a respectable interment or whatever. [Laughter] But I think we’re underestimating the size of
the change we’re making here; we’re so used to markets not responding at all. I think there’s a little
more tentativeness out there. People are not quite certain, which means that there is a greater chance
of a strong market response. Or perhaps more accurately, there is the chance that the market will
respond in one way first and then 15 minutes later will go wholly in the other direction. We’ve seen
that type of reaction in the past. We haven’t seen that recently.

December 13, 2005

77 of 100

I’m a little uncomfortable about that phenomenon in this context. As you say, our knowledge
at this point is a little sketchy in terms of what the market reaction will be. But I can go either way on
the word “measured” myself. I just think it’s better to keep it in now and then take it out later.
MR. MOSKOW. Well, I’ve thought about both sides of this a great deal, and I understand
that argument. I just think we’re at the point where it’s better to get all the changes behind us, so I’d
do it now. That’s a judgment call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you can guarantee that the market will—[Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. If I could guarantee that, I wouldn’t be here! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with the recommendation to raise the
federal funds rate target by ¼ percentage point, and I can accept the language in alternative B as it is
drafted here.
If I were the policy czar on this, I would make an argument to take out “measured” on the
grounds that we want to at least alert market participants to the prospect that we’re getting close to
ending the more or less automatic ¼ percentage point increases, because we’re getting close to having
removed all of the policy accommodation that we need to remove. President Moskow made the other
side of the argument for removing “measured,” and I took your comments as implicitly working in the
same direction. So I think “measured” ought to come out, if not at this meeting, soon; it seems to me
that it certainly has about outlived its usefulness.
I would also, if I had my druthers, replace “likely” with just “may” or “may well.” But as I
said, I can accept this language as drafted, because I don’t have any special insights as to whether
market participants are going to like one word better than another. But of course, however the market

December 13, 2005

78 of 100

happens to react, the relatively prompt release of the minutes will help because the market will get a
more complete picture of our thinking within a relatively short period of time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I listened very carefully to what you said. In 1997, I sold my
money management business because I figured I could no longer beat the house. For 23 years I was a
market operator, so I’m very sensitive to the power of markets and the issue you raised, although I
think it’s a very risky business for the FOMC to discuss how monetary policy might impact asset
prices. Yet you’re right in terms of the power, the liquidity, and what that’s doing to affect real
economic behavior, so I look forward to that discussion.
In thinking about this statement, I want to vote for the ¼ point increase announced in the first
sentence. I think the one-sentence statement in row 2 in alternative B says all that needs to be said—
the economy is solid, period. That’s good news. In row 3, I would prefer to say why core inflation
has stayed relatively low, because we talked about it at this table. It has remained low for two
reasons—because of competitive pressures and still robust growth in productivity, and I think we
ought to insert that. Those are the facts, and we just talked about them at length. And I suggested that
kind of language when I sent in my note.
In the wording of the assessment of risks, I think there is an interesting trade here. We’re
taking out “accommodation,” which is a signal. One could make the argument to remove the word
“measured.” I respect the arguments that were just made. To mitigate the operative word “likely” I
think we could achieve the objective by just saying “further measured policy firming may be needed”
rather than “is likely to be needed.” That leaves us plenty of options, and I can honestly say that I feel
it may be needed; I cannot honestly say it will likely be needed. But then, again, I will not have a vote
next time. Thank you.

December 13, 2005

79 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the 25 basis point increase. In my view,
leaving “measured” in is wise because it provides continuity with past statements. Also, I think taking
it out would be read as a hint to the market that we would seriously consider a 50 basis point increase.
And I don’t think that’s necessary or desirable.
I am inclined to believe that we should replace “is likely to” with “may,” and my argument
goes this way. This is a chess game, and we have a bunch of moves ahead of us here. In terms of the
likely policy adjustment in January, I’m not willing to bet my house—or even the equity in my
house—but I am willing to make a $100 even-money bet that we’ll want to raise the funds rate
another 25 basis points in January. But as we go out further and look at March, I’d probably not make
a $100 bet but a $30 bet. And for May maybe only a $10 bet. And the question is: When is the best
time to replace “is likely” with “may”? If we do it now, we can pretty much recycle the same
statement, if we want to do so, whereas if we were to substitute “may” for “is likely” in January or
March, the market will ask what kind of signal that is. I think the reading would be: “They are going
to pass and not raise the funds rate next time.” That may not be the signal we want to send. On the
other hand, if we leave in the words “is likely,” at some point we’re going to be faced with the
problem of wanting to pass on a rate increase but having said in the previous statement that an
increase “is likely.” So that would be my argument for substituting “may” for “is likely” at this
meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only thing I would say in response to that is that if we
change “is likely” to “may” at this meeting, we’re going to get a bond market rally, which we’re not
going to find helpful in containing the speculation in the housing market. So I think it’s more an issue
not of what our intentions are but how the market is likely—I shouldn’t use the word “likely”

December 13, 2005

80 of 100

[laughter]—to react. What we’re trying to do essentially is to get a soft landing coming in from the
top. Markets tend to over-respond, as we’ve seen too often. Saying “may” implies that we may not
move in January, and that will bring the structure of the yield curve down quite measurably. And I
think that will open up house price speculation, which will create problems for us. In my view, it is
perfectly credible that we may choose to make January our last increase. And if we do, as Brian said,
we have the sentence in row 5 there. That’s its purpose.
Look, if this economy slows down significantly, the markets will adjust before our next
meeting, and whatever we say will be almost irrelevant. That’s what we’re dealing with. It’s
essentially playing the short-term game and trying to guess what the 10-year note is going to do
relative to what we’re doing. I happen to think it’s a risky activity, even though it’s perfectly credible
that January could be our last boost in the funds rate.
MR. POOLE. I don’t disagree with that, and that’s why I said I would be willing to make a
substantial bet that we will want to increase the funds rate in January. And I think it would be
unfortunate to send a signal otherwise. But I am worried about the sequence of these statements and
the advantages of making minimal changes in order to avoid misleading the market. What I’m saying
is that there is a tension between those two objectives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we’re all in agreement that we want to get out
from under this language as soon as feasible and with as little disruption as feasible. And we’re
guessing in a lot of areas. We just have no way of anticipating certain things. We’re all going in the
same direction. The question is how fast we get there. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I accept your recommendation for a 25
basis point move. On your analysis of asset prices, I think it is notable that over the last ten years—or
more than ten years—we’ve had a great moderation in both GDP and also inflation, but at the same

December 13, 2005

81 of 100

time, as you point out, asset volatility hasn’t come down. Actually, the price level with respect to
equities has gone up. This supports your thought that going forward we’re likely to be talking about
asset prices more, without targeting them.
To the point of today’s discussion, I rather like alternative B, after the back and forth, as it sits
on the page. I think it is no longer fair to say that policy is accommodative. I believe we are close to
or well into the neutral range. In my view, most of the data that we’ve seen tend to support that
notion. If we take the reference to accommodative policy out, I think we do need to consider what is
appropriate for section 4, the forward-looking language. And, in particular, the phraseology “some
further measured policy firming is likely to be needed” strikes me as getting just the right balance, as I
think you were saying as well. The word “measured” I think has come to mean 25 basis points, and I
believe it’s important to hold on to that notion if we take out “accommodative.”
Secondly, on the issue of how much more we have to do, I tend to think it may be one or two
more moves, similar to the expectation built into the Greenbook and the market, which strikes me as
appropriate in supporting the concept of “some further.” So, even though it’s a mouthful, I like the
“some further measured policy firming.”
On the “may” versus “is likely,” I think it’s important to hold on to “is likely” because that’s
actually our best judgment—that further tightening is likely. If we get into January and we are much
less certain, then we can dial it back to “may.” But I think “is likely” is a more accurate signal and I
would support that wording.
And finally, though people don’t focus on it too much, we have the escape valve that you just
talked about, the last sentence. We’ve gone through lots of iterations of this statement back and forth.
One of our colleagues feels as though he’s been in a great tragedy or a comedy of errors. [Laughter]

December 13, 2005

82 of 100

But I think we’ve ended up in a reasonably good place, and I’d like to stick with the language of
alternative B as written, as you proposed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, let me say that I support the 25 basis point
increase today. And I give my sympathy to Brian, who has heard our many different viewpoints in
the last week. I think he has done a good job of trying to get all our ideas out here in a reasonable
balance. My initial feeling was that I really didn’t want to keep the word “measured” in the
statement; I wanted to drop it as part of this change. But for the reasons everybody has suggested, I
can accept the wording in alternative B as it is now.
Mr. Chairman, you talked about some of the risks to the long-term side of the market. I think
that is a serious concern because so much of the pricing these days seems not to involve looking at the
longer-term risks, and it’s so critical to what is currently driving investment and risk-taking. And for
that reason, I guess I’d like to leave the words as they are now. But the big change that I would like to
see is a move away from forward-looking language as we get to the point where there is more
uncertainty about future policy. It was easy for the last thirteen meetings to say, “We’re on a trend;
the funds rate is way too low and we have to get it back up.” So it was easy for us to signal ahead.
But as we signaled ahead, the market looked at what we were saying we were going to do as opposed
to what the data were saying we would do. We, in effect, have taken the risk away from the market,
especially at the long end, because market participants think we’re going to signal ahead of time and
they will have time to get out of their long positions.
In my view, we should go back to structuring section 4 to say basically where we think the
risk is. Then I’d take the second part of that sentence and put it down in section 5, because it’s still a
tautology to me. It still says we want to attain the right balance. Well, there’s no way any of us

December 13, 2005

83 of 100

around this table is going to say that we’re not going to follow the mission of the Fed. So if we’re
going to put in a tautology, I’d put it in part 5. And in part 4 I’d just indicate our assessment of the
risks—that we think the risks are balanced or that the risk to growth or for inflation is greater. That
would give the markets the message that they need to go back to looking at the data to figure out what
we’re going to do, rather than our laying out for them what our next policy moves are going to be. As
we get to the cusp, that risk perspective is really important. We saw when we turned from the bottom
and rates were heading back up again that it disrupted the markets. But we need the markets to be
ready to absorb that kind of risk because, as we sit around this table, we do not know exactly how
we’re going to engineer getting out of this pattern of moving 25 basis points at each meeting. And I
think the way to do it is to focus on where we see the risks and to stop giving any kind of signal on
what our likely moves are going forward. I would like to see that happen at the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I support the ¼ point increase. We
have passed over fairly quickly, except for a couple of instances, the impact of removing the
“accommodative” language, which I think is very significant. And I am reminded, based on past
experience, that when we make multiple changes in our statement, there is a greater likelihood that the
market will respond in ways that we hadn’t intended.
On the decision of whether to include or exclude the word “measured” from the language,
initially I was ambivalent. But after hearing the discussion, I wanted to make sure that if we removed
it, we also had language that took off the table the possibility of a 50 basis point move. So I was
intrigued by Brian’s suggestion of—I don’t know what to call it—a gentle jettisoning of the term, and
I think on balance I am in favor of keeping it. So I am supporting both the ¼ point move and
alternative B as written.

December 13, 2005

84 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Mr. Chairman, I support the proposal to raise the fed funds rate 25 basis
points. As to the language itself, I supported the first change we had to alternative B. Since that time,
we’ve played around, if you will, with some of the wording, and I worry a little about wordsmanship
by 19 people over time. I’m not sure how stable that is. So, rather than being one of the 19, I’m very
happy with the language as it stands.
On the issue of “measured,” I came into this Committee meeting somewhat reluctant to retain
that word in the statement. I was taken by your explanation of the likely market reaction and, on
further thought, I support retaining that word as well. So I’m quite happy with where we are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your proposition to tighten policy by 25
basis points today. And I agree with you that we’ll probably have to move in January, with a good
deal of uncertainty about where we’ll go after that. If I could design the market reaction to our
announcement—which I know from long experience I can’t—I would leave rates about unchanged
when we’re finished, with some probability of tightening past January, but not 100 percent. Like you,
I think we’re at a point where the momentum in demand and the level of resource utilization are such
that if we’re going to make a mistake, we ought to err a bit on the side of going too far rather than
stopping too soon.
Exactly what the role of asset prices is in that is a much more difficult issue. I certainly see
asset prices playing through to the macroeconomic situation, as you said—in particular, housing
prices and the way they have stimulated not only residential construction but consumption more
generally. And as I said in my remarks, I think we need to see some sign that that market is cooling
off. So, in that regard, I agree that asset prices are critical to the outlook. Whether I would worry

December 13, 2005

85 of 100

about imbalances and put a little more emphasis on them, aside from the macro outlook, I think is a
much more difficult question.
In terms of the language, despite my expansive reading of the word “accommodative” at the
last meeting, I support its deletion from the announcement and the wording of alternative B. I don’t
think we have to go to a restrictive policy in this firming cycle, which I would define as a policy
designed to cause the economy to run below potential in order to reduce inflation. I think I’ve just
been reinforced in that judgment by the recent data on costs and prices. But we don’t need to get into
linguistic hair-splitting to make our point about what we intend to do. I support taking attention off of
a precise definition of “neutral,” which remains a shifting and elusive quarry. And that was inherent
in the use of the word “accommodative.”
In terms of the wording of the statement itself, I like alternative B as it is currently worded. I
agree with you that moving from “is likely” to “may” would signal that we are about to stop, or that
we think the odds are at best 50/50 that we’ll move again, and we would have a heck of a rally in
financial markets. And as I said, I’d prefer to leave markets unchanged at the end of this. So I would
go with “is likely” at this point, given my expectations, and save moving to “may” for the January
meeting, if we think the odds are 50/50 for March.
As for the word “measured,” I would prefer to keep it in the statement. To me, it means that
we think we’ll be moving in 25 basis point increments, and I do believe that’s our intention. I’d be
concerned that omitting it would be interpreted as an indication that the Committee would be looking
at the possibility of moving in 50 basis point increments, and I don’t think that’s what we intend to do.
In the phrase “measured pace,” I thought it was the word “pace” that tended to carry the concept of a
series of moves, rather than the word “measured,” which, to me, meant 25. So I’m in favor of
dropping “pace” and keeping “measured.” Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

December 13, 2005

86 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your recommendation of a 25 basis
point increase in our fed funds rate target. I can also accept the language in alternative B. Like
others, though, I came to the meeting preferring to remove the word “measured.” But I didn’t see
removing the term “measured” in the way Brian did—that it meant markets might think we would go
up at a faster pace of 50 basis points. I thought that its removal would give us more flexibility to stop
at a certain point. It’s interesting, in listening to this conversation today, that we all have different
interpretations of what it would mean. So I am just going to go with your guidance. Nevertheless,
given what I know today, I’m leaning to the view that we’re going to have to stop at some point soon
versus having concern that we’re going to have to do more. But again, given what I’ve heard today
and given your recommendation, I support the language as written in alternative B.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support a 25 basis point increase today and I
also support the language in alternative B. It seems to me that the framework in “B” maintains its
existing form and also offers forward-looking guidance. I think we’ve had a very constructive
process, much to my surprise, in the way 19 people have taken turns at drafting a statement that has
evolved really quite nicely. The statement has the potential to evolve further next month and in
March; we’ve already discussed ways in which it can evolve—by eliminating “some,” changing “is
likely” to “may,” or possibly excluding “measured.”
For today, I guess I’m comfortable keeping “measured.” I think there are arguments on both
sides of it. I think it is important to signal that we have no intention of doing something more
aggressive than a 25 basis point move. On the downside, as President Pianalto said, when you
combine “measured” with “is likely” and simultaneously remove “accommodation,” markets may

December 13, 2005

87 of 100

conclude that we have in mind at least two more steps, maybe more. And potentially removing
“accommodative” may signal that we intend to go beyond neutral into a restrictive stance.
But it’s really hard to interpret how the markets are going to react to this. And frankly, I think
this statement comes as close as we can get to doing what I would like to see today, which is to
essentially validate the expectations that are currently in the markets and in the Greenbook. Those
expectations are that we are highly likely or almost certain to move another 25 basis points next time
and that what we will do in March and beyond is an open question. I think this is not a statement that
is likely to bring long-term rates down, although we will see shortly.
On the issue of asset prices, I would simply second the comments that Governor Kohn made
about them. It’s a topic for greater discussion in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I too support the recommendation for a 25 basis point increase.
I’m sure that the process we went through on revising the language in the statement was frustrating to
the staff but I actually found it both interesting and constructive. When we’re making changes as
significant as we are today, I think there should be some way for all of us to contribute to the ideas
and to see each other’s ideas. So again, as frustrating as I’m sure it was, I found it constructive.
There’s a lot to like about alternative B, and I support it as well. I’ll limit my comments just
to the words in play. Actually, my comments on the draft statement language last week indicated a
support for leaving “policy accommodation” in. My thinking was—and I still believe this—that we
really haven’t moved through whatever the neutral point is to pure tightening. I have a little bit of
concern that markets will interpret it that way and assume that we’ve gotten behind and, therefore, are
ratcheting things up. But I like Brian’s comment that there comes a time to honorably discharge

December 13, 2005

88 of 100

words and phrases from service. And since it’s so hard to measure, and even more difficult to talk
about, I think it is time to get that out of the statement.
I actually think there’s no cost to leaving in “measured” in row 4. Although I think the
probability is very small of its removal being misinterpreted as an opportunity for us to move faster, to
me it’s much better to leave it in. I have a strong preference for leaving the next line as it is, with “is
likely” instead of “may.” I think that’s where we are, and I’d much prefer that the wording stay that
way. I assume we’re going to have other substantial changes to the statement in coming months. I
just hope we can find a way either before the meeting or during the meeting to have a chance to share
our views and see each other’s ideas, as messy as it is. I think we come out in a better place when we
do that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation to move 25
basis points and I support the language in alternative B. I think it’s a nice, balanced formulation, and I
do believe it’s the best way to leave expectations roughly neutral.
I think we view the probability as very high that we’re going to need to move in January and
that March is maybe an even bet. That seems about right. This probably introduces a little bit more
uncertainty into the signal about monetary policy than has been the case before, but I think that’s
desirable. It’s a fairly flexible formulation and allows us to adapt reasonably easily going forward. I
agree that “may” would carry too much risk of taking out a good deal of the tightening that is now
built into the market, and, therefore, I don’t think it would be desirable.
The problem with “measured,” of course, is that in our discussion there is so much dispersion
on how we interpret the implication of “measured” today that it’s a little hard to justify retaining it.
Nevertheless, I’m comfortable retaining it because it has two virtues that are not necessarily

December 13, 2005

89 of 100

inconsistent. One is that it does keep a bit of a cap on expectations about how much and how fast we
need to move, and I think that’s probably desirable now. The second implication it carries is the sense
that we may be facing two more moves rather than just one. Again, I think that’s desirable now, too;
so, on balance, it makes sense to me to keep it.
Also, I just want to echo what many of you have said in that I agree that this was a pretty good
process. Committees sometimes have a bad name. We were a group of seventeen people this time
and I thought the process was quite good. I think the language got better through the evolution of this
statement, and that makes me more hopeful. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are going to be voting only on the directive and the
assessment of risks; therefore, we needed a second view of the Committee on the statement itself. It
turns out that the critical word there that has been in dispute, and which Brian was unable to resolve,
was the word “measured.” And it had the advantage of not changing the rest of the statement either
way—whether it was in or it was out. In the event, a significant majority seems to be in favor of
leaving “measured” in. Hence, we will vote on the directive and the assessment of risks, and if that
gets an affirmative vote, we will presume that the language for the statement shown under alternative
B is acceptable as well. So, why don’t you read “B” and the assessment of risks.
MS. DANKER. I’ll be reading the directive wording from the Bluebook and the assessment
of risks from alternative B in exhibit 2 from Brian’s presentation. “The Federal Open Market
Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with increasing the federal funds rate to an
average of around 4¼ percent.” And the wording for the assessment of risks: “The Committee
judges that some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to the

December 13, 2005

90 of 100

attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In any event,
the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.
MS. DANKER.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bies
Governor Ferguson
President Fisher
Governor Kohn
President Moskow
Governor Olson
President Santomero
President Stern

Yes 

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes 

Yes

Yes

Yes


CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Let’s move to recess. I’d like to ask the Federal 

Reserve Board members to come to my office to respond to requests for changes in the discount rate. 

[Recess]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Board voted to approve the requests of all twelve Reserve
Banks to increase the discount rate to 5¼ percent.
The last item on the agenda is to confirm that our next meeting, and my last, is January 31st.
See you all for lunch.

END OF MEETING

