Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 28, 1989

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 28, 1989 at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Guffey
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Melzer
Seger
Syron

Messrs. Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Promisel, Scheld,
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
Open Market Account

System

3/28/89

- 2 Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stone, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco, Cleveland, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Cook, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 28, 1989
MR. JOHNSON. This is the meeting when officer nominations
are usually made.
So, I'd like to open the meeting by asking for
nominations for the Chairman of the FOMC and then the Vice Chairman.
We're open for nominations.

set.

MR. ANGELL.
I nominate Alan Greenspan--unless it is already
Do you have someone set to make the motion?
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

Let's get on with this.
Okay.

Alan Greenspan and Gerald Corrigan.

MR. JOHNSON. All right. We have nominations for Chairman
Alan Greenspan and Vice Chairman Gerald Corrigan. All those in favor?
SPEAKER(?).

Enthusiastically.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Unintelligible.]

MR. JOHNSON. I think it goes without saying that we have
some outstanding nominations. We're ready to proceed, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I thank you. I think what we need next
Norm, would you read the list?
is the election of staff officers.
MR. BERNARD.
Secretary and Economist, Donald Kohn
Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Gary Gillum
General Counsel, Virgil Mattingly
Deputy General Counsel, Ernest Patrikis
Economist, Michael Prell
Economist, Edwin Truman
Associate Economists from the Board:
David Lindsey;
Larry Promisel;
Charles Siegman;
Thomas Simpson; and
Lawrence Slifman.
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Anatol Balbach, proposed by President Melzer;
Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;
Thomas Davis, proposed by President Guffey;
Alicia Munnell, proposed by President Syron; and
Karl Scheld, proposed by President Keehn.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would somebody like to move that?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

Second.

I will.

Is there a second?

3/28/89

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, it's so ordered. The
next item on the agenda is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to
execute transactions for the System Open Market Account.
Is there a
nomination?
MS. SEGER.

How about Cleveland?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Is New York okay for a second choice?
I'll second that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
this is going!
SPEAKER(?).

Call again.

Without objection.

I don't like the way

It sounds all right!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our Managers for Domestic Open Market
Operations and for Foreign Operations are at the moment, as you know,
Peter Sternlight and Sam Cross. Would somebody like to move their
reappointments?
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KELLEY.

So move.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have the review
of--and I assume that they have been mailed out to all of you--the
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, the Foreign
Currency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive, and the
Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations.
Would somebody like to move them individually?
Let's do them one at a
time. Are there any objections to the Authorization for Domestic Open
Market Operations?
If not, let us assume that it's so ordered.
Sam,
would you like to discuss the second issue?
MR. CROSS. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would. I would like to
raise one point with respect to the Authorization for Foreign Currency
Operations.
We are currently authorized to maintain [foreign
currency] balances up to a total of $12 billion equivalent.
Our
present holdings, at about $9.4 billion, are well within that limit.
But in addition to this formal authorization there are three informal
limits which are not contained either in the Authorization, the
Directive, or the Procedural Instructions. These [informal
understandings] call for us to limit our holdings of German marks to
$8 billion equivalent, Japanese yen to $3 billion equivalent, and
other currencies as a group to $1 billion equivalent.
All of our
intervention in recent months has been in marks and we are now about
$150 million or a little more above that informal limit for marks. We
notified the Committee of that situation by a telex that was sent out
on March 15th. But, Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that the
Committee consider eliminating these informal sublimits for the
particular currencies so that the $12 billion authorization for
foreign currency balances could be used more flexibly.
I question
whether the informal sublimits currently are a very useful management
tool.
The particular currencies that we operate in are determined, of
course, by market conditions and other factors. And in any event, we

3/28/89

would continue to be under a number of limitations--qualitative as
well as quantitative limitations--both with the [Foreign Currency]
Subcommittee and the Committee. These limits relate to the changes in
each currency for a single day and for the intermeeting period as well
as changes in the overall balances for a single day in the
I believe these various limits
intermeeting period and so forth.
provide for adequate monitoring and control by the Committee and the
Subcommittee without the informal sublimits. Accordingly, I would
recommend that the Committee consider eliminating the three informal
sublimits.
If the Committee did wish to retain those sublimits I
would need to request a change in the overall Authorization in order
to provide more headroom in the event we need to acquire more marks
So, I recommend the elimination of the three informal
and yen.
sublimits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would somebody like to move that?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
want a formal vote on this.
MR. BERNARD.

I think I would move it.

I've just been informed that we don't

On the informal limits.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the informal limits. Let me put it
If
this way: Are there any questions on this issue for Mr. Cross?
not, we'll assume [agreement].
MR. ANGELL. Would there be some notion as to where we might
That is, would there be any
be going in regard to any one currency?
restraint or any notion that there might be some point at which we
would acquire more of a particular currency than might be the most
advantageous position for our asset holdings?
Obviously, we will want over time to acquire
MR. CROSS.
But I don't think that this
various amounts in particular currencies.
particular arrangement is the way in which we are best able to do
that.
For example, our holdings of yen have been low and we've been
undertaking such measures as we could to raise those holdings both for
Indeed, we did acquire some yen during
the System and the Treasury.
this recent period by buying them from a customer. But I don't think
that the informal sublimit is a very useful mechanism for doing this.
We have to make decisions and acquire those currencies more or less as
conditions permit and as our policies aim us to do.
I don't think
these limits help very much operationally.
MR. ANGELL. So from time to time you would expect to report
to the Committee on [individual] currency holdings as compared to what
you might think of as some optimum range?
MR. CROSS. Well, if I went too far in saying what was the
optimum that might raise a lot of questions. But we certainly report
regularly on the amounts of the individual currencies.

3/28/89

MR. ANGELL.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LAWARE. I have a question.
big enough kitty for you or do you--?

Sam, is the $12 billion a

MR. CROSS. Well, at the present time we have $9.4 billion
and the limit is $12 billion. Looking ahead, say, for the next year
it's certainly conceivable that we would need to go above that.
I
would assume that the Committee would not find it difficult to change
the limit at the time, if the conditions arose. Or, it could be
changed right now when we are reviewing this at our annual review.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But to change the $12 billion would
take specific action of the Committee?
MR. CROSS.
[Yes.]
That is a formal authorization and that
is public. The present authorization is for $12 billion and has been
at that level for a couple of years, I guess.
MR. LAWARE. You don't see any immediate circumstances that
would likely put you in a position where you'd have to ask for a
special meeting in order to enlarge that limit?
MR. CROSS. Well, we have a $2-1/2 billion [leeway].
And, of
course, when we intervene we have typically done half of it and the
Treasury has done half. So that means a potential [increase in U. S.
holdings] of $5 billion worth before we run into a problem. I would
assume that if conditions were such that we needed a change in the
Authorization, it would not be difficult to propose that and to change
it at the time.
MR. LAWARE.

Okay.

I wasn't trying to sell you anything.

MR. CROSS. No.
I'd be happy to have any further headroom
the Committee wishes to offer. But I can't really make a strong case
that it's likely to happen and would require a meeting.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. GUFFEY.

Sam, can you remind us: what is the intermeeting

limit?
MR. CROSS. Above $600 million requires the Subcommittee's
approval and above $1-1/2 billion requires the Committee's approval.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. CROSS.

In all currencies?
That's in all currencies.

I
MR. GREENSPAN. Any further discussion on this subject?
will assume a general consensus in favor of Sam's recommendation.
However, we do need a vote on the Procedural Instructions with Respect
to Foreign Currency Operations.
I'll entertain a motion.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

Second.

So moved.

3/28/89

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Do all three?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's combine all three: the Foreign

Currency Authorization and the Foreign Currency Directive as well as
the Procedural Instructions.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KELLEY.

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

Next we have to

approve the minutes of the Committee meeting of February 7th and 8th.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KELLEY.

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would you
now report on foreign currency operations for us?
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. HOSKINS. Sam, I'm just curious as to why we don't buy
yen in the open market. I notice a couple of other central banks have
done so. Do we have an agreement with them or--?
MR. CROSS. Well, the Ministry of Finance in Japan thus far
often has intervened itself to resist the decline in the yen. And the
U.S. Treasury has not been prepared up to this point to [intervene
unless] we have the agreement of the Japanese before anything is done.
And the Japanese have not felt that this situation yet warranted
intervention. Now, in the past day or two the pressures on the yen
have become more substantial. The Finance Minister did make a
statement last night--at which point the yen had weakened to above the
133 level--saying something to the effect that they were watching
[developments] very carefully at the 133 level, which was taken by the
market as a signal that that might be a key point. The rate then
moved down a bit below 133 and that's where it is now. I imagine
there will be discussions of this--certainly this weekend when the G-7
gets together. But up to this point the Minister of Finance has not
wanted to see intervention or to be involved in intervention to resist
the decline.
MR. FORRESTAL. On the general subject of intervention, Sam,
do you detect any change in philosophy of the present Administration
with respect to intervention? Or are they continuing pretty much in
the same vein as the previous Administration?
MR. CROSS. I don't think there has been any very notable
change. The G-7, of course, met in February and they are going to
meet again. The general premises within which these activities have
been taking place remain more or less the same.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Mr. Cross?

3/28/89

MS. SEGER. I just want to make sure I understood your
comment about intervening and the Ministry of Finance. Do we have a
deal with the Japanese that we will not intervene unless they [agree]?
What if we reached the point that it was in our interest to do so and
the Ministry of Finance was still balking?
MR. CROSS. Well, I would hope that it wouldn't come to a
point where we were operating at cross purposes with the Japanese.
It
would be very difficult if we reached the stage where it was as overt
as that. These intervention operations obviously work much, much
better if all parties are marching together. We have seen many times,
both with the Germans and the Japanese, that the market pays a lot
more attention when they see that we are uniformly aiming in a certain
direction, trying to bring about a certain purpose.
It's difficult to
be operating in one direction if the central bank or the government on
the other side doesn't agree or indeed is opposed to it.
So, it's
much better to work it out.
MR. TRUMAN. Governor Seger, this is one of the
[unintelligible] to President Hoskin's comment.
This is one of the
asymmetries in the international financial system today. Other
countries-MS. SEGER.

It was too subtle for me.

MR. TRUMAN. Small countries can buy yen or sell yen. But
for big countries like the United States and Germany and Japan their
actions in this area are guided by different understandings, if you
want to put it that way, about when one does it for the reasons that
Sam mentioned.
If Canada buys yen, or even if the UK buys yen, that's
not the same thing as our buying yen or the Bank of Japan buying yen.
Now, the other point-MR. CROSS.
easily arranged.
MR. TRUMAN.

But even those

[transactions] have not been

That's right.

MR. CROSS. With the Canadians or the others it required
working it out with the Japanese. But they are a little more amenable
to that than if it's going to impact directly on their exchange rate.
MR. TRUMAN. The other point is that there are certain
understandings about the point at which intervention becomes more
favorably regarded. But as far as the yen is concerned we're far away
from that point.
MS. SEGER. Just looking at their gigantic trade surplus visa-vis our own situation, it seems that at some point we'd have to ask
ourselves what is in our interest rather than having the Ministry of
Finance decide.
MR. CROSS.
That's becoming increasingly apparent.
It is
true that up until recently most of the pressures were not in the yen
but were in the European currencies. But it is moving more and more
in that direction and it is becoming clear that we are getting to the
point where there is a need to do something about the movement in the
yen as well. That is part of my own concern. And as I say, the

3/28/89

pressures of the past few days have been led by the movements of the
yen. That's the first time during this recent period of activity
where that has been the case; but it is now the case. On the other
hand, if you look back to the low points--which were at the beginning
of last year--the 1988 low point for the mark was 1.56 and we're now
at 1.88 and the low point for the yen was just over 120.
So, it's
getting closer but not quite as much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I heard what you said, Sam, about Germany but
that explanation still doesn't strike me as justifying completely why
they have been so reluctant to move. A lot of people seem to be
scratching their heads about Germany's behavior relative to
inflationary pressures and the fact that they have been sitting back
and letting the mark depreciate.
I know it has been pretty stable
over the intermeeting period in general. But I think the feeling has
been: What's going on in Germany compared to their previous behavior?
MR. CROSS.
Well, I think there are various factors. They
are divided. There are some in Germany who will say that they could
be tightening domestically and not necessarily going through the
exchange rate.
They are divided. The mark has moved up against some
currencies as well as having softened against the dollar. If you look
at the mark on a trade-weighted basis you don't get the same picture
The
that you do if you look just at the dollar-mark relationship.
Germans, I think, have a genuine problem with respect to the EMS.
Their concern at the moment is that the EMS is fully stretched--in
other words, they are at the top of the band and, as it turns out,
Denmark is now at the bottom of the band. At those levels they have
to intervene fully in order to keep the rates from moving beyond that.
There were very, very large amounts of intervention in the Danish
currency last week, in fact. They did
on one day,
which is a lot for a small country. And they did almost
the next day. The Germans are concerned that--the mark being weak
against the dollar and strong against the EMS--if they intervene on
the dollar side it's just going to cause a lot more trouble and lead
to serious pressures in flows and political problems and all the rest
with the EMS.
MR. JOHNSON. But isn't it, though, just the Danish that are
The lira-down there?
MR. CROSS.
The Danish are down there but the pressures could
move to the others, particularly if the question of whether to reform
the EMS currency alignments and so forth arose.
It could lead to
pressures. The French not too long ago had been under some pressure;
they are not at the moment. But-MR. JOHNSON. It just still seems strange, given that nobody
paid too much attention when the Italians were way below the band and
just hovered there for heaven knows [how long].

level.

MR. TRUMAN. Well, but they weren't down at the 6 percent
They have a wider band.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, it was a special arrangement.

3/28/89

MR. CROSS.
Since Italy is not really in the arrangement,
they don't have the same obligation to intervene.
So they don't have
the same problem on the intervention side.
MR. TRUMAN.

Italy has a much broader band.

MR. CROSS. We talk to the Germans and we make these points,
too. But I think you do have to recognize that there are pressures
from the EMS angle of it.
MR. TRUMAN. One of the problems is that even if they want to
move the D-mark [vis-a-vis] the Danish kroner that would raise
questions about what else they would do within the EMS.
It seems hard
to do since there is this strong desire, especially between the
Germans and the French, not to do anything for who knows how long. By
[their suppressing] all this, it may be like the U.S. attitude toward
sterling in the late 1960s.
MR. JOHNSON.

Not to prolong this, but what's rotten in

Denmark?
MR. CROSS. Well, they have a stagnant economy and they don't
want to raise their interest rates.
So they are having a lot of
capital outflows.
MR. HOSKINS.
I'd like just one follow-up.
I raised the
issue about the Japanese but I haven't heard what their argument is.
What did they tell us?
Why don't they want us in?
MR. CROSS. They are still concerned or have a fear that the
dollar-yen relationship is going to move back in the other direction
and that it's going to cause problems there. At least that's what
they say. Now, I assume that there is an interest from the point of
view of their whole economy and their exports and so forth for them to
try not to get back into intervention if they can avoid it.
But it
gets harder and harder to make that case as the rates move. We are
still at 133. And the last time we were intervening I think it was
close to 137.
So the yen is not within any new ranges in that sense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. KEEHN. Sam, separate and apart from the central bank
attitudes, what's the attitude of the participants in the markets?
[Do they see] long-term trends there or is everybody kind of moving
day-by-day?
What are the basic attitudes?
MR. CROSS.
In terms of the dollar outlook?
waiting and I think they are moving-MR. KEEHN.

I think they are

Day-by-day?

MR. CROSS.
--with a short-term focus to see what's going to
happen on this. As I said, at the present time these markets are very
fickle. They watch one thing for a while and then they watch
something else.
But right now they are watching very closely the
inflation and monetary policy actions in all these countries because
there has been so much attention on and concern about whether
inflation is growing worldwide.
So, that's the main focus of

3/28/89

attention right now: what's going to be done about it and what the
various players are going to do.
If not, would somebody
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else?
like to move to ratify the transactions of Mr. Cross since the
February meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KELLEY.

So move.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Without objection.

Mr. Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. HELLER. Peter, I heard you use a term a little earlier
that I think I have never heard used before: the indexed level of
borrowings.
[That's] borrowing used in the construction
MR. STERNLIGHT.
of reserve paths, about which we had a good deal of uncertainty. I
say uncertainty, but I had a fairly strong suspicion that we were
overstating or were using a higher level than was consistent with what
banks would actually come to the window for, given the range of the
funds rate that we were expecting. During those first few weeks of
this intermeeting period we would make adjustments, particularly if it
went well into a reserve maintenance period, for what was turning out
to be a lower level of borrowing by $200 or $300 million as this
period went along. And as that persisted week-after-week the decision
was made--we consulted with the staff and the Chairman on it--to make
this downward technical adjustment in the level of borrowing used in
the path, but we were not expecting that to be accompanied by any
change in the range of expected funds rates.
MR. HELLER. No, I understand that.
indexed or linked to any other variables.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. HELLER.

But it is not formally

No, no.

Okay.

I thought you had some construct there.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I said indexed because it was indexed to a
degree of pressure that we expected to be associated with [a certain]
range of federal funds trading. It's indexed in that sense.
MR. HELLER.

Thanks.

MR. STERN. Peter, you may already have answered this
indirectly, but in view of the widely recognized problems in the
relationship between borrowings and interest rates I wonder if some
market participants believe now that we're targeting the funds rate?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they certainly realized that we have
had problems with it.
Periodically I see things suggesting that they
think we are getting back more to the use of borrowings but probably

-10-

3/28/89

not all the way back to where it was, let's say, prior to the stock
market crash--which was the time of the major departure.
MR. STERN.

I said rates; you said borrowings.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
they think that we are-MR. STERN.

Maybe I twisted that around.

But

Getting back to a rate.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. STERN.

Sorry.

Getting back toward use of borrowings.

Okay.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we're getting back toward the
borrowings but [not] all the way to what we were pre-October '87.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MS. SEGER. There was an article in the paper about Salomon
Brothers taking big hits in their government trading.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

MS. SEGER. Given their level of expertise, etc., and what
you said about the people in the markets expecting us to tighten
further how could they possibly have taken such gigantic loses?
MR. STERNLIGHT. As I understand it, Governor, it was not so
much a bad bet on what was going to happen to the general level of
rates but rather some sophisticated rate spread movements that they
anticipated that just did not pan out as they expected. That's not to
say I agree-MR. JOHNSON.
going to rise.

They probably believed the long-term rates were

MR. STERNLIGHT. It's surprising to see as sophisticated a
participant as they are coming up on the wrong side on that.
I will
say that in the past couple of years when, in general, the government
securities dealers have had a pretty rough time that firm drew on
perhaps a more sophisticated view and a better knowledge [of the
I'm
market] and has fared better than the pack by a fair margin.
really more concerned about a great number of other dealers who seem
really unable to hack it with the current degree of competition in the
government securities market.
MS. SEGER. The only reason I mentioned Salomon Brothers is
that that was the firm that happened to be featured in the news item.
But I imagine-MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, they did have that big hit from a bad
bet on what was going to happen to the shape of the yield curve.
MS.

SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

-11-

3/28/89

Peter, how widespread are these exotic--if I can
MR. SYRON.
Are
use that term--hedging strategies that Salomon had in place?
there many other firms that have things that are [that complex]?
Would
Obviously, there are varying degrees of complexity, though.
they have the edge in terms of the complexity of their strategies or
are there others that are operating-No, I think there were many firms that
MR. STERNLIGHT.
engaged in those strategies, though probably in lesser dollar
But I don't think it's at all that
magnitudes than Salomon Brothers.
unusual to the degree-Well, it really isn't an exotic hedging
MR. ANGELL.
You really
strategy; it's an exotic speculative strategy, I think.
have to distinguish between an exotic speculative strategy and an
There's quite a difference.
exotic hedging strategy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In a total

[unintelligible]

it turned

out-MR. SYRON.
MR. JOHNSON.

It may be a

[unintelligible]

distinction.

I don't know that you look [unintelligible].

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

[Unintelligible]

on a hedge.

It
MR. JOHNSON.
Well, by definition a hedge is a hedge.
just depends [on whether it was] something they thought was a hedge.
MR. SYRON.

They may have thought it was a hedge in priority.

MR. ANGELL.
But anyone who finds the hedge [unintelligible].
So, I think they
They just have to have more expertise than that.
were taking a position.
Further questions for Mr. Sternlight?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS.

SEGER.

Would

So move.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
like to raise your [leeway question]?

Peter, would you

In the upcoming
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
intermeeting period, current projections suggest a maximum reserve
The main factors we
need on the order of about $7 or $8 billion.
think will be increased currency in circulation, higher required
reserves and, by early May, some rise in Treasury balances at the Fed.
While some of this can be met with repurchase agreements, which do not
count against leeway, I believe it would be prudent to enlarge the
standard $6 billion intermeeting leeway temporarily by $2 billion to
$8 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HELLER.

So move.

Would somebody like to move the leeway?

-12-

3/28/89

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
economic reports. Messrs. Prell and Truman.
MR. PRELL.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

We now turn to the

[Statement--see

Appendix.]
MR. TRUMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. JOHNSON. A couple. One: Just looking at the forecast,
which has been revised since last time although it's not dramatically
different, you have real GNP slowing significantly by the third

quarter of 1989. It averages about 1.2 percent from the third quarter
of 1989 through 1990. We have gotten into these arguments before
about what potential is but I think everybody agrees that that's well
below whatever anybody is thinking of as potential. And that's for a
fairly significant period of time. Yet we don't see any improvement
on the inflation side. The lags are longer I guess than would show up
on here. But exactly what do we expect, ultimately, on the inflation
rate from a forecast that has that kind of slack built into it over a
prolonged period? Clearly, it's not showing up in the numbers here.
When does it show up?
MR. PRELL. Let me say first that it takes a period of below
potential growth in order for some slack to open up in the labor
market in particular. But also, we'd expect to have some slack-slack.

MR. JOHNSON. I know, but there's a year of that kind of
And I just wondered--

MR. PRELL. But, as you know, in our forecast that only
brings the unemployment rate up to about 6 percent. The maybe "worst
case" interpretation of the events of the last two years is that
that's only getting us back to the natural rate--if you want to use
that framework for looking at this. We have been implicitly a bit
more optimistic in the sense that, as we move up to the 6 percent
neighborhood and edge above it by the end of 1990, we are anticipating
that we will begin to see some tendency toward moderation in the
underlying inflation trend. And thus in 1991, if the unemployment
rate remained in the low 6 percent neighborhood, by bringing growth up
to, say, the 2 percent range we would anticipate that we would begin
to discern a very gradual deceleration of inflation. But it would be
measured in fractions of a percent for a year at that level.
MR. JOHNSON. But if you're just saying that we're moving to
the natural rate why would you get below potential growth on that?
MR. PRELL. Well, to raise the unemployment rate you have to
move below potential growth. In recent years it has been very clear
that on average the economy had to grow less than 2-1/2 percent in
order to produce an upward movement in the unemployment rate.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, I know I'm--

-13-

3/28/89

MR. PRELL. Our judgment is based on what we've seen in wage
and price behavior. All the anecdotal evidence over the past year or
so suggests that in essence we have overshot a level of resource
utilization that's consistent with stable inflation.
What is the
MR. JOHNSON. Again, what happens ultimately?
ultimate inflation path that we get out of this scenario?
MR. PRELL. Well, in 1991 we'd expect to see a fractional
decline in the inflation rate barring any exogenous shocks that we
obviously can't anticipate at this point.
MR. JOHNSON. There is one other point I wanted to ask. I
asked this last time but I'll ask it again. I was looking at our
I know what was
forecast compared to the Bluechip consensus.
circulated showed some other forecasts besides the Bluechip one, but
those are all contained in the Bluechip so I'm comparing that one with
ours.
We have very similar forecasts on real GNP and inflation. But
once again they expect a decline in short-term interest rates by the
second quarter whereas we're saying they need to go a percentage point
higher. Any comment on that?
MR. PRELL.
I don't think we're totally outside the spectrum
of outside forecasters, but there continues to be some difference of
opinion between the staff and that average in terms of how much
weakness is likely to occur in aggregate demand as a consequence of
I noticed in the article in
the tightening that has occurred already.
The Wall Street Journal the other day on the difficulties in economic
forecasting that one person commented that it appears that the
business forecasters keep predicting recession about a year out and
In essence, there's a
then moving it back as it doesn't materialize.
large element of that: a sense that we have had a long expansion;
things have gotten tight; and it's more likely than not that we may
have a downturn. And they perceive it occurring by the end of this
year, in many cases with interest rates moving down along with it.
They also tend to have a seemingly relatively rapid disinflation
response to that softening--greater than we would anticipate. And
that's part of the difference in our views.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Ted, considering the strength of the dollar in
the past year and your comment that you think the dollar will remain
relatively firm in the near term, why wouldn't it be reasonable to
expect that any significant improvement in net exports would be
delayed to the second half of the year at the earliest and most likely
to 1990?
MR. TRUMAN.
second half.

I don't think we have much improvement in the

MR. PARRY. Well, you have improvement over the year going
from $103 billion, which of course has been revised. But the change
is from $103 to $85 billion; that's not [unintelligible] $18 billion.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but some of the changes have to do with
special factors in the last quarter of 1988 when there was a
deterioration, some of which was caused by a surge in oil imports and

-14-

3/28/89

probably a surge in nonoil imports associated with the buildup in
[inventories].
So, you take that out and that's where much of the
improvement comes on the trade side in the first half of the year.
MR. PARRY.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PARRY.

It's still $13

billion.

What?
$98 billion to $85

billion is still $13

billion.

MR. TRUMAN. What I mean is that while there is a small
improvement in there most of it is a bounceback from the fourth
quarter on the trade side.
MR. PARRY.
MR. TRUMAN.

But when-And there is a small adjustment in the--

MR. PARRY. Wouldn't typical statistical studies lead you to
expect an actual deterioration?
MR. TRUMAN. No, because we think that there still is some
effect in the pipeline from the delayed effects of the dollar decline
and we have built some of that in there.
So that's consistent with
the models and the equations that we use in terms of those effects.
And then we add on the special factors like oil and agriculture--to
the extent that there's a rebound this year in agricultural exports in
real terms, in comparison to the flat performance last year--and
that's what gives you some of the improvement.
MR. PARRY. Would you say there's perhaps a greater
uncertainty in this area than in some of the other areas of GNP
performance?
MR. TRUMAN.
I've always felt there's a lot of uncertainty.
That may be because I've been closer to it.
But I think that Mike
sends me his gospel truth and he's always right.
MR. PRELL.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. PRELL.
of the forecast.
MR. PARRY.

And vice-versa.
One of you is making a mistake.
Well, there's a lot of uncertainty on all aspects

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Doesn't it bother you that implicit in
this scenario is an increasing willingness to [acquire] direct claims
on the United States?
If you extrapolate to what seems to be going
on, what turns it?
In other words, I assume the long-term rate
differential is what basically is driving the models. Are we
expecting that the long-term rate differentials will narrow in the
next recession or the next month?
MR. TRUMAN. That is what it is basically. As you know and
others who have looked at it know, the equations for exchange rates
just barely qualify as equations in the statistical relationships--

3/28/89

-15-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They're better than anything else I've

seen.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as we get over this peak and the economy
softens a bit--this is basically what Governor Johnson was commenting
on in terms of the Bluechip forecast--we have U.S. rates coming down
in 1990 and coming down relative to rates abroad. No matter what
model you put that through, that gives you essentially a differential
effect. It could differ with regard to how much you get in the short
run on the one side. But the changing effect comes from the change in
the influence of the interest rate differential on the exchange rate.
In a sense we pushed aside the fact that you get very little
improvement in nominal terms over this period. And we are assuming,
maybe based in some sense on recent experience, that the market will
continue to finance us about-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, I just had a question, which I think I know
the answer to. Regarding the rate increase that is implicit in the
Greenbook forecast: Is that essentially a straight line linear
forecast throughout the year?
that.

MR. PRELL. Well, we wouldn't want to be any fancier than
We just have a gradual further rise.

MR. SYRON. I guess the second part of the question I'll put
off until later. But I'd be interested in speculating if it wasn't a
straight line increase whether the potential impact of that was of
importance.
MR. PRELL. I think what we have built into the remainder of
this year is not very large. In fact, I will venture to say that it
might not be large enough, given the range of possibilities one can
see here. But to make distinctions on whether you've gained this
increase of roughly a percentage point through a 3/4 point rise over
the next three months and a 1/4 point rise thereafter versus 1/4 point
and then 3/4 point I think is going well beyond anything that economic
science can discriminate between.
MR. SYRON. The second part of my question relates to the
questions Governor Johnson asked. In your model, is it fair to say-and this leads to the risks--that you don't see us getting below the
natural rate until somewhere around the second quarter of 1990?
MR. PRELL. Well, I don't want to speak of models per se
here. The models we have been looking at have a longer history of
price/wage behavior and would suggest that the natural rate is above 6
percent. However, our interpretation of the errors those models have
made recently and of recent evidence leads us to put together a
forecast that, if you forced it into that kind of model, would imply a
considerably lower natural rate. So, we are in the vicinity of that
implicit natural rate by the middle of next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. If you look at many models in their unadjusted
state--just running the pure models whether they're monetarist or

3/28/89

-16-

[unintelligible]--over a fairly broad spectrum they tend to come up
with a negative growth rate in the first half of next year. And then
you judgmentally massage the models. The main difference that I can
see is whether the conditions that are implied tend to have no
recession. How confident are you that the no recession scenario is
judgmentally right--that it will prevail over the simple unfettered
models?
MR. PRELL. Well, there's hardly anyone who runs an
unfettered model forecast. You're always confronted with the fact
that models have imprecisely predicted the recent past and you need to
make some corrections in order to move forward in the forecast period.
Our models, for example--the quarterly model and the P* model--have
tended to underpredict the strength of aggregate demand in the economy
If you immediately eliminated that and had
over the past year or so.
a pure model forecast moving forward it would suggest a sharper
weakening than we have in the forecast. But whether that's the most
plausible assumption to make is a question. Certainly, we [would] be
inclined to make that kind of adjustment.
The basic question, though,
In
is whether the outlook contains a significant risk of recession.
this Greenbook we deviated from what we had done the last couple
times--just to avoid needless repetition perhaps--but maybe it is
useful to state again: we are skirting zero growth here by a small
margin in what we've written down. And certainly a small hiccup in
the economy in an adverse way could tip this into negative territory.
So I would say that with this kind of outlook there is a nonnegligible risk of at least a mild downturn in the economy.
MR. KOHN. Governor Heller, I could add that we do run some
what we call St. Louis-style reduced form equations on monetary
aggregates and they do show slower nominal income growth than the
But they showed substantially
staff projection for 1989 and 1990.
slower growth, particularly in the M2 equation, in 1988 than we got.
And they made huge errors earlier in the decade, in '85 and '86.
On
the other side, they had much faster GNP growth, say, in-MR. HELLER.
MR. KOHN.
MR. HELLER.
beginning?
MR. GUFFEY.

How low do they get there?
What?
How would you describe the path at the
In '89, how weak?

Let's see.
MR. KOHN. How weak is it?
growth in 1989 it has about 4 percent.
MR. HELLER.

For nominal income

And real?

MR. KOHN. I don't have it broken down; this runs off the
nominal model. But running it using the base I have 9 percent or so
[nominal].
But they have all been making such huge errors that I
would have skepticism about-MR. HELLER. Well, the skepticism is whether the errors will
average out over the--

-17-

3/28/89

MR. KOHN.

At the end of a certain number of decades, right.

MR. PRELL. It sounds like we're somewhere in between those
two in our '90 forecast in nominal GNP.
MR. HELLER.

Thanks, Don.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, I was curious about the real disposable
income number that you have in the Greenbook. The second quarter
shows considerable weakness. I know the nominal personal income
number doesn't change very much. Is there a special factor there?
MR. PRELL.
referring to.

I'm sorry I didn't catch the change that you were

MR. FORRESTAL. The real personal disposable income in the
second quarter of '89 would be quite weak.
MR. PRELL. Well, there are some special factors boosting the
first quarter and some of those, like drought relief payments, won't
recur in the second quarter. The growth in the first quarter is also
boosted by things like Social Security but that's a level adjustment,
so to speak. We are expecting a considerable slowing in employment
growth and in hours in the months ahead. And that plays a significant
role in the outlook for income growth.
MR. HOSKINS. Mike, let me ask you Governor Heller's
questions perhaps in a different way. And that is: How would you
assess the risks of forecast error with respect to inflation? Do you
have a symmetrical risk on either side or are we more likely in your
view to exceed it on the up side or the down side?
MR. PRELL. I think it's fair to say that the recent data-and as I indicated we've raised our forecast of the price indexes for
the current quarter--leave us with the impression that the inflation
pressures at these levels of resource utilization may be a little
greater than we had anticipated. But we haven't made a dramatic
change here. We have tried to read through some of the noise in these
numbers. And we've only passed through a modest bit of this surprise
I characterized the
into the forecast for the next two years.
situation last time as being one where we think this inflation
forecast represents our best point estimate. But if I were to draw
the probability distribution, my sense is that the distribution has a
longer tail on the up side than on the down side. I could envision a
percentage point more inflation more readily than I could envision a
percentage point less inflation over the next year or so. That
doesn't mean that there's a strong likelihood of that happening; but
in that sense I think the risks may be a bit on the up side.
MR. HOSKINS. I'd like to just follow up. Since Don raised
it, I want to know what base growth you had to get 9 percent nominal.
MR. KOHN. Actually, I think we have projected about 4-3/4
percent base growth. That model, the base model in particular, has
done so poorly that I really shouldn't even have cited it. The errors
have been in percentage points.

3/28/89

-18-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[There are questions about] the
appropriate numerator, I think, on velocity with the base--if you pick
up a good chunk of economic activity outside the United States, some
of it illegal.
MR. KOHN.
MR. HELLER.
Columbia as well.

Right.
A lot of that activity is in the District of

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but they do use American currency
last I heard. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to ask if you had any insight
into what's going on with short-term business credit--that there's
some strength apart from the LBO situation.
MR. PRELL. I can't slice this too finely; it's very hard to
In the Greenbook we referred to numbers where we've taken
trace that.
away the large corporate merger transactions that we can identify and
gotten some additional information there. There are so many corporate
restructuring transactions going on that there may be a lot of other
things going on in the numbers besides basic financing and capital
Our reading is that there has been some
expenditures and so on.
strength in short-term business credit apart from the RJR/Nabisco and
other major merger transactions. And that probably is reflective of
the underlying need for funds and the deferral of long-term financing.
Some of the long bond issuance that Peter talked about earlier really
isn't very long term; much of it has been swapped into floating rate
obligations.
It just appears that businesses are not anxious to lock
in these current long-term borrowing costs which, again, is consistent
with the term structure picture and these forecasts of weakening in
the economy and lower interest rates down the road.
MR. MELZER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Maybe you can get rid of some confusion I have.
I always thought that the housing industry was very sensitive to
credit conditions and interest rate movements, and so forth.
I see
what has happened to interest rates in the last year and I hear the
forecast of another percentage point to be tacked on, yet I see
housing starts for the calendar year 1989 actually estimated at a
touch above calendar 1988--if I'm on the right line, it's 1-1/2
million versus 1.49 million. And then the following year it's 1.44
million, with the weakest quarter not being any worse than 1.43
million.
I guess I just need to have that put together for me. How,
with these interest rates, would you think that the home construction
will not be any weaker than that?
MR. PRELL. Well, to date, the effects on housing starts have
been negligible.
I think housing starts were confounded a bit by the
weather that boosted the January figure to such a high level.
February is in the area of more than 1-1/2 million. Interest rates
have already risen a good bit.
We don't have a gigantic further
increase in mortgage rates in this forecast, so this kind of decline-given the underlying demographic influences and so on--looks to us to

-19-

3/28/89

I don't think we are all that far off. Given
be fairly reasonable.
what other forecasters have been anticipating in terms of interest
rate movements, I don't think we're that far off the beaten track on
Perhaps we're being a little optimistic.
the housing starts outlook.
If we had a much larger mortgage rate increase it would obviously make
a difference.
But it's not very large at this point.
MR. PARRY. Governor Seger, one other perspective that
perhaps I can provide on that: If you take the California market,
which represents a fairly significant share-MS. SEGER.

Assume everyone's moving to California--is that

it?
MR. PARRY. No, I said it's a fairly significant share of the
We have had increases in the prices of singletotal housing market.
family homes that have averaged 25 to 30 percent in the Los Angeles
I think there are some consumers that look
and San Francisco markets.
at that on a total return basis and figure out that 11 percent is not
such a bad deal if you can count on increases in prices of that
I don't know
I think that's had an impact in our state.
magnitude.
if--

MS. SEGER.
MR. HELLER.

Yes, but the others-Mike Kelley wants to speak.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an interesting issue because the
real interest rate there is to be adjusted not by general price levels
but by the price of the asset to which it is applied.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And there as you're saying--you don't
mean in California that it is literally negative at this stage but-MR. PARRY. Well, all I know is that the average price in the
two markets that constitute most of the area has gone up about 25 to
30 percent in the past year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.
projecting.

No.

Well, that's not the projection.

And one has to figure out what people are

MR. PRELL.
I think we've seen in some parts of the Northeast
that this doesn't go on forever--that you get an affordability problem
after a while because the mortgage payment just is unmanageable. But
it is a mixed picture regionally, and that's one of the problems in
It clearly has been a problem in the
forecasting housing activity.
last year. We've had very divergent and changing market conditions.
We try to sort through all of that as well.
MR. SYRON. Consistent with what Bob [Parry] said, you get
this responding sort of with a lag.
In New England now we're seeing
lower housing activity than you might expect, considering other
variables, because with the rate of appreciation having declined
substantially--it has actually gone negative in real terms--people are

-20-

3/28/89

They are not buying it any longer
buying housing only for shelter.
So, at some point it sort
figuring that it is an investment as well.
of falls off a cliff in a sense, and you get a strong negative
reaction to the whole thing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's what will tilt the housing
market down.
If all of a sudden there is a perception that
residential property values are easing then all of a sudden, whatever
the nominal mortgage rate is, it will grab-MR. PARRY.

That's right.

MR. PRELL. I might just note one of the surprises recently:
we haven't gotten too excited about this yet, but we have been
surprised by the firmness in the multifamily sector. And we notice
that there has been some downturn in vacancy rates in some locales.
We have a sense that there is a very old stock of apartment buildings
It may be that there is some
out there and some demographic pressure.
considerable resilience in the apartment part of the market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, I assume that the 25 percent
increase is a nominal increase in price and that it has the same
problem that the national figure has in picking up a significant
So, the
increase in the average size of homes and improved quality.
adjusted price level is not going up anywhere near that level.
I don't
MR. PARRY. We do not'collect good data on that.
know how much that has changed and how much of a factor that is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do know in the national figures that
it's very significant. And since California is such a big part,
clearly, it's got to be an issue there. President Guffey.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mike, how much of the
decline that you're showing in your forecast for 1989 and 1990 from
last time is attributed to your assumption of an additional one
percentage point increase in interest rates?
MR. PRELL. We haven't really made much of a change from our
last projection. Using the model--which I've already indicated is an
imperfect predictor of these responses--if you took out the interest
rate increase and just held the funds rate stable the model would take
off maybe 1/3 of a percent in real growth this year and something over
1/2 a percent next year. That means that we still would have a
perceptible weakening in growth and likely some slight edging up in
the unemployment rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ted, can I ask a question on the effect
of the rise in the oil price in the last couple of weeks on the Saudi
Arabian fiscal situation? A couple of weeks ago, as I recall, it
looked as though the rapidly deteriorating fiscal situation in Saudi
Arabia and the pressures on the oil price would likely come, with the
Saudis having to increase their liftings to meet their revenue
requirements, which would accelerate the price level decline.
Is
there any way of making a judgment as to whether the recent runup in
spot crude prices has altered the situation in a way in which they
need not move the liftings at this point?

-21-

3/28/89

MR. TRUMAN. Well, it clearly works in that direction, though
it all depends a bit on what one thinks the current meeting will
produce for the balance of 1989. I have not seen any reports that
suggest that the Saudis will step up production because of their
fiscal situation or that they do not need to step up their production
because prices have moved up. Posted prices have not moved to the
same degree as spot prices, although-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, but they are still really selling

at spot.
MR. TRUMAN. But they have some long-term contracts. It
depends on how those contracts are written; that's right. It works in
that direction. One of the favorable factors has been the supply
disruptions in Qatar; that has tightened the supply side. And in some
sense there has been a spillover to the price the Saudis are getting.
We have a small step-up in production in the second half of the year
built into this. Our guess is that they decided to accept the prices
coming down on the assumption that there will be a modest increase--a
couple hundred thousand barrels a day--in OPEC production in general
in the second half of the year. That's not a big deal. A small
increase, on that order of magnitude, is built into what we have and
if you parse that out among all the producers-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions for
Messrs. Prell or Truman, shall we open our tour de table? Who would
like to start? President Boykin.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I really don't have any
questions or any real disagreement with the staff forecast.
Looking at the District, our recent performance and the nearterm prospects for our economy continue to improve. Over the last
year and a half the gains in the Dallas District have been
concentrated primarily in manufacturing services. More recently,
we've seen some gain from the energy sector. The contraction in
construction seems to be nearing the bottom. Agriculture remains a
bit of a concern, primarily because of the uncertainty of the drought
situation. As I've reiterated over the last six months, most of my
contacts outside the banking and real estate industries have been
sounding increasingly optimistic. I had a group of investment
merchant bankers in for a breakfast meeting last week and most of them
agreed that the Texas economy and even that of Louisiana, which has
been one of the weakest states, are beginning to demonstrate
increasing strength. In fact, a few who represent very large
companies with considerable capital from both national and
international sources are beginning to look upon the region as a ripe
opportunity because of the reduced competition coming from the banking
sector. On the whole the regional economy is improving but growing
slower than the nation. Banking, real estate, and now agriculture are
the exceptions to this pattern. Within the District no one is noting
price or wage pressures but there have been a few signs over the last
two or three months of some shortages of engineers, first in Houston
and now in Dallas. Overall, I think we're feeling a little more
optimistic down our way than we have for quite some time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

3/28/89

-22-

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook projections look
quite reasonable to us.
Until very recently we had thought that they
were underestimating the amount of economic growth we would have in
the economy. But at this point I guess we think the risk of error is
about equal on both sides of that.
This change in our view is not the
result of what we see in the Greenbook or the Beigebook or what we
pick up in the way of anecdotal information. To us those sources
suggest--if you allow for some downtick in some of the monthly
statistics in February because of that temporary weather-induced burst
in January and also allow for the sluggishness recently in automobile
sales, which may prove to be temporary--that the economy looks pretty
strong. What makes us think that the risks really have shifted is
that we have taken, we think, some pretty significant policy moves in
recent weeks and months.
The federal funds rate is up about 3-1/2
percentage points over a pretty short period of time, and we think
these policy actions--particularly the most recent ones--have
increased the odds that economic activity will moderate later this
year just as the Greenbook projects.
And these actions significantly
reduce the risk that the economy is going to overheat further.
Now, the recent sharp increases in prices at the wholesale
level and certainly at the consumer level worry us a great deal as do
the indications of upward pressures on wages. And we're deeply
concerned about broad increases in prices outside the food and energy
area. That suggests that the underlying rate of inflation has risen
at least a notch or two in the last several months.
On the other
hand, the trend rate of growth in M2 has dropped pretty markedly over
the last two years and I think that provides us with at least some
insurance against a really sharp further acceleration in the
underlying rate of inflation for the remainder of 1989.
But I would
add, perhaps gratuitously, that if we're really going to get inflation
down to a zero level I think somewhere down the road we've certainly
got to get the aggregates growing at a slower rate than they have
grown over most of this two-year period--maybe no slower in 1989, but
certainly in a trend sense they have to come down still further if
we're going to get to our ultimate goal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth District
economy continues to experience healthy growth with only a few signs
of slowing. Agricultural producers are enjoying high product prices
and recent rains have lessened the chances of drought in the area
rather substantially. We also hear reports from Western department
store executives that sales of soft goods have improved in recent
weeks. But I must admit that that may be a reflection of improved
weather conditions and also the early Easter season.
In the few
sectors that we do see slowing it appears as though supply constraints
explain much of the change.
In Section II of the Greenbook there was
a reference to the types of problems that the commercial aircraft
industry is experiencing and I was thinking that it's rather amazing
that Boeing has signed an agreement with Lockheed to borrow up to 670
Atlanta-based workers for as long as six months.
Turning to the national economy, the level of activity as
indicated in the discussion in the Greenbook remains above its
noninflationary potential.
Strong growth in employment and tightening
labor markets suggest that upward pressures on wages are likely to

3/28/89

-23-

persist. At the same time, higher short-term interest rates may
result in some slowing in the next few quarters. But I must admit
that, to me, signs of current slowing are too few to be convincing at
this point. Our overall outlook for the economy is really not very
different from that of the Greenbook. We also expect the economy to
remain above full employment with continuing upward wage pressures for
at least the remainder of 1989 and
have less strength in our forecast
sector, largely as a result of the
experienced during the past year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

perhaps into 1990. However, we
originating in the net export
strength of the dollar that we've
Thank you.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard first to the District economy, in
general things remain in good shape and there haven't been any major

surprises or new developments that are worth reporting, with a couple
of exceptions. On the side of real activity the one surprise that
I've noticed is that nonresidential construction activity is certainly
stronger than I would have expected at this point. Major projects
continue to be announced and initiated in the Twin Cities and the way
things are shaping up it looks like that's going to keep that sector
reasonably strong early into the next decade. Labor markets generally
remain tight and sectors that had been expanding are continuing to
expand. Having said that, I do have the sense from talking to a
variety of business people that the rate of expansion has eased a bit.
And it's very clear to me that in the last several months, at least,
business people are once again noticing interest rates. Interest
rates have become a topic of conversation whereas as recently as
perhaps four or five months ago that subject hardly, if ever, came up.
But that's now back on the agenda. Another subject where the tone of
the anecdotal information seems to have changed is cost increases. In
the past a lot of business people would tell you about the cost
increases that they were experiencing and the difficulties they were
having in passing those cost increases through. They will admit now
that they're having less difficulty moving those cost increases
through. They hardly, if ever, complain any longer about the
difficulty in doing so.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, I have little to
add. I think there are some signs that we may be approaching a soft
landing, at least as far as real growth is concerned. I wouldn't want
to exaggerate those signs, given that January was probably boosted by
very favorable weather and some backing off in February was almost
inevitable. We do run an unfettered model forecast; it's a wholly
unfettered [vector] auto-regressive model. And for what that's worth,
that does not have a recession in it. It has continued real growth in
'89 and '90, and it has that at modest rates. And, at least as far as
consumer prices are concerned, it has somewhat more rapid inflation
than the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, looking first at the District,
I'm glad Boeing is borrowing some of the Lockheed workers; that will
be helpful. There are several thousand Eastern [Airlines] people who
are available as well. We haven't seen very much of a change in the
Sixth District since the last meeting of the Committee. We are
continuing to see moderately good growth, although it's somewhat

-24-

3/28/89

slower paced than the national average. Capital spending plans are
quite robust in those industries where capacity pressures are evident
and that is certainly the case for industries like paper, chemicals,
rubber, and all aspects of the transportation sector. Textile
manufacturers are also moving ahead with plans to increase purchases
of equipment although in that case it's mostly to modernize their
older facilities. We do continue to have reports of shortages of
skilled labor and upward [wage] pressures for skilled workers. The
markets are not quite as tight for unskilled people but even there we
hear sporadic reports of difficulty, particularly in fast-food places
and in supermarkets. There is considerable concern among people I
talk to about the rising cost of benefits, particularly health
benefits, and the impact on total labor costs. In addition to that
there's a fear or concern about enactment of a higher minimum wage
which would push up wages for higher paid labor as well, given the
relative tightness of the labor market. As for prices, on the basis
of sporadic reports, the information we're getting is mixed.
Increases are mixed for industrial inputs, with a greater upward bias
than seen a year ago. And it's rather interesting to me that, in
connection with prices as well as some other areas, people talk about
a lower level of prices over the last month or so but when they
compare their prices to a year ago they are still considerably higher.
With regard to the national economy, we don't have very
significant differences with the Greenbook forecast. We would have a
slightly higher inflation number and a lower unemployment number but
those are minor differences; basically we're in agreement. Judging
from the Sixth District and from what I see around the nation there is
some near-term deceleration in economic expansion, especially if you
take into account the fact that we're at full employment and a lot of
industries are going full blast and at high capacity. There are two
things that continue to disturb me. One is that any slowing that's
evident seems to be taken as a sign of real weakness in the economy.
I think we've gotten so used to high numbers over the past several
years that when the numbers come off even a little people get panicky.
On the inflation side the same thing is true. As I've said before,
among a lot of people that I've talked to there is kind of an
acceptance of inflation at the 5 percent level or even a bit higher.
I think that was confirmed when the CPI number the other day came in
at .4 percent--which I'm not all that sanguine about--they were
relieved that it wasn't at the higher end of the expected range. So
in general, I think we have an expectational problem in the economy
and in the markets that we really have got to move against. Now, I
hope that the economy really is slowing. But as someone said earlier
we've been burned on this before. Over the summer I remember a couple
of times when we thought there was a slowing and it turned out not to
be. So, I'm skeptical that we are really seeing a sufficient slowing
to stem the inflationary pressures that are there. And that obviously
leads me to a certain conclusion about monetary policy that I'll
reserve for the later discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I do find this a particularly
difficult period in which to assess the outlook. In his presentation
I think Mike made the case, which we would agree with, that there are
at least some tentative signs of moderation out there. In a national
context we reviewed a number of things in the Greenbook. We think

3/28/89

-25-

consumer spending, particularly for durables, will be showing some
sign of leveling. Growth of exports is certainly short of our
expectations, and that would be particularly true for industrial
supplies, materials, and capital equipment. The housing numbers are
showing some signs of softness; interest rates have had an impact on
that.
The railroads no longer carry the GNP but nonetheless the yearto-date numbers for rail shipments are certainly lower, particularly
for February, than was the case for last year. How much of this is
January was
weather-related I think is very tough to tell.
extraordinarily warm, of course, and February was at least normally
cold and the seasonal adjustments may have had an impact on some of
these national numbers.
In a District context, we're really not seeing very much of
this moderation. The employment numbers throughout the District
continue to be strong; we don't see any weaknesses emerging there.
The manufacturing outlook continues at a pretty high level. The steel
business, for example, is strong. And the steel plants in the Midwest
are exporting--admittedly from a low base--but nonetheless that's a
Railway equipment-new market for them. Machine tool orders are up.
an industry that has been absolutely moribund over the last four or
So, in a
five years--is showing some signs of increased orders.
manufacturing context, it's our expectation that activity in the
Midwest this year probably will be running ahead of the national
numbers. And certainly the other aspects of the Midwestern economy
continue to be pretty favorable. On the inflation side I have thought
for quite some while that of course the risks really were, on balance,
for higher levels of inflation.
I think that continues to be the
case; but it may just be possible that we're at one of those times
when the balance is shifting a little and that as we go into the
upcoming period some of the moderating signs will become a bit more
specific.
The real question--which we'll be talking about a little
later--is how much more we need to do in a monetary policy sense, if
in fact we need to do more.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Stone.

MR. STONE. Regionally, the labor markets in the Third
District have continued to tighten. The unemployment rate this
quarter for the three states represented in the District is estimated
to be the lowest it has been in 19 years.
We'd be happy to borrow
some employees from whatever Districts seem to have some available.
Businesses are reporting a shortage of labor across an increasing
number of categories and that includes skilled and unskilled workers.
And we're starting to hear about shortages in the professional area,
including engineers. Prices and wages continue to increase at levels
above the national average. We also see some early signs for our
regional outlook of more moderate growth in the near term, but not a
level moderate enough to reduce substantially the pressures on both
labor markets and prices.
On the national scene, we feel the staff estimates are
relatively reasonable.
We probably see more risks on the up side,
particularly for inflation. That concludes my report.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

3/28/89

-26-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me start with a couple of
impressionistic or anecdotal comments. My sense is that most people
in the business community that I talk to associate themselves with the
view that there are these straws in the wind that the economy may be
settling down a bit. But I think it's almost universally true that
they would tend to be in the soft landing camp in that I have
absolutely no suggestions [from them] of any accumulating downturn or
anything even remotely resembling recession or remotely indicative of
that.
There is, I think, especially among major industrial companies,
far less conviction today than there was three months ago about the
prospective strength of exports.
Some of that is exchange-rate
related but, seemingly, a lot of it is not simply a reflection of
exchange rates; there's a combination of capacity constraints and
other considerations as well. But certainly there is less conviction
about the near-term strength of exports than has been the case.
Even
has changed his tune, Alan, quite perceptibly.
The anecdotal material on the inflation side is, frankly, a
bit sour right now. Virtually all companies--small and large--that
we've talked to in the recent past do point to both labor and nonlabor
cost pressures. And consistent with Gary's comment [they report] less
difficulty in passing costs through.
I don't think I would
characterize these impressions as symptomatic of a 1979-80 type
outburst of inflation. Nevertheless, I think the perception is there
that the pressure is greater. One little tiny vignette that's
germane: our small business and agricultural advisory committee
members were talking last week--and this really shocked all of us, I
think--about wage increases as high as 9 and 10 percent.
Presumably,
because these are small companies these are not wage increases as much
In other words, when they lose
as they are increases in hiring rates.
employees they have to go out into the marketplace and replace them.
And I think the thrust of their comment was that, in at least some
cases, replacement rates are now 9 or 10 percent above prevailing
rates for existing employees.
So it's not a wage increase in the
usual sense of the term but I think it is symptomatic of quite tight
labor markets throughout the District, including most of upstate New
York at this point.
The other impression that I pick up an awful lot lately--and
I think it's just worth repeating--is an almost universal skepticism,
bordering on cynicism, about the outlook for budget deficit reduction
plans, as they may or may not emerge over the weeks ahead. Again, it
doesn't matter whether you're talking to small businesses, big
businesses, upstate, or downstate. There really is a growing concern
that nothing seems to be happening. Whether the Administration's
quiet diplomacy will produce something is another question. But I
think it is a matter of increasing concern.
As far as the forecasts are concerned, the New York staff
forecast for 1989 in terms of GNP, real GNP, and indeed almost all the
components of GNP, is virtually identical with the Board staff's
forecast. The only major difference we continue to have is on the
Depending upon which index you look at, our inflation
inflation side.
rates are a half-MR. GUFFEY. Jerry, would you speak up a little?
to hear what you're saying.

We'd like

3/28/89

-27-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I'm sorry. The only material
difference in our staff forecast versus the Board staff's forecast is
on inflation. That has narrowed a bit but we still have inflation
rates in 1989--depending upon which index you look at--that are 1/2 to
That still seems to
3/4 of a point above the Board staff's forecast.
reflect, primarily, a different view on markups. Mike's forecast
still has a small negative spread between, say, the deflator and unit
labor costs and ours continues to have a small positive spread. But
when you add the two of them together it comes out to 3/4 of a point
In 1990, for whatever
difference on the high side in our forecast.
weight one wants to put on a 1990 forecast, there's a fairly sharp
difference between the Board staff's forecast and ours. We don't have
And we have the
as much of a slowdown in domestic demand as they do.
external adjustment process essentially flattening out and indeed
deteriorating a little. So there's a quite a sharp difference in
1990.
I don't put any more weight on those forecasts than Ted Truman
does, but to get back to the point the Chairman raised earlier-whether you take the staff's forecast or our forecast for '89 and '90
on the external side--both imply an increase in U.S. net external
liabilities in balance sheet terms of about $275 billion for the two
years combined. And I must say as an intermediate- or medium-term
policy problem I am getting more and more concerned about the
implications of anything even resembling that kind of a result for the
two years running.
With regard to the near-term growth prospects in the economy,
my sense of things, Mr. Chairman, is that under the best of
circumstances the near-term inflation numbers are going to be bad.
And if the economy is simply pausing rather than trending down they
So an awful lot does ride on the question of how
could be terrible.
much weight one should give to these signs, however tentative or firm
one may think they are, as to the near-term course of the economy.
Just one last point on the price side: Mike and Ted talked a fair bit
about oil prices and Governor Angell will probably talk a bit about
But one thing I did notice in looking at
commodity prices.
commodities is that stocks of a very wide range of agricultural and
I'd
industrial crude materials are at quite low levels right now.
simply observe that if we don't get some rain in some parts of the
country pretty soon that could further complicate the near-term
outlook on the price front.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer, why don't you start
off by telling us about rain in your area?
MR. MELZER.
It's not a problem; we even had a foot of snow
three weeks ago.
I think Roger might have something to say about
that.
In terms of the District numbers, the most recent reported
activity is very strong both relative to what we've been seeing lately
and also compared to the national numbers.
In general, the more
recent anecdotal information would tend to confirm that. The general
sense I get is that orders are growing, albeit at a slower pace, and
that there is some weakness in the consumer area but the commercial
area is still quite strong. In particular, we're seeing strong
manufacturing employment growth and the industries that you see there
are transportation, textiles, food products, and chemicals. On the
transportation side--just picking up on what Bob Parry said--a fellow
from
mentioned to us the other day that they have a
five-year order backlog in commercial aircraft and I think half of

3/28/89

-28-

their workforce has about an average of one year's experience on those
particular assembly lines. He did go on to say that the order backlog
includes options--I think they call them reservations--so that some of
that could fall away. On the textile side, where we've seen some
strength as well, a textile manufacturer who had just returned from
the Far East mentioned that, looking at Korea for example, between
what's happened to their currency and wage rates domestically in Korea
they're looking at cost increases of 25 percent in manufacturing
there. And to a lesser extent that's happening in Hong Kong and
Taiwan.
So, in particular types of products the United States is much
more competitive.
In terms of other insights of an anecdotal nature, the
general sense I get is that people--whether they are in a commercial
business or even in a consumer business--really feel that they are
under a great deal of margin pressure. Raw material prices are up a
lot, as somebody said, over the last year.
I think the increases have
slowed down recently. There is some sense of potentially growing wage
pressures.
And certainly in businesses where they're selling to
original equipment manufacturers there is still a great deal of
difficulty passing along price increases.
But they will try to work
both ends of the costs savings, passing along increases where they
can.
In terms of growth in orders, clearly the sense I got is that
[the rate of] growth has slowed down in the last couple of months but
orders are still growing.
I've heard of no cancellations as yet, but
reading between the lines I sense a little anxiety about the
possibility of cancellations.
In a similar vein on receivables, one
consumer products company mentioned that they are really taking a very
close look at their receivables, which have been growing; and they
noted that now 20 percent of the companies they sell to have been
involved in LBOs.
So, they view the quality of their receivables as
really quite low and they are looking at that carefully.
On the national front, my observation would be--just going
back a month ago--that our forecast in terms of the result was very
close to the Board staff's but it presumed roughly 4 percent M1 growth
over the forecast period. Clearly, to the extent that we have very
low money growth, people who prepare [our forecast] have become
increasingly concerned about whether or not things are going to work
that way.
In a sense that leads me to a bit of concern, to the extent
that in our discussions here we tend to focus on current inputs and
whether or not we see weakness and how we try to trade that off
against price pressures.
In a sense I think there's a trap in that
process in that it doesn't really take into account some of the
inherent lags in policy.
By the time we see the weakness it could be
too late; and when we do see the weakness we probably will continue to
see price pressure. What do we do then?
If you look back to the
discount rate increase, to some extent the market in effect demanded
that, in my view. I'm not saying we wouldn't have done it anyway, but
in a sense I don't think we had a choice because the perceptions out
there were basically that we were going to respond to these short-term
inputs.
So, I think at some point we have to introduce into the
dialogue something else to look at that can be a guide.
In general, I
would just urge that we not ignore what's going on with the
aggregates.
We all know we set a target on M2 and we know where that
stands: it's a little below the lower end of the cone.
I'm sure you

-29-

3/28/89

In
all recall my proposal for a [monetary] base growth constraint.
the fourth quarter that grew at less than 5 percent, which is what I
suggested as a lower bound; this quarter it's probably right around 5
I took a look at reserves and I was interested in what I
percent.
found there.
If you go back to '79 we've only had two quarters over
that entire period of negative reserve growth: one was the fourth
And as you
quarter of '88; the other was the third quarter of '87.
know from the Bluebook, we're putting together a second back-to-back
quarter of negative reserve growth of fairly substantial proportions.
In any case, I just think that as we contemplate policy actions we
have to consider not only what's going on in the economy currently but
also some gauge of the thrust of our actions and the lagged impacts
they are going to have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, maybe it's because I'm sitting next to Bob,
I'm
but the New England economy sort of performs inversely to Texas.
Contemporaneous
not sure whether there's any causal relationship.
measures of the region's economy are very strong: an unemployment rate
of 3.2 percent; personal income still growing at faster than the
national level. But if one looks a little beyond that, particularly
using anecdotal information from talking to people, there are
certainly signs of a number of areas where there are problems.
Manufacturing employment has been declining in absolute terms for some
substantial period of time. There was some mention of the computer
industry on a national basis; that's reflected to an even greater
extent in New England. One of largest employers, Digital Equipment
Corporation, had a very major decline in its stock price last week
Consistent with
that reflected some problems they had in earnings.
that, we're seeing that wage pressures are still pretty strong at the
unskilled end of the labor market. At the skilled end of the labor
market pressures seem to be abating somewhat from what has happened in
But going beyond that there is a variety of things that I
the past.
think are going to lead to some further relative slowing in the New
England economy. We have serious tax problems in three of the six
states that account for about 80 percent of the population and 80
percent of the economic activity in the District. There are incipient
problems in the banking sector. Delinquencies have risen. Actually,
it's the ultimate in anecdotal information, but in last Sunday's
papers we had three pages of ads for single-family houses, which is
Granted, they were big ads so they end up taking a
unusual for us.
lot of space. But interestingly, particularly in the housing area, I
think what's driving it is not rates so much as this realization that
people are no longer going to buy a house at $600,000 and then two
years later turn around and sell it for $800,000. That's what we were
talking about before--Bob Parry's point that people are buying
shelter.
I would maintain that much of what's going on in New England
does not really reflect monetary policy or overall constraints in the
national economy. It's sort of supply constrained and relative costs
have gotten so high in the District; and actually, it's a very small
District in terms of its weight nationally.
In terms of the national economy, we too don't differ very
much--hardly at all--[with the Greenbook forecast].
I have some
slight difference with the unemployment path of the staff forecast and
agree very much with the tone of the comments that Mike Prell made
this morning. However, I find those projections somewhat

-30-

3/28/89

disconcerting--not in the sense that we don't agree with them but that
they imply that we have a very difficult situation before us in that
we know inflationary pressures are there. It seems to me there isn't
much question about that, regardless of what we do right now. And
while there have been some--to be different I'll use the word "reeds"-in the wind of a possible slowdown, I don't think we've seen any
broad signs. We have certainly seen substantial increases in personal
income; we don't know how that's going to be reflected later on.
There really isn't any convincing evidence of a substantial slowdown,
so we are rather dependent on a forecast for that. And the Greenbook
forecast--which I'll say again we have very little problem with-shows, even taking out the drought in the second quarter, fairly
strong rates of growth. There was discussion about what the natural
rate is. I think that we're in a difficult position where if one does
believe that the risks are not symmetrical, the risks would lead one
to want to be more conservative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
District economy, it continues to improve albeit at a rate somewhat
slower than the national rate of growth. The strength comes largely
from the agricultural and manufacturing sectors whereas the weakness
is where it has been in the past couple of years--in the energy and
construction areas. There is an event that I think is worth noting
that somebody spoke of a moment ago, and that's the drought. That
will affect portions of the Tenth District, largely an area from about
the plains in Kansas to the northeast through Kansas, northern
Missouri, and portions of southeastern Iowa and western Illinois. If
we do not get rain, some generous spring rains, fairly soon the
agricultural situation will be fairly grim. For example, in Kansas
about 3/4 of the wheat crop is now estimated to be either poor or very
poor, which are two of the lowest categories of estimates of that
particular hard winter wheat crop. The one event that was frightening
occurred about two weeks ago--and I suspect most of you know this-when there was a dust storm that was created by 50-60 mile per hour
winds that actually darkened the sun in midafternoon in Kansas City.
In fact, there were some street lights that came on. I happen to be
old enough to remember the 1930's dust storms and this was very
reminiscent of that. It happened to be [only] one day; nonetheless,
if there is no rain through that belt that I just described I think we
will have very serious problems. The estimate of food prices, for
example, might be way off. Beyond that, there is strength in the
manufacturing sector, and I'm thinking primarily of general aviation.
Auto production, up until a couple of weeks ago at least, was going
full bore with auto plants operating at two full shifts. That would
appear to be slowing now; I don't know what's going to happen in the
future but there is a very large inventory, as you know, of unsold
autos. The energy sector shows little or no improvement. As a matter
of fact, it continues to decrease in terms of exploration activity.
It has always been thought that a price around $17 a barrel would
regenerate the interest in exploration; but the uncertainties about
OPEC and what may happen to oil prices simply are keeping those
individuals out of that particular activity and the number of active
rigs that are drilling continues to decrease.
With regard to the national outlook, there is no real
difference between the staff forecast and our own for the horizon of

-31-

3/28/89

the forecast with the exception that we're a bit stronger on both
growth and prices. In fact, there is some encouraging evidence that
has already been cited with respect to a slowdown. But it isn't very
convincing, at least yet. I think we still have to wait for some
additional information on that. In our forecast, we'd put the risks
on the high side rather than the low side, with rather a bit stronger
growth and stronger prices.
MR. HOSKINS. The Fourth District really hasn't changed much
over the last year and a half that I've been talking to you about it.
It's very difficult to pick up any signs that we have a slowing in the
area, either through casual observations, talking with people, or
trying to ferret through the data. What we did this time was to talk
to a few capital goods producers, which includes firms like
Westinghouse and Eaton Corp., and several other basic capital goods
producers, to try to get a handle on whether or not they see any
change in attitudes among the people they supply. And the answer to
the question is simply no. Any weakness that you perhaps see in
computers or office equipment is being offset, at least in the
District, in very traditional capital goods. The most optimistic
person was a guy in the capital goods industry who estimates real
[growth] for this year at 6 percent, fourth quarter-over-fourth
quarter. It's very difficult to find any signs of weakness in that.
Now, to some extent I'm a little surprised that we didn't find more
price pressures developing than we did. They all expect to be able to
move prices up in the coming year but they haven't moved aggressively
as of yet generally. Order books are still good and lead times are in
most cases lengthening rather than shortening. So the picture for
capital goods expenditures--at least what the producers in our
District think--is that the outlook for them is quite bright this
year, with really very few concerns about a slowing economy. One or
two raised a concern about that but they hadn't altered their plans
for production.
In terms of the Greenbook forecast and the outlook
nationally, as usual I am chagrined that, to some extent, again we are
pushing back another year any decline we are going to see in the
inflation rate. But that has been a continual concern. I haven't
seen us making a lot of progress in the last year and a half. I agree
very much with the comments made by Tom Melzer that we have done some
things that are unusual. One is the growth in total reserves. Maybe
Don can talk about that a little later; I don't know exactly what it
means. I know that it comes from interest-sensitive asset flows being
shifted around. But it seems to me if it's something that we ought
not be concerned about at least we should question whether or not
there's some significance to it in terms of the outlook. The lag
problem is always with us.
I presume Mike has built that into the
forecast. Now, I have no confidence that any other forecast is better
than this one. So, my concerns are the same as his--well, I don't
want to speak for him. I view the errors as likely to be on the high
side in terms of inflation rather than on the low side. I'll save the
rest of it for the policy go-around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I don't really have much to add. We got a rash
of weaker indicators for the month of February, where almost across
the board all of the data suggested a weakening. But we don't know

3/28/89

-32-

whether that is weather-related or not because of the strong data for
January. There certainly are some signs of slowing. I agree it's too
early to assess whether things are significantly slowing or whether
this is establishing some sort of trend. Real personal consumption
expenditures seem to have been on a modest track for more than just
one month and the order books on capital goods seem to have been
moving at a moderate pace for several months now. So, I think those
are promising signs. But I don't think there are any indications of
things going overboard on the weak side. Or, at least if they are
starting to slow down quite a bit, we only have one month's
observation. It's too early to make any judgment one way or the other
on that. I think the inflation news recently has been disappointing;
but at the same time we knew these lags were built in. Those forces
were set in place long ago and we've got to look forward. So the
question is whether we have put in place strong enough policy that,
with a lag, we're going to get the results we're looking for. That's
the key question. I don't think anyone knows this for sure; but we
have moved quite significantly over the last intermeeting period and
we will just have to see. Economically, I think we are in an
uncertain period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. My sense is that consumer spending in the United
States is rather gradually coming into line with what needs to happen.
Maybe some of this is interest-rate induced; maybe some of it is
demographics; maybe some of it is actually the impact of higher prices
and higher interest rates on budgets. In many ways that looks like a
1 to 2 percent growth rate of consumption, which seems to me is
exactly what we would like to see happen. And it seems to me that
this happens in an environment that's not very prone to a recession.
When I look at inventories and at the factors that ordinarily lead to
recession I just do not see the economy going into recession in the
foreseeable future, and I guess that would take us through the first
quarter of 1990. I recognize it's a narrow path to have this slowdown
in consumer spending without overshooting and getting a recession out
of it. But it does seem to me that that's still a possibility.
Hindsight, it seems to me, would say that some of us who watch
commodity prices didn't say as much about it as we should have said,
but there is a clear indication that year-over-year rates of change in
commodity prices have been moderating. But they have been plateauing
in a very, very slow manner. Of course, we had the November-December
spike in which the world food situation began to be somewhat more
clear to the people that follow it. We saw food and fiber prices
[rise] in November and December. We've had a year-over-year increase
of 42 percent in the price of wheat; the price of wheat is almost 80
percent of its high, which occurred back in 1974. And that's a price
that really is very conducive to increased production worldwide. The
weather situation is, of course, a very clear one; and it gets
interpreted into those commodity prices very, very rapidly. I suppose
some things could go wrong but I guess I'm comforted, Tom, by the 2
percent M2 number. Given the price pressures that are there, I
couldn't be more satisfied with any M2 growth that I can think of than
what we're getting. I suppose it does run some risk of being that
close to the precipice. But I think it would be riskier still if we
were going along with growth of M2 at a much more rapid pace.

3/28/89

-33-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other Governors wish to add

anything?
MR. HELLER. I think the general reluctance, Mr. Chairman, is
indicative of the fact that we all like where we have been and we
don't like where we are going. Maybe Mike Prell said it best when he
said we're in danger of overshooting the runway and when you overshoot
the runway you tend to get stuck in the mud or something. So, with
regard to the general picture of the economy that's unfolding here,
I'm not particularly fond of the declining investment activity, which
doesn't build additional capacity nor of the export picture not being
as good as it could be, although we continue to make progress. I see
the export picture mainly as a problem of different regions in the
world economy and relative exchange rates rather than our absolute
exchange rate levels towards Europe. We are in an approximate balance
now or actually are running very, very small surpluses, but [not]
toward Japan and Korea; obviously that's where the problems are
located. And I'm not sure that exchange rate changes are the right
way to go at that particular problem. So it isn't going to be very
pleasant. But it's all we've got, right?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
before coffee?
MR. HELLER.

There's only one economy.

Anybody else

Sounds better than anything else, right?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, why don't we break now.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The dollar is up to 133.20 on the yen;
the bond market is up over 9/32nds; the stock market is at
[unintelligible].
What do they know that we don't?
MR. SYRON.

Plenty of confidence in us, that's all!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Which was my opening refrain to Don

Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
see Appendix.]

Well, they're in a lot of trouble!

[Statement--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Let me quickly ask on Chart
7: I assume that you're not repeating before 1978 because that's when
the whole survey started. Or is it because other proxies don't give
you as good a correlation with the very present?
MR. KOHN. Yes, I think it's sort of suspicious too. This
chart is plotted from 1978 because that's when the 10-year Hoey survey
started. We have done some other experiments using, for example,
1-year rates with 1-year inflation expectations. They tend to get
very poor results in the 1960s and somewhat better results in the
1970s and 1980s. They also suggest that there have been changes in
the natural real rate, which was a little higher in the 1960s, a
little lower in the 1970s and much higher in the 1980s.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions?

-34-

3/28/89

MR. JOHNSON. Just one. On the Hoey survey, was that last
survey taken before or after our discount rate [action]?
MR. KOHN.

I don't know.

MR. JOHNSON.

It's a February survey number.

MR. KOHN. Yes, it was the last half of February, but I don't
know the exact date. I know it was after that first PPI number and
before the second; that I checked on.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.

That's all I need.

MR. KEEHN. Don, maybe you answered this, but in the cool
light of hindsight has the Hoey survey had a reasonable degree of
accuracy?
MR. KOHN.
MR. PRELL.
have to look back.
MR. KEEHN.

Well, I don't know.

I'm not familiar with--

It only had one observation in 10 years.

You'd

Well, on the shorter?

MR. KOHN. I don't know, President Keehn.
I haven't seen a
study which tends to do that.
Generally, these market expectation
studies don't show that the market does a very good job of
[predicting] what's going to come. But also, I look at it not as a
way to see if the market may in some sense be more accurate than
someone else, but rather as giving us some clue as to what's going
through people's minds, whether it's accurate or not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
If not, let's move
on to a discussion of policy. I'd like to start off by saying that
the [outlook for the] economy is generally uncertain, a view I assume
a lot of us share. My own impression is that the odds are that what
we're going through now is more likely to be a pause rather than the
beginning of a downturn. But the odds are less, I think, than they
were in earlier stages in this particular cycle, if for no other
reason than that we are at much higher levels of activity and the
probabilities that the economy will eventually tip over obviously are
linked to how long the expansion has been going on, even if age per se
does not necessarily throw us over.
But there are signs that orders
are a little shabby. Basically, with the dollar very strong and with
the money supply growth factor rather modest--even though the odds in
my judgment are somewhat better than 50/50 that we will probably have
to tighten again before this cycle is over--this strikes me as
probably a good time to pause and see what effects our actions to date
have.
That would lead me to come out for "B" asymmetrical towards
tightness. Governor Johnson.
MR. JOHNSON. I'd just follow up on that, Mr. Chairman.
That's pretty much the way I see it.
As I said in my statement just
before the coffee break, I think there are certainly some signs of
slowing but not enough to feel that a clear trend has been
established, although I think we have enough observations on new
orders and in the real consumption area to suspect that things are at
least slowing or moderating. Whether that will be sufficient is

-35-

3/28/89

certainly not clear at this stage. But, given the fact that we have
just recently moved fairly significantly on policy, I think we at
I think
least ought to wait a while to see how those lags work out.
it's probably still true that the risks are somewhat asymmetric, so I
can certainly go along with an asymmetric policy position in terms of
our pause.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your view in regard
I have a slight
to a pause, so I would go with alternative B also.
It's
preference for being symmetric but not for operational reasons.
simply that I believe if we are symmetric and we need to take that
next step--and I think there is at least a 50/50 chance that that's
the case--we can do it with symmetric language. But if it happens
that we don't need to take that move, we just look a little wiser by
I don't know whether that impresses anyone or not.
hindsight.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have a request for clarification.
In the Bluebook it's stated that alternative B would assume roughly a
continuation of 9-3/4 percent [on the funds rate] and that money
market rates might tend to decline a bit if that indeed is where we
It seems to me in terms of maintaining the existing degree
came out.
of restraint in financial markets that the market is probably thinking
Could I interpret support of "B" as being an
more about 10 percent.
operation which would cause money market rates to remain at roughly
their current levels?
My own impression is
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would think so.
that it's much too soon to allow the markets to get any signals,
erroneous or otherwise, that we're backing off. That would strike me
as a very inopportune signal.
MR. PARRY.
firmer funds rate?

So that could be consistent with a slightly

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I would think so.

MR. PARRY. Okay. Well, in that case I certainly would favor
alternative B and asymmetric language at the present time. However,
if further signs of slowing do not become more convincing in the next
several weeks, I would certainly recommend that we consider moving to
alternative C promptly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I favor holding policy steady over
the period ahead, for a period of the next few weeks anyway. My hunch
is the same as the one that's there [in the forecast] and also the one
you made in assuming that some further increase in the funds rate is
probably going to be needed later on to keep inflationary pressures
and expectations from building up over the months ahead. So, I would
want the directive to be asymmetrical. But I think it's also possible
that we've done enough, particularly in looking at the behavior of M2
and how that has decelerated.
I realize a lot of that stems from how
opportunity costs of holding M2 [have changed] just recently; but if

-36-

3/28/89

you look at the last two years M2 growth is still down to 4.7 percent
from many years at a trend rate of about 8.9 percent. That is one
whale of a lot of deceleration over that period. That leads me to be
more sanguine about what might happen to inflation than I would be in
the absence of that decided deceleration in M2. So, I would go with
"B," at least until we have more information on the March figures; I'd
watch those closely because I may well be wrong on that. Certainly,
the current statistics do not reflect anything that would suggest that
we ought not tighten more. You've got to look way back at what has
been put in train, guess about those lagged effects, and reach the
conclusion that now is the time to pause. And that's really where I
think the focus ought to be right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as you know Mr. Chairman, I
blow hot and cold on this, to put it mildly. I probably have changed
my mind about what is the right thing to do about once every hour for
the past two weeks. I clearly think that we've got to maintain a tilt
toward firmness; indeed, I think my preference would actually be to
come out somewhere between "B" and "C" right now. Let me just
elaborate on two basic reasons as to why that's where my preference
lies. The first is, as I've said before, that it seems to me we have
a period immediately in front of us just about baked in the cake in
which the price statistics are going to tend to be on the bad side. I
think that's kind of locked in. By "bad" I don't mean anything like
those January-February PPI numbers but something in the range of 5
percent or higher. Again, if our forecast and our hunches about soft
landings prove to be right then we could get lucky. On the other
hand, if our forecast and hunches about soft landings are wrong and we
have a pause rather than a slowdown then I think we have real trouble,
which is another way of saying that I still think the risks are
distinctly asymmetric.
I have another concern that reinforces my tilt [preference].
And that is, notwithstanding Don Kohn's Chart 7--which I agree is
pretty impressive to look at--I still worry that the changes in the
financial system and structure may well have produced a situation in
which it takes a higher level of both nominal and real interest rates
to get the same degree of restraint that might have been associated
with that nice neat relationship in Chart 7. And that leads me to a
couple of things. First of all, as we look around right now there is
no evidence that I can see of any credit availability problems.
There's plenty of credit there. That shouldn't surprise us, given all
the structural changes in the financial system and so on. But what it
means, of course--and Ted Truman touched on this--is that one way or
another restraint has to come through price effects. Price effects
either mean the exchange rate--and if they are the exchange rate that
complicates immensely that medium-term problem I spoke of earlier this
morning--or they have to be one way or another through interest rates.
But what I'm not so sure about is how much we know today about the way
the interest mechanism itself works. For example, take the consumer
sector: it's unambiguously clear that rising interest rates have a net
positive impact on personal income even after you take account of
floating rate mortgages and home equity loans. Now, that itself
doesn't tell you too much; you then have to make a lot of judgments
about relative propensities to consume. But it's unambiguous in terms
of its cash flow effect on the consumer sector as a whole.

-37-

3/28/89

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But adjustable rate mortgages are only
25 percent of total mortgages.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's true. That's what they are
right now. But on the other hand, the business sector clearly is hurt
more in cash flow terms by rising interest rates than it once was.
And we get the anomalous effect that at least in cash flow terms the
effects of rising interest rates are more of a problem in the place
where we need spending activity rather than in the consumer sector
where it should go the other way. Just as another illustration of
this financial engineering, we're now all familiar with the swap
market but we now have emerging markets in interest rate caps,
collars, and floors. And this market, which is only a couple of years
old, we know to be $300 billion in size and we think it is probably
$500 billion in size. This market didn't even exist three years ago!
And as a reflection of the way that market has been working in recent
months, the open interest in Euro-dollar futures contracts in Chicago
is now up to $760 billion. Now, I just don't know myself how all
these things interact in terms of the way monetary restraint works
itself into the system by interest rate channels. But my hunch is
that, if anything, it probably works to slow it down rather than speed
it up. And that's the second reason why I have that tilt. Having
said that my preference would lie between "B" and "C" right now, I
guess I can go along with your formulation in the spirit of Bob
Parry's earlier comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in favor of your
recommendation, namely, alternative B. But at this point I certainly
would continue to favor asymmetric language. Not to go further into
the operational aspects of it but, if the market's perception is that
the fed funds rate target is, say, 9-3/4 or 9-7/8 percent, it does
seem to me that we are in a period in which there may be natural
I wouldn't resist it if the rate were
upward pressure on that rate.
moving up to 9-7/8 or 10 percent, whereas I would resist it if, in
fact, the rate began to trend downward. So, I'd have a clear bias
toward allowing the rate to go up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, Si Keehn and Bob Parry have already pretty
That is, I'm afraid
much emphasized what I would want to point out.
that market participants believe we are targeting the federal funds
rate closely at this juncture. So, while I favor "B" I think it's
important, as we pause in the process of tightening here, that we make
sure we pause at the right place and don't give the market a signal
that we are in some sense backing off. That's all I would add.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

"B,"

MR. HELLER.
asymmetric.
MR. BLACK.

Governor Heller.

I think President Black gave my speech;

Both?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

I'm for

3/28/89

-38-

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sensing that the
theme of this conversation is that it's time for a pause, and I
certainly share that. Consequently, I can comfortably support your
suggestion. But I would like to repeat what Governor Johnson said a
little earlier when we were touching on the matter of lags, and that
is: Have we put into place already enough [restraint] that will get us
what we want?
It's in that sense that at this moment I'm in no hurry
to tighten. While I would agree that we certainly don't want to be
perceived as backing off in any way--that caveat having been given--I
really personally would prefer symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. My preference is for no change, which I guess is
"B" with symmetric language. As has been said by a number of people,
we have had a substantial tightening over the last 12 months or so;
interest rates have risen rather dramatically. Because of these known
lags, much of that tightening has yet to be felt by the economy.
Also, as Manley said, there have been some signs of slowing.
I
personally would argue that there's going to be some more coming,
particularly in housing and in the auto industry.
I haven't heard it
mentioned but I think that the thrift situation is something we should
be aware of, if for no other reason than we could easily do something
that would make the cost of the bailout quite a bit higher. Also,
despite the Brady plan, I don't believe we've solved the third world
debt problem; maybe it's coming but I don't think it has been done.
Too much additional tightening, I think, could negatively impact those
third world nations.
Finally, I'm very concerned about the dollar
perhaps not performing as Ted and his people think it will--that it
will stay strong and that that will prevent this export expansion that
we all want which, in turn, will make it even more difficult to narrow
our trade deficit.
So, for all those reasons I would prefer to sit
tight and have symmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that a somewhat
firmer policy at the moment would be appropriate. My judgment is that
we are, in fact, experiencing a pause and not a sustained downturn in
the economy.
But even if it is not a pause, even if we are seeing
some real slowing, I think the risks of recession with a firmer policy
are minimal. The Greenbook forecast, with which I agree, is
predicated upon some tightening beginning in the second quarter--some
tightening from where we are at the moment--and that does not produce
a recession in 1990. Moreover, it does not produce any great
improvement in the inflation rate.
So, not only do I think that we
don't need to back off, I think we need to continue our pressure on
reserves in order to stay ahead of this inflation curve. We ought to
go ahead and do the job now and make a tightening move. I wouldn't do
it to any great degree but I think a funds rate around 10 percent, or
whatever the equivalent borrowing is, would be appropriate. My
preference would be to move now by some small degree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can't remember when
I was more concerned about the confusion of the signals that I'm
reading or as uncertain about my own conclusions.
But I guess I feel

3/28/89

-39-

that the economy is a lot mushier and that there are more risks

inherent in it than most of you around the table do. I'm kind of like
the guy who's gone into the saloon to play poker and is willing to
check his sixgun at the door and accept the key as the alternative.
But I'd like to keep a derringer in my watch pocket. So, I'm in favor
of the asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

So that's "B,"

asymmetric?

Yes, sir.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. My preference would be for "B," symmetric.
I
can certainly live with what you suggested, Mr. Chairman. The other
point I would make, consistent with what I was saying earlier, is that
I'd be a little concerned if we reacted to a single number in the
intermeeting period. It may be that the markets force our hand and we
have to do that.
But I think there's going to come a time when--and I
don't know how this will be achieved--there will have to be something
else on the table so that when we decide it's right to start moving,
the markets aren't sitting there saying, well, where's the Fed. With
respect to the M2 ranges, I don't know whether we have confidence over
a long period of time that if we stick with the lower end of the
ranges that that's going to contain inflationary pressures.
I just
think at some point we've got to get out of this mode of the
expectation that if a bad number comes out, boom, the Fed ought to be
there doing something right then. And if we are not, all the markets
[unintelligible].
That's a very difficult thing to deal with but it
does trouble me.
And, in my judgment, just not moving in response to
a number won't solve that. But I think we're getting to a point that
we ought to be worried about trying to break that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. We think that more tightening probably is going
to have to take place this year. I'm not terribly concerned about the
timing, provided that when we do--to reinforce Tom's point again--that
we take a very credible action and to some extent lead market
expectations at that point.
We take those actions and we explain
them; we tell them what we're doing. So, I'm comfortable waiting for
a while.
But I am disturbed. Again, many of us have spoken out about
price stability; yet as we look at the forecast, we're starting 1991
with roughly the same rate that we have right now. I think that's a
concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The truth of the matter is that none of
us has a clue as to what the price level will be in the fourth quarter
of 1990.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's for sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The fact that it's in the forecast I
don't think [is important].
However, I think the issue that you raise
is.
But I wouldn't state it as unequivocally as you state it.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, I think we have to look into the future
since, presumably, the lags are 18 months to 2 years or perhaps

3/28/89

-40-

longer. And I don't know what else to look at. If that's not our
objective then I think we probably ought to talk about it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think it is our objective. But
when you look out in these forecast numbers--. You've done your
models and I've done my model; I would hate to go back and have anyone
look at our historical forecasts in this area. That's the reason why
I think the money supply issue is so crucial. I agree that if we can
hold the money supply growth down, just keep it there persistently, I
think we'll win this one. President Syron.
MR. SYRON. I personally would be more comfortable with
something closer to "C" than "B" because I think we are probably going
to have to tighten at some point and I would prefer to tighten sooner
rather than later. But having said that, I'm comfortable with your
suggestion of "B," asymmetrically stated. The point that was made
that we certainly wouldn't want "B" to be consistent with an easing of
market rates--I'm not sure what the exact number is--is an important
one. The only other point I would make is that I would not in the
immediate period be terribly concerned if M2 continued to grow rather
slowly, because I'm not as sanguine that some of these thrift
problems, in terms of the deposit outflows, are not going to continue
in the immediate period ahead. That's based in part on looking at
some data of FSLIC insured thrifts as compared to FDIC insured
thrifts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should hope we would be able to make
some thrift-adjusted M2 judgments.
MR. KOHN.

Of a very rough sort.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know.
about the price forecast and-MR. ANGELL.

Here I am complaining

We can call it M2t.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

As in M1A?

MR. BOYKIN. I would favor alternative B as you suggested.
And I would strongly favor asymmetric language. I would do that
because I think projections are extremely important right now. I'm
not sure that we will know by the time of the next meeting whether we
are in the pause or whether we're heading a little differently. And
when this policy record becomes public, following the next meeting, I
think it could lead to some confusion in terms of our commitment to
having inflation in the forefront of our thinking. I think it could
send the wrong signal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor "B" and an
asymmetric directive. I'd just like to highlight the point that Tom
Melzer made, however. We have in the past been fairly quick to act on
a single number that has been published, given the background of the
tightening that we've done over the last year. And that's 3

-41-

3/28/89

percentage points over the last year in the federal funds rate alone-or 2 percentage points over the last 8 or 9 months.
I think it is
time to pause and see what these numbers really mean.
I would like to
see a little more accumulation of evidence of this slowing or the lack
of slowing before we take any further action.
I don't know what that
means [in terms of timing] but I think it should be at least a month
In my mind that would give us the employment
before we do anything.
numbers and the next PPI number, I guess.
In other words, I need a
cumulation of numbers going one way, really, before taking any
dramatic action on the asymmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, let me say--and I think it deserves
to be said--in the event that some number [becomes available] or that
something occurs that is significantly out of tune with this
conversation we're having, I think it is obligatory that we have a
telephone conference and some rethinking and rejudgments of this.
First Vice President Stone.
MR. STONE.
I probably come out where Vice Chairman Corrigan
comes out, somewhere between "B" and "C."
But I certainly would be
able to live with "B" with an asymmetric guideline.
I am very
sensitive to the points that President Melzer brought up about how
we're going to get out of this cycle of reacting to each of the
numbers that comes out.
One of the ways to get out of that is to be
ahead of that; and that's why I'd probably prefer to be between "B"
and "C."
But, for all the reasons stated, I think there is some
reason to pause at this point and to be a bit more conservative.
So,
I could support "B" with an asymmetric guideline.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It appears as though the critical mass
is on "B" with asymmetric language. We could insert that into the
directive. Let's have it read and we can put in what we need to as we
go along.
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
Taking account of indications of
inflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion, the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign
exchange markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March through
June at annual rates of about-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

3 and 5.

MR. BERNARD.
--3 and 5 percent, respectively. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of 8 to 12 percent."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would anyone like to amend that or does
anyone have any problem with the language as such?
If not, could you
poll the Committee?

-42-

3/28/89

MR. BERNARD.

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
President Melzer
Governor Seger
MR. ANGELL.
MS. SEGER.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
How do I vote for no change
with symmetrical?

You say yes.
That being the case, I'll say no.

MR. BERNARD. [Continuing the roll call for the vote:]
President Syron
Yes
MR. BLACK.

You would have said yes if he hadn't helped you,

MS. SEGER.

I would have.

Martha?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
adjourn for lunch.

The next meeting is May 16th.

END OF MEETING

We will

