Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
June 5, 1989

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Angell
Guffey
Johnson
Kelley
LaWare
Melzer
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, Oltman, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Fransciso, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Truman, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, Lindsey, and Simpson, Associate
Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Banks of Chicago
Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas,
Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of June 5, 1989
I believe we
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone.
are all accounted for with the exception of Governor Heller who is
away.
Sam Cross, could you bring us up to date on anything pending?
MR. CROSS.
transcribed.]

Yes sir, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--not

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Cross.
Mr. Cross?
Peter Sternlight, would you update us?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
transcribed.]

Certainly, Mr. Chairman.

Any questions for
[Statement--not

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Joyce Zickler, could you bring us up to
date on your appraisal of the Friday [employment] report?
MS. ZICKLER.

[Statement--not transcribed.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions for Ms. Zickler?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Black. Has anybody
been able to figure out whether this is a supply phenomenon or a
It occurs to me, with this high level of
demand phenomenon?
employment, that that weakness might stem from a lack of people to
employ.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
meaning of your question was.

I'm sorry, I didn't quite get what the

MR. BLACK. Well, [I question whether] to interpret this as a
sign of weak demand when employment rose so slowly. I'm wondering if
it wasn't a matter of difficulty in finding people, given such a high
level of employment, high participation rates, and a relatively low
level of unemployment.
MR. JOHNSON.

That shows up in the

[index for] wages, Bob.

MR. BLACK. I didn't understand all of what Joyce was saying,
but I thought it had accelerated a little.
MR. JOHNSON.

No, it went down.

MS. ZICKLER. Well, on a year-over-year basis there really
hasn't been much acceleration in the hourly earnings index. For the
last year or so we've been seeing quarterly numbers that fluctuate
anywhere from 3 to 4 percent. And, as Governor Johnson just said, if
we were continuing to get more and more widespread shortages we would
expect to see more on the wage side. We had thought that perhaps some
of that supply constraint was showing up in the productivity numbers.
But I'm not certain we'd be ready to give that interpretation to it
right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is clearly a puzzle as to why the
wage behavior is as soft as it is, given the tightness of the labor
markets.
I guess the only thing that one can conclude from any of

6/5/89

this is that the issue of job security, which surfaced as a critical
element several years ago, appears to be as pronounced as it has been.
One sees it as a significant shift in the relationships between wages
The data that we saw in Friday's report I
and the unemployment rate.
found frankly rather encouraging, in the sense that if there were
acceleration going on we would have seen it in that figure. As best I
can judge, the fact that it came down rather than going up reinforces
the view that wage pressures are, if anything, subdued rather than
accelerating. Mr. Kohn, would you bring us up to date and also
respond to the request of President Parry of last week?
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--not transcribed.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there any questions for Mr. Kohn?

MR. PARRY. Don, this is Bob Parry. Thank you very much for
doing that work. One question: On your assumption that M2 would end
up near the bottom end of the range, what was the assumption with
regard to [interest] rates for the remaining part of the year?
MR. KOHN. The assumption was that they would rise from where
there were last time by about 3/4 of a point by the fourth quarter.
MR. PARRY. So, if [interest] rates were to stay where they
are or even decline somewhat, money growth could be somewhat faster?
MR. KOHN. That's true. Offsetting that, President Parry,
was the fact that the incoming data were a little weaker, and carried
We already have
forward this [would affect] our view of nominal GNP.
had a downward revision to the first quarter so that in some sense
So, we weren't going
nominal GNP could be a bit on the weaker side.
to have a major revision. But you're right--the [steady] interest
rates work in the direction of higher money growth.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mr. Kohn? As I
indicated last week, I was concerned about how the data would come out
on Friday's employment report--if they would show no contrary evidence
to what was beginning to emerge very clearly as a significant defusing
Increasingly, as I look at commodity
of inflationary pressures.
prices, and especially wages, I would be inclined to request the Desk
I've concluded-to bring down the borrowing requirement a notch.
looking at the data and thinking about it considerably over the
Hence, consistent
weekend--that that is the appropriate thing to do.
with the directive, I am requesting the Desk to move the borrowing
objective from $600 million down to $500 million; and I expect that to
be consistent with a funds rate of about 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 percent. Is
there any discussion?
MR. GUFFEY.

Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Roger.

MR. GUFFEY. You have made your proposal and it does
I understand that, I think. I
encompass a lower interest rate level.
But I
really believe the data that we look at can be read both ways.
don't really understand the urgency of moving at this time given the

6/5/89

uncertainty about inflation and the uncertainty about the strength of
the economy generally. It still isn't clear to me that we're in
anything other than a pause. As a result, there seems to me to be
some risk of this economy really [unintelligible] in the period ahead
and having to reverse our stance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I wouldn't disagree with that,
Roger. At this particular point we are confronted with a very tricky
balancing of risks.
Essentially, the question here is: Is the risk of
being wrong in moving down modestly larger?
I might add, given the
money supply growth factors, which we discussed at length last week:
Are we at greater risk with our money supply and inflation outlook
data than we are on the dangers of reacceleration?
I think that this
is a close call; I would not deny that.
However, having looked at the
[forward] order positions in the best detail that I could and having
spoken to the purchasing managers in some considerable detail--even
going beyond the data that were published in the May purchasing
managers' report--the impression I am getting is that all the
preliminary indications are that their next report will be one of
increasing softness on the inflation side.
I would think that that in
itself would not be enough if there were not also evidence that the
wage patterns are being subdued.
If we had complete capability of
seeing into the future this would be an easy job, but we obviously
don't have that.
And I must tell you that I do not see immediate
signs of deterioration. The inventory data at this stage don't show
any imbalances that create major problems.
My major concerns are (1)
the money supply data and (2) evidence that is emerging that the
commodity price inflation is beginning to subdue. All the discussions
that I have been able to have--and there have been a considerable
number of them--confirm that the inflationary processes are easing,
not accelerating.
MR. PARRY.

Mr. Chairman, this Bob Parry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Bob.

MR. PARRY. It seems to me important that we indicate that
we'd like to chart some longer-term [course] for a lower rate of
inflation. Quite frankly, I don't think that a small decline in
interest rates such as the one that you're proposing would be at
variance with that necessarily.
If we were to make the change that
you've suggested, perhaps at some convenient opportunity you could
underline the concerns that we all have about gradually reducing the
rate of inflation over the longer term. I think it would be a very
desirable way to go.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony
we will update our basic views with respect to the P* forecast system
and emphasize that the purpose of our policy is to bring the inflation
rate down to negligible levels--as close to zero or thereabouts as
possible.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your move.
It
seems to me that we do not always know whether the given level of
restraint is in place or not. And when we begin to have undershoots
in regard to money, it just seems to me that it's the prudent thing to
do to let some of that show through on the interest rate side so that
all of the miss doesn't show up on the reserve side.
I have never

6/5/89

seen a clearer signal in regard to money growth--also incorporated by
turning commodity prices and foreign exchange auction markets as well
as the action of the bond market--that would indicate such a clear
view as to what seems to be happening. Now, I will grant that these

money numbers may change, and commodity prices may change, and foreign
exchange markets may change. But if all of these were to transpire,
Mr. Chairman, I would be just as eager to be out front in supporting a

reversal or a continuation of what was there as I am to support this.
I believe this is an appropriate move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I would like to back up what Governor
Angell said and also acknowledge what Bob Parry said. I see this as
an appropriate move and not at all inconsistent with our long-term
goal of getting the inflation rate down. I think we can easily make
the mistake of seeing the fed funds rate and the level of short-term
interest rates as a target and not an instrument. I thought we all
basically had taken the position in the past that we don't want to
target the level of short-term interest rates--that we see movements
in interest rates rather as an instrument of our long-run goals. If
that is the case, there are going to be times when we see the funds
rate come under both downward pressure and upward pressure. I don't
see having to reverse this at some point--if in fact that's the way
things develop--as inconsistent at all. I think it would be a much
worse mistake simply to worry about stabilizing the level of interest
rates and to view any change from that level as a tightening or easing
of policy. I don't think it is at all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments?

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I support your move for the reasons listed by
Governor Johnson and also Governor Angell; I agree with all of those.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. GUFFEY.

Anything further?

Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey again. Let me say that I don't
necessarily agree with the action you're proposing. Let me raise
another point. The dropping of the borrowing level to $500 million,
given that seasonal borrowing is now up at least to the $375 million
level, leaves roughly only about $100-$125 million of adjustment
borrowing, which is marginal it seems to me. If we're going to move
this way, what you're really talking about is an interest rate target
for the short run rather than a borrowing target. And I know the Desk
would treat it

[unintelligible]--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's an important point, Roger.
Don Kohn, why don't you respond?
MR. KOHN. Well, President Guffey is correct in that seasonal
borrowing has moved up--actually to $385 million in the current
period. I would say, though, that we moved the borrowing objective up
to $600 million at the last FOMC meeting sort of as a technical
adjustment, mostly in anticipation of the increase in seasonal

6/5/89

-5-

borrowing. So, while the Desk will have to remain somewhat flexible,
I do think that the consistency of $500 million with federal funds
trading in the 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 percent area is probably taken care of
by the adjustment that the Committee made at its last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
If not, I look
forward to seeing you all at the next FOMC meeting of July 5.
END OF SESSION

