Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
October 18,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

1989

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Guffey
Johnson
Keehn
LaWare
Melzer
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Hoskins, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Alanta, and San
Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, and Simpson,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of
Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. J. Davis, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
October 18, 1989
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Bob Parry, would you bring us]
date on the events of the last 13 hours?

up to

Sure. At the present time
MR. PARRY [from Los Angeles].
we're still on night hours; [the earthquake] has knocked out power
throughout the city. We will be open for business in critical areas
today. We've told employees in some areas--personnel, research,
But in
auditing, etc. that it is not [necessary] for them to come in.
other areas, we've asked some to come in where possible. The problem
in particular is that getting from the East Bay to the City is very
difficult because the bridge is down and it means that people either
have to come by one of the more remote bridges or by a ferry that was
set up on a temporary basis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is the San Mateo Bridge still down?

MR. PARRY. No, the San Mateo Bridge is up so that
[unintelligible] are functioning well. At the present time we haven't
had any problems with staff. All essential employees have been
contacted and asked to come in when possible. We also wired all
Districts that we are open for the day; you should have received that
wire. Getting to some of the services, everything seems to be okay in
securities. Bank of America has a problem and will be moving their
securities operation, at least part of it, to our facility.
[Unintelligible] of California we haven't been able to
[unintelligible], and apparently there are many small banks that
aren't going to open today. There are a lot who could have their
businesses open and we're just not aware yet of the problems of
In the currency area we're receiving and
smaller institutions.
shipping, but we're not going to be doing any processing. Our
decision at this point is not to do any processing until we get on
There
regular power. We just fear that we wouldn't [unintelligible].
Very little in
are no ACH tapes in or out; electronic ACH is fine.
checks came in last night, but we do expect a heavy volume tonight.
The real [problem] in everything is transportation. As an example,
In San Francisco
there are very limited flights at the present time.
there are some commercial cargo flights but at the present time [the
airport] is not open to passenger flights. The other airports are
either under limited or no use at the present time, but are expected
to come up shortly. The wire as we speak is--if it isn't up now it
will be up momentarily. As far as the [unintelligible] of LA, as it
turns out we recovered the data bases in LA and we were ready to take
over [from there], but it wasn't necessary because we think all the
processing can be handled out of San Francisco at this point.
Basically, it's a little early to be too optimistic but as far as our
assessment of the situation at the present time, things seem to be
going as smoothly as they possibly could. That's it, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Bob?
planning to drive up to San Francisco today?

Bob, are you

MR. PARRY. Well, I'm either going to drive or there's a
possibility that I can get a flight from Burbank to Oakland and then
find a way to get over to the city. We'll get there probably by noon
one way or the other.

10/18/89

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are the roads open?

As a matter of fact, one of the
MR. PARRY. Not all.
critical roads leading from the Oakland Airport is the one that
collapsed and killed 200 and some people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
from the south.

Yes.

I was referring to roads coming up

MR. PARRY. I don't think there's much of a problem.
[Routes] 101 and 5 are not; it's just [route] 880, which is a big road
that comes up from [unintelligible] actually. But I think anyone
could find a way to get to San Francisco from LA or from the north.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that it is going to be weeks or
months before everything gets back to normal.
I think that's true, although the damage on the
MR. PARRY.
Bay Bridge is really quite small; it was only one small section at the
top deck. And they anticipate that they might be able to get traffic
back on the bridge in a couple of days.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, that'll make a huge difference.

And how about BART?

MR. PARRY. The last word I had was that BART was running
everywhere except under the Bay, but they expect that will be up and
that will be most helpful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

That will make a big difference.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Bob?

MR. STERNLIGHT. This is not a question--Peter Sternlight
here. The market has lots of questions about how certain transactions
stand with the California institutions and we're trying to pass along
as best we can what we hear about the situation. But there is a lot
of uncertainty. Even though we know the Reserve Bank is operating,
there are questions that market participants in other areas have about
counterparties in the Twelfth District or California.
MR. PARRY. Well, I'm not aware of problems at this point.
I
think we would have received indications of problems by this time, but
we'll recheck. If you hear any, Peter, let us know.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

It's just that we're hearing questions on

this.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

Well, we'll

[unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions for
Bob, Sam Cross, could you bring us up [to date on developments]
overnight?

10/18/89

MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, the exchange market continues
to be nervous and jumpy and continues to be influenced by what's
happening or expected to happen to the general economy.
The markets
are thin and many customers are standing on the sidelines.
[The
direction of any] quick movement that we see seems to be determined
more by the traders and the other big players than the customers.
Yesterday at this time I mentioned that right after the trade figures
[were released] the dollar declined by about 1 percent, partly in
anticipation of what they were expecting the stock markets to do.
In
the late morning and early afternoon and after the recovery of the Dow
from those early declines, the dollar also recovered and made up those
earlier losses.
So, by the end of the day we were back to the levels
prevailing before the trade deficit was announced.
The recovery was
led by the dollar/yen; throughout yesterday's [trading session] there
continued to be buying pressures from the Japanese in the yen.
Overnight--in Tokyo's afternoon--the dollar did ease back somewhat.
There was some profit-taking and also the question of the earthquake,
which raised a lot of uncertainty and questions about what was going
to happen to the stock market this morning, and also raised questions
that Peter mentioned about the payments system and the ability to
settle.
So, the dollar has eased back again in light of that and is
now trading at about 140-1/2 and 1.84-1/2. The announcement of Mr.
Honecker's resignation has had no effect so far, and the housing
starts [data] seem to have had no effect. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Peter Sternlight, would you bring us up

to date?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I would say nervousness
certainly continues in the domestic stock market.
There was a
moderate buy [unintelligible] on balance yesterday, although at one
point at mid-morning there was a pretty sharp sell-off [and] the Dow
was off about 60 points for a few minutes.
It came back and ended up
the day about 18-1/2 points or about 1/2 percent lower; that would be
true of the broader S&P 500 as well. Just as we're speaking now I see
the opening on stocks for this morning is a further modest decline-about 16 or 17 points on the Dow. Returning to yesterday, Treasury
bonds ended up modestly lower on the day. They had been up at first;
they were knocked back by the bad trade number; they recovered from
that, and then went off moderately in the afternoon--largely, we
thought because of some supply prospects. The TVA refunding issue was
enlarged by $1 billion and the market senses the approaching big
Revcorp issue that I think will be announced formally today. Bonds
are up a little this morning on the housing starts decline.
The highgrade corporates came off a little yesterday also on the TVA and other
supply prospects. The junk market was mixed, with some of the better
quality names slightly higher and some of the weaker ones, or ones
with some particular news affecting them, coming off a little more on
the day. Treasury bills were not much changed yesterday; they are
down a few basis points this morning. Fed funds yesterday were around
8-5/8 to 8-11/16 percent.
The effective rate was 8.70 percent; that
gave us an 8.85 percent average so far this reserve period, which has
just one more day to go.
We're starting out with funds trading at
8-3/4 percent this morning.
As to the Fed's operations, initially yesterday we were well
positioned to stay out of the market:
Reserves looked to be just
about on path after allowing for high borrowing earlier this reserve

10/18/89

Just as we
and funds, as I mentioned, were 8-5/8 to 8-11/16 percent.
were shaping up our final plans for the day, the stock market was
experiencing that selling spasm that I mentioned and we were also
hearing a couple of things on the reserve front suggesting a little
less availability. Moreover, the market was pretty much looking for
us to come in again with something on the day, so we finally decided
on discretion over valor and did pass through $1-1/2 billion of
customer repurchase agreements. The market remains somewhat mixed in
I'd say most are looking for us to
its expectations about policy.
come out of this period with funds centering around 8-3/4 percent, but
I think there are certainly more than a few who would look for 8-1/2
percent. Others are not yet convinced that we have deviated more than
But if the funds rate were to return to
temporarily from 9 percent.
the 9 percent area, I think there would be some sense of
I do not have that feeling about
disappointment in the market.
centering on 8-3/4 percent, if that's what emerges. As to what we
might face today, I don't really know. I think there will be more
than usual uncertainty because of the earthquake situation. We
probably won't have our usual confidence, even our low confidence, in
That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
the numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Cross or Mr. Sternlight?

Okay.

Any questions for either Mr.

I'd like to ask Peter a question. You
MR. JOHNSON.
I thought we had
mentioned that funds opened around 8-3/4 percent.
regarded our market participation in the last couple of days as
somewhat liberal, coming in with customer RPs when funds were really
close to 8-1/2 percent. Why do you think that funds have opened up
Does it have something to do with the earthquake or what is it?
firm?
Yesterday when
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know at this point.
we put in funds, we did that reserve injection when funds were 8-5/8
It
percent. Funds tended slightly firmer over the course of the day.
We thought we were just
may be that there really is [a shortfall].
about on path, but we were hearing--there are always these marginal
reserve factors--that the foreign central bank pool was going to be a
little bigger than we had thought initially and there's so much that
So, we may have
can vary just on the size of the Treasury balance.
had a reserve shortfall; we may be getting another revision in the
path. That was one estimate that we were hearing just about the time
our conference call was over yesterday. So we may actually have a bit
of a reserve need; I just don't know. But we may not have a good
reading on it because of the uncertainty coming out of San Francisco.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay, thank you.

Si Keehn, is
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
there anything you can add to our body of knowledge this morning?
MR. KEEHN. Not really, Mr. Chairman. Activity in the
Chicago markets yesterday was much smaller than on Monday and Tuesday.
Operations here yesterday were seen as fairly routine and at this
point there are no particular glitches in the system that I'm aware
But having said that, there certainly is a sense of wariness that
of.
continues.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Jerry Corrigan, are you there?

10/18/89

-5-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I have nothing to add, Alan.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. I still would think it
appropriate to have the Desk ease with the period starting tomorrow if
nothing untoward occurs.
I think we ought to play it loose today, in
any event, and see what occurs. I don't think we need to schedule a
meeting for tomorrow morning, but should the markets behave in an
unstable way, we ought to be prepared to have another meeting. But if
nothing much occurs it probably will not be necessary. Are there any
further comments? Does anybody out there want to add to the pot?
If
not, we may or may not be on [the phone] tomorrow.
END OF SESSION

