Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
April 29, 1983

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Solomon, Vice Chairman
Gramley
Guffey
Keehn
Martin
Morris
Partee
Rice
Roberts
Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,
Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Bradfield, General Counsel
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, Eisenmenger, Ettin,
Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate
Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

-2-

Messrs. Burns, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, and Stern,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Dallas, San Francisco, Atlanta,
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Meek, and Soss, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Kansas City, New York, and New York,
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of April 29, 1983
[Secretary's note:
The roll call and opening statements by
staff were not transcribed.]
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony.
It seems to me
that the current situation reflects the clause in the last FOMC
directive that lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of
more pronounced slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates, etc.
And I think we ought to give serious consideration to a cut in the
borrowing level assumption.
In theory, a cut of $100 million from
$250 to $150 million would give us about a 25 basis point reduction on
average in the fed funds rate.
On top of that there probably would be
some psychological effect and we might get a drop over a period of
time down to as low as the 8 to 8-1/4 percent area. It seems to me
that there's some advantage in doing that because all the arguments,
including both the international side and the high level of real
interest rates, are on one side with this very major slowing.
It also
seems to me that we would want to see that development first before
considering a discount rate cut. And next week there are three days
of Treasury refunding, so that it would be very hard to do a discount
rate cut in the middle of that or the day after. Any discount rate
cut probably would come in the early part of the following week, so we
would have about a 10-day period before we could give that really
serious consideration and in which we could have a working out of this
reduction in the borrowing level. We ought to have some discussion
and serious consideration of doing this.
MR. PARTEE. Tony, this is Chuck Partee.
I think you're a
little premature in your conclusion that the growth rate in the
I
aggregates has dropped off very markedly. We only have April.
would be more inclined to think that if May does not show a sharp
rebound, as Steve apparently is projecting, but continues at a
moderate rate, then there would be a basis for what you say. But at
this point it seems to me we only have one month and it very well may
be a sport.
It's too early to take the kinds of actions you're
suggesting.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even if May showed a rebound of the
magnitude that I understand is being considered, growth would still
average out for April and May at only 5 percent.
MR. PARTEE. Well, as I recall, the projection for the
quarter was on the order of 8 percent for M2 and I've forgotten what
the M1 projection was.
So, remembering that we've had very strong
[growth] over an extended number of months in the case of M1 and over
several months in the case of M2, it seems to me that people would
think it pretty fast to be reacting [now].
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
But you would agree, Steve, that the
average of April and May would still represent a significant slowing
compared to the growth rates we've been seeing all this year. And
given the facts--and I'm thinking particularly of the international
side as well as the solidifying of the recovery here and the slowing
of the inflation rate--there would seem to be a lot of good reasons
for some modest reduction.
If we wait until we see May data, we're
talking about waiting maybe five to six weeks--

4/29/83

MR. PARTEE.

Or several weeks.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
--before we have a clear idea.
we may be losing an important period of time.

And

MR. PARTEE. That's on the presumption that we are going to
be moving in an easing direction. If that's incorrect, we're not
losing an important period of time, we're avoiding an error.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
at this point?

Does anyone else want to enter into this

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.
I would like to
join Tony for some of the same reasons, but I would restate some
reasons that I have put to the Committee before.
It seems to me that
we should take advantage of a "window" to move interest rates a bit
lower in the period ahead, and the window may be within the next
couple of weeks. Even if it's a mistake, as suggested by Chuck, I'm
more concerned at the moment that we do indeed continue the recovery
than I am with the fear that there is a possibility for some fairly
strong growth in the aggregates in the second quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any real questions about
the recovery at the moment?
MR. MARTIN. Well, I would like to enter my usual caution
with regard to the so-called housing recovery, Paul. We're still not
sure of the new housing sales. The anecdotal evidence from developers
is that these are still predominantly and unusually first-time buyers,
and that sort of market can weaken very readily.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, this is Frank Morris.
I'd like to
be recorded as supporting Tony Solomon's position as well. If we look
at the performance of the broader aggregates, we simply don't find the
kind of enormous bulge that we have had in Ml and M2.
Without being
too repetitious, I simply don't think that they have been giving us a
proper clue as to what policy ought to be doing.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, this is Lyle. I agree with
Frank's last comment that the aggregates have not been giving us an
indication of what is happening to monetary policy. And I would be
strongly opposed to the use of one month's prospective reduction in
the growth rates from very high paces to take action to lower interest
rates.
I interpreted Jerry Zeisel's comments as indicating that by
and large the recovery is coming along as well as we could have
expected. There are the same kinds of weaknesses and question marks
that we had at the time of the FOMC meeting, but nothing new in that
respect. I think we ought to wait until we have a clearer indication
before we take precipitate action to lower interest rates.
MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, this is Henry. It seems to me
we've reversed ourselves here. The main concerns of the present time
are on the international side and there's quite a bit of reason for
Domestically I see very little.
trying to get to lower real rates.
So we have
The economy seems to be moving slowly but fairly stably.
now a situation where international considerations urge ease but
In short, I think we ought to wait.
domestic considerations do not.

4/29/83

MR. ROBERTS. I'd like to be associated with those who want
to wait. I think one month is much too early to start fine-tuning,
particularly when the economy seems to be moving along all right here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're all aware that that
directive has a clause in it saying that we would ease in a sense-automatically is too strong a word--if we had a convincing lower
[monetary] growth rate over a period of time. I myself think it's
premature to do it now after one month, with confusion about IRA/Keogh
accounts, seasonals, and mainly the fact that it's only one month.
And the latest indication we have is that the trend may be rebounding
a bit. I think we just have to wait and see a few more weeks and not
get caught in a move that we may want to reverse quickly. But I think
it's a legitimate question to be raised and to watch in coming weeks.
I would assume, and I won't raise the question, that the directive is
certainly valid. I don't think we have to vote on anything.
MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting you indicated
that if there was any erring in policy, given the recovery and the
strong aggregates, that one would tend to err a little on the high
side rather than the low side. It would seem to me, while it might be
premature for any significant change in policy, that the erring ought
to be more neutral and not have that bias on the high side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would say in that respect that we
already have unbiased errors. We are not trying to err--well, we
never do try to err on anything--but there currently is no attempt to
bias the errors, as you put it.
MR. MARTIN.

Snugging is dead.

SPEAKER(?).

Unbiased.

Is that right?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a straightforward aim that is not
always reflected in results. We had very high borrowings at the end
of last week. Everything was more or less on track and then went off
right at the end of the week. As a result, borrowings started out
heavy this week. So we may have more than $250 million of borrowings
this week, but not because we're aiming at that; it's just because we
already have them on the books, which I suppose technically will mean
that the markets will ease after the weekend sometime, maybe around
4:00 p.m. Wednesday afternoon. But, obviously, we are and have been
operating in a very narrow range. If there is not a strong feeling
otherwise--in terms of riding with the existing directive under those
understandings and watching this as it evolves to see whether we do
get a May rebound or not--I think we can conclude.
SPEAKER(?).

I think we've lost you again.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.
SPEAKER(?).

What?

They can't hear you.
We've lost you again.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just said that I don't think we need to
talk about changing the directive. We have a directive. I interpret
it at this point, on the basis of the discussion I've heard, that

4/29/83

we're not going to do anything or even talk about doing anything very
significant anyway, but that we'll play an unbiased approach for the
next few weeks and watch how things develop.
If we have a strong
indication of a confirmation of the April trend, obviously, things
will look differently; if the aggregates are rebounding, then for the
moment, unless it's an enormously strong rebound, we will still be on
track in terms of the aggregates. Just to see if that's acceptable, I
will pause for 10 seconds.
Let me just turn very briefly to a couple of other things as
a matter of information. We have had a request for the Redbook to be
sent regularly to the Congress. We wouldn't want to do that without
some expurgation. I have agreed to do it, but I think it's better to
do it in a non-Redbook form. So, I'm going to be sending a request to
change the format a bit.
I don't know the details; maybe we'll do it
slightly more frequently. Essentially it will be the same regional
document, which will be given to one Congressional Committee--not
necessarily for publication, but it may end up that way sometime down
the road.
SPEAKER(?).

We lost you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you didn't lose anything very
important because I will be communicating with you in writing on what
we're going to do with the Redbook.
SPEAKER(?).

Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might just note for your information
that we continue to get, because of budget resolutions or whatever,
these various resolutions on monetary policy. I think you should be
aware that there is a more concerted review under way of the HumphreyHawkins Act directive, clearly with the intention at this stage of
changing it to reduce or eliminate the emphasis on the aggregates.
How that will materialize, I don't know, because there's going to be a
series of hearings and we will be testifying I think late in June.
This is a direct review of the matter by the appropriate committee and
it will be rather interesting to see how and if it develops.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're going to be testifying before
the Banking Committees of both houses? Does this mean that the
paragraphs in the budget resolution are stalled temporarily or what?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm talking about at this point is
purely in a subcommittee in the House, the Monetary Policy
Subcommittee. Whether the other things are dead, I don't know.
There's going to be an attempt on the floor because it's not dead in
the House resolution. There is some doubt about whether they will
even pass the budget resolution. But in the Senate a strong protest
has been made by the Banking Committee on jurisdictional grounds and I
If there is
would think that might hold it at bay in the Senate.
nothing else, I will be in communication with you on the Redbook
Thank you. If something amazing comes up,
matter in writing. Okay.
we'll have another consultation.
END OF SESSION

