Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
June 23,

PRESENT:

1983

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roberts
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Black, and Ford, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Mr. Ettin, Associate Economist
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Meek and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of June 23, 1983
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it would be appropriate to
review the situation and confirm or review our decisions on what
degree of slight firming is appropriate and whether we're within the
directive.
[Secretary's note:
Messrs. Kichline, Cross, Ettin, and
Sternlight reported to the Committee on recent developments. Their
comments were not transcribed. A summary of those reports, based on
staff notes, is included in the Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Turning to the decision process, I do not
myself feel--as a matter of preference--that we need any vote or new
decision today. But I want to confirm that we have a somewhat higher
borrowing level than the $350 million that we talked about. As Peter
said, after one week where it went somewhat the other way, we have
been playing it cautiously--particularly against the background of the
higher aggregates and the better business news and not wanting to
mislead the market the other way--and ended up with a somewhat higher
level of borrowings. It seems to me appropriate to maintain that
level, which I interpret as in the $400 to $500 million range at this
point. That's what I would like to get some judgment on, given the
background. And I think that is not out of keeping with the general
directive and not out of keeping with the basic guidelines on monetary
expansion that were established at the previous meeting. But that's a
matter of taste. I would just look for concurrence, if that's your
wish, on that kind of borrowing level, taking account of fluctuations
in excess reserves and the rest.
MR. WALLICH. This is Henry Wallich. The question is whether
the borrowing is going to remain at these levels. In that case there
has been an implicit move, which I think has been in the right
direction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I'm talking about is maintaining
roughly these levels which, as I say, I interpret as $400 to $500
million. The actual level of borrowings, if we get a big bulge in
excess reserves or something, is different. But I'm talking in terms
of making the path something like $100 million higher, more or less,
than the one we were talking about before.
MR. GUFFEY.

What's the implication for the funds rate?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I'll let Peter address that.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I can chime in on that. With regard to the
Chairman's suggestion of $400 to $500 million, I would associate that
with a funds rate around 9 percent or a little higher.
[Unintelligible] conversation, but what part of
MR. KEEHN.
the borrowing would you interpret, Peter, [as related] to various
computer and systems problems that we've experienced?
MR. STERNLIGHT. A little, but not a major part recently. I
think some of the higher borrowing, particularly in the first couple
weeks in June, was associated with reserve shortfalls for various

6/23/83

reasons--mostly some high Treasury balances and on occasion
unexpectedly high demands for excess reserves. I don't have a
recollection of any major computer-related or wire problems in the
last two weeks.
MR. KEEHN. At the last meeting there was some considerable
sentiment by a number of people to move toward a higher borrowing
level. And we finally did compromise at the $350 million level.
But
it seems to me that events that have transpired since then would be
consistent with your suggestion that we move the borrowing level up to
the $400 to $500 million area.
So, I would be in favor of that.
MR. PARTEE.
Si, this is Chuck Partee.
I agree with you.
I
think that everything that has occurred has been a little stronger
than we anticipated at the last meeting and that the third quarter is
developing as a very, very good quarter indeed in terms of final sales
prospectively. Although Jim didn't put a figure on it, I think it's
going to be much stronger.
The aggregates are all a little on the
high side. Ml is very much on the high side.
So, I don't think we
ought to back down a bit from where we are.
My only question is
whether we ought to move further.
I would agree with the Chairman,
though, that we would want to be gradualist about this and that we
have a meeting coming up not too long from now, so $400 to $500
million is acceptable to me.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, this is Tony Solomon.
I think that $400 to $500 million is reasonable under today's
conditions.
It would mean that there wouldn't be any further movement
unless anticipations carried it somewhat further than the 9 to 9-1/4
percent that Peter Sternlight was talking about.
I think it's
reasonable and consistent enough with the majority view on a slight
increase in restraint that I don't think there needs to be a rewriting
of the [directive].
I agree with you, therefore, that this can simply
be a consultation in which we agreed on this somewhat higher level of
the borrowing assumption.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
In that connection, what I would be
inclined to do--though it could be done another way--is not, as you
say, rewrite the directive because I think this is generally within
the scope [of the existing directive].
But I would include in the
written record that there was a consultation and that we confirmed
that a slight increase in pressures was appropriate.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Does that get published?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
Well, it doesn't have to. We could
do it either way. But we have some precedent for publishing something
like that, and it might be useful.

a

MR. PARTEE.
[consultation].

Yes, I think we have to indicate that there was

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

So, does that raise the question of a

vote?
SPEAKER(?).

No, I don't think so.

6/23/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. We have precedents for all different
ways. We can have a vote; then we have to rewrite the directive.
Well, we don't have to rewrite the whole directive but we have to have
something to vote on--a specific sentence. We can just do what I
suggested, which amounts to pretty much the same thing except we don't
list a vote. The bottom line would be that we reviewed the business
situation, the aggregates, and the international situation.
Everything looked a bit stronger and the Committee consensus was that,
consistent with the directive, pressures would be slightly tightened.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though your voice faded, we did
get the last sentence. I agree with the approach you outlined. I
think it's a moderate response, but I'd go along with it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The
thought--and we have precedents
consultation and not say we had
my instinct is that we might as

other alternative, just to complete my
for this--is that we can have a
a consultation. I don't know why, but
well say we had one.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's because we never mention
in our record, as I remember, what the borrowing assumption is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh no, we wouldn't cite that anyway. It
would be some language to the effect that we're operating consistently
with a slight increase in reserve pressures. That's all it would say.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, if it's not published, it's all
right. But if it were to be published, then that would sound like a
further increase in restraint and that is beyond what the majority
decided last time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it would be stated as consistent with
the directive. And we have a directive that says "slight increase."
All we're doing is consulting about what a slight increase is, in
these terms. I think it's consistent with what we've done at times in
the past. As I say, we have alternatives all over.
MR. WALLICH. I think there would be some merit in this case
in having a public record. There is enough of a movement so we should
recognize it--without changing the directive, however.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is my instinct. I don't know quite
why I feel that way, but it just seems natural to say we have this
under review. We have a pretty vague directive, so we're just
indicating publicly that we've kept it under review between meetings
and reconfirmed the idea of a slight increase in pressures. But the
emphasis would be on "reconfirmed."
MR. MARTIN. I think the advantage in some careful public
indication of this kind is in the reduction of the fear that is in the
market that we will not take gradual and careful interim steps, but on
the contrary that we will sometime down the road, as in the common
This would be a good signal, if
expression, "slam on the brakes."
carefully enunciated, to minimize that fear that is in the market.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get too bogged down on
procedures at this point. Let's return to the substance. Does
anybody else have any comments?

6/23/83

MR. BLACK. Bob Black, Mr. Chairman.
I agree with you
completely.
And I would favor showing it in the record.
It will look
a lot better if it's as strong as it appears to be to show that we met
and did something.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?
In the absence of a
comment, I will interpret it as a consensus, which is the way the
record of the consultation will be written.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. Do I understand
that what you plan to show publicly is that the Committee met and
confirmed the slight firming that has already taken place?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I wouldn't word it just that way.
I would
just say that we met, we reviewed the business situation and the
strong news that was reported.
We reviewed the aggregates and they
looked a little stronger. In the light of all these facts, the
Committee consensus was to confirm its decision that a slight firming
in reserve pressures is desirable.
MS. TEETERS.

You're not going to take a reported vote on it?

It will just
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I wouldn't have a vote.
be reported as a consensus that a slight firming was consistent with
the directive we already have.
MR. GUFFEY.

What has already happened?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
but this--

Well, in fact, it has already happened,

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I must be dense.
It seems to
me that what you're doing is leaving it open to ambiguous
interpretation, which may be just as well. But it could either be a
slight firming, which doesn't go beyond the firming that was in the
last directive, or it could be a slight additional firming even though
it's still consistent with the last directive. Am I correct that it
is open to both of those interpretations?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think probably so, and I'm not sure I
see the damage in that ambiguity.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
is ambiguous.
Okay.

I'm not sure either, but I think it

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn. We're in the
middle of a director's meeting and I wonder if I could be excused to
get back there before-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can be, if it's agreeable that this is
the consensus. Hearing no objection, I think you can go, Si.
I'll
just ask whether anybody else has anything else they want to bring up
and you go.
MR. KEEHN.

Okay, thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not hearing any other business before the
house, we will stop.
Thank you.

6/23/83

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, your voice fades. The
Washington end fades very, very frequently. Maybe somebody ought to
take a look at the system again.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to take a look at the system
for various reasons. The more we look at it the worse it seems to
get.
But we'll try once again.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
the communication system?
SPEAKER(?).

system.

Is that the Federal Reserve System or

Both!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Okay.

That comment refers to the communication

END OF SESSION

