Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
January 21,

PRESENT:

1983

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Ford
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of January 21, 1983
There is no transcript record of the
[Secretary's note:
beginning of this conference call. However, Committee records make it
clear that the staff reviewed the latest data pertaining to the
extraordinary growth of the monetary aggregates and that Committee
members discussed the implications for monetary policy. An addition
to the policy record for the meeting held on December 20-21, 1982
indicates that subsequent to that meeting the Committee discussed
these issues on several occasions; it includes a summary of the
staff's review and the Committee members' conclusions.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't hear any other comment about
changing what we're doing operationally. If anybody has a comment,
I have a small question about whether it fits the directive,
say so.
or whether we ought to recognize [the situation] in the directive or
make some note of this call, or have another call next week and see
whether we want to make a note of it, or any one of those variants.
MR. PARTEE. I think there's a real problem as to whether we
shouldn't indicate that in the present instance, with all this
uncertainty, we're temporarily running on borrowings or on net
borrowed reserves; it doesn't make any difference. We are doing that
in fact and there's nothing else we can do as I see it.
"The
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm reading from the directive:
Committee indicated that greater growth would be acceptable if
analysis of incoming data..."

etc.

We weren't exactly expecting M2

growth of 32 percent.
MR. GRAMLEY.

We didn't say "somewhat"!

MR. GUFFEY. We could indicate that we don't believe that 32
percent if the discount rate were lowered.
MR. GRAMLEY.
I'll tell you that!

They're real gunslingers out in the Midwest,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think we ought to make a
I don't know quite what we
note of this meeting or have another one.
would say other than that we reviewed the situation and decided to
await further evidence while maintaining the reserve path. Actually,
because there are no reserve requirements on M2, we're not changing
the reserve path.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we are changing it every week to
accommodate what happens in light of the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

To accommodate what happens to Ml.

MR. AXILROD. That's right, and also the drop in required
We're not letting that ease, for sure.
reserves on M2.
MR. PARTEE.
unchanged."

"To maintain reserve conditions about

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I just haven't thought about this, but if

1/21/83

we don't want to make any real change now, I would suggest that we let
it go until the middle of next week and maybe have another conference
call.
People may get a bright idea or maybe we can just send you
around some language to approve, disapprove, or comment on.
I think
it might be useful in the record to show that we have had some
discussion of the situation in the light of these wildly changing and
divergent figures. Does that sound reasonable?
MS. TEETERS.

Do you want to include last week's meeting

also?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think that we have to be specific
in terms of dates but just say something about "after a Committee
discussion."
We'll have the date of whatever I send around.
I don't
think we have to indicate every time we discussed it.
Is that broadly
okay?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think it's okay, but I'd be
interested in hearing why Steve feels it's a good idea for us to come
up with six ranges--three fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter ranges
and three year-over-year ranges--when we're probably going to be wrong
on all six.
MR. AXILROD.

I certainly didn't intend that.

I intended it

in a-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He put that in there because I would
prefer to have an average range instead of a fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter range. The explanation is as simple as that.
MR. AXILROD.
If I may, Mr. Chairman, I also thought that by
the time the year's over--and this is the difficult thing--if it
turned out that the fourth quarter were high and we happened to be
over on that basis but year-over-year it looked very reasonable,
that's the better way to look at it.
And almost vice versa.
MR. PARTEE.

He wanted more options.

MR. AXILROD. I wasn't intending to suggest that the
Committee would set 6 different ranges.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As always, our ranges are mutually
consistent, in at least the analysis beforehand.
MR. BALLES.
Paul, did I understand you to say you did not
contemplate another call next week?
I wasn't sure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might.
Let's see how things look.
What I'd like to do, if I have a sense that nothing drastic has
happened, is incorporate what I sense people want to do at the moment
and use it as a vehicle for informing the world at some future date
that we've looked at these wild numbers as they were developing and

1/21/83

That
kept close touch on them and describe what we did in reaction.
would come out about the time the public got the numbers.
I just
don't know the operational language I want to use.
MR. PARTEE.

That's fine with me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if it looks more complicated or if
Hearing no other comment, we
something changes, we'll talk about it.
I don't think there's anything
will proceed on the present basis.
here that calls for any easing of the reserve path.
MR. AXILROD. We set the path on the assumption of borrowing
of $200 million, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is the way we will proceed in the
next week. Let's see whether we can condense something into a
paragraph. Thank you.
END OF SESSION

