Federal Open Market Committee
Conference
January 14,

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker,
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Ford
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Call
1983

Chairman

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Mr. Boehne, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of January 14, 1983
MR. ALTMANN. To make sure that all the Presidents are on the
line, I'll be calling the roll by Reserve Bank. Please respond by
identifying yourselves so we know for sure who is on, given this new
system we're using.
[Secretary's note:
Mr. Altmann then called the
roll and all Reserve Banks were represented except Cleveland.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Everybody's on here?

Cleveland is missing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we might as well proceed with Mr.
Axilrod telling us where we are.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'd like first to give the
clearest thing I can give, which is where we've been. For the fourth
quarter of 1982, the Committee had an objective for M2 of around 9-1/2
percent and for M3 [of about 8 percent].
The actual results are that
M2 did grow 9-1/2 percent from September to December and M3 grew 7
percent.
So, in terms of the fourth-quarter objectives that were set
at the beginning of the fourth quarter, those are the latest numbers.
We will be publishing the December figures today and they will show
for M1 an increase of 9.1 percent, which will give us an increase for
the year of 8-1/2 percent; they will show an M2 increase of 8-1/2
percent, which will give a yearly increase of 9.9 percent; and they
will show an M3 increase of only 2.3 percent, which will give a yearly
increase of 10.4 percent.
We believe the M2 increase in December was
impacted to a sizable degree by the money market deposit accounts. As
of the latest specific data we have, which is the week of January 5th,
these money market deposit accounts had grown to a level of $111
billion. Making a reasonable estimate for the [week of the] 12th from
the savings deposit figures we have, which include the MMDAs, would
conservatively put them at a level of $130 billion.
So, they're
coming very close already to the level that the staff had assumed was
consistent with a 3 percent shift adjustment for the first quarter.
That is, if your underlying-MR. ALTMANN. Excuse me. Could you hold it a minute.
see who's coming in on this other line.
SPEAKER(?).

Let me

Cleveland operator for Mr. Altmann.

MR. AXILROD. With this rapid growth in the MMDAs, we made a
very definite attempt, based on what are rather rough data, to see how
much of those funds shifted out of non-M2 sources.
The only way we
can do it at the moment is by a residual method.
It involves going
through the M2 weekly data, which aren't necessarily complete, and
deciding what they otherwise would have done and seeing what they did,
and then assuming that that difference goes into MMDAs. That then
leaves a residual that comes from market sources.
Our estimate of the
amount that would have come from market sources in December would tend
to raise M2 growth on the order of 3 to 4 percentage points at an
annual rate.
So that would suggest, if that number is right, that
underlying M2 growth was somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent in
December. We've also looked at December in other ways. We have taken
the nonpersonal MMDAs out of M2 just to see what that would have

1/14/83

-2-

given; and that would have produced a 4-1/2 percent rate of growth in
M2 in December.
That assumes nonpersonal MMDAs are something like
large CDs; that's probably not right because they include other kinds
of things such as business savings deposits, but that would have been
We have a survey in which we
the result for M2 growth in December.
began to get data on MMDAs maturing in 7 days or more that are over
$100,000.
That survey has not indicated that there are very many of
those.
The first week's data show only $100 million, so that wouldn't
have any effect on M2.
Looking ahead, given the strength that we now
have, because the growth in December was very rapid in M2-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We have an interruption here for some

reason.
MR. ALTMANN.
MS. HORN.

President Horn, are you there?

Hello.

MR. ALTMANN.

Yes, this is Karen.

Okay, thank you.

We're in process.

MR. AXILROD. We had, of course, more rapid growth in
December in the MMDAs than was implicit in the Committee's target, or
really even in the staff's estimate. As I said, we have virtually
reached the midpoint of the staff's estimated range now; we're very
Unless this slows down perceptibly or very rapidly, it's
close to it.
growing at least more toward the upper ends of the staff's estimates
and probably well above what had been included in the 9-1/2 percent M2
growth that the Committee voted on, which included a modest increase
Given what happened in December, that carries through
in shifts.
somewhat into January because the level is being raised very rapidly;
and simply carrying through that higher level raises the growth for
the quarter on our estimate of the shift by about 2 points.
So, that
alone would raise the 9-1/2 percent to roughly 11-1/2 percent without
shifts being even greater from there on in than [assumed] in the
Committee target.
So, without an ability at this point to be
extremely specific, I would say that fairly clearly, for reasons of
the shifts, we're running above the 9-1/2 percent. To get at the socalled underlying strength of M2--[to determine] whether we're running
above because of underlying strength as well--is really very
difficult. Given what we have so far in January and assuming over the
balance of January increases in M2 that are normal, as if there were
no shifts--in the $2 or $3 billion or $4 billion range weekly--we come
out with a very high M2 in January. To give you a rough idea of the
range of possibilities, we have [an estimate] on the order of 28
percent; the New York estimator has [an estimate] on the order of 20
So, I think growth somewhere in the 20 to 30 percent range
percent.
here is certainly more than possible, it's probable.
MR. GRAMLEY.

This is after allowance--

MR. AXILROD.

No, gross.

MR. GRAMLEY.

Gross.

MR. AXILROD. And 7-1/4 points of that is simply carrying
through the December level that had been shifted. Given our estimate
of the amount that shifted--from this residual method we've assumed 16
percent of the MMDAs are shifted--and our projection for January over

1/14/83

the balance of the month, we would be reducing that 28 percent by only
11.6 percentage points. The reason I'm that specific is that that
It just
looks way too high as a January underlying [growth rate].
doesn't make sense.
So we tried to undertake some [analysis of] the
numbers to see how sensitive things were. And it's so sensitive that
it's very difficult to guide ourselves in any very technical way.
If
we had assumed that 25 percent shifted out of market instruments,
which is not unreasonable--one could get that out of the numbers and
I'm told that some market people think it's that high--then we would
be subtracting 17 to 18 points at an annual rate in January from the
actual growth.
So, [the rate of growth] is very sensitive to what one
thinks has shifted, and we don't have a particularly firm way of
coming up with an estimate of the amount of the shift.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have made!

Which seems to be the understatement you

MR. AXILROD.
But, Mr. Chairman, the one thing I can say to
the Committee with a reasonable degree of certainty is that the 9-1/2
percent is too low relative to the amount of shift we've already seen.
So from that alone one would expect growth above 9-1/2 percent, and
there is some growth above that that represents shift.
MR. GRAMLEY.

It's further shift?

MR. AXILROD. The shift we've already seen.
The shift we've
already seen adds 2-1/2 points to the first quarter.
If you had an 8
percent underlying growth, it would be at 10-1/2 percent; and I think
the Committee added roughly another one in there, so that got me to
11-1/2 percent.
MS. TEETERS.
Steve, of the $130 billion you're estimating
for January 12th, in dollar terms how much of it came out of non-M2
components?
MR. AXILROD.
It's 16-1/2 percent of that.
All I have here
are growth rates that have been translated from it.
But it's 16-1/2
percent of that number.
What we worked out through January 5th was a
specific number of $18 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
what is going on with M3?

After that enlightening discussion of M2,

MR. AXILROD.
For M3, we've had a considerable weakness in
large CDs, so we had that weak December growth. And it looks as if
growth in M3 in January will strengthen considerably, largely because
of this huge M2.
If M2 is up in the 20 to 30 percent range, I would
assume that something like at least half of the growth will be in M3.
And we're assuming large CDs are not going to be quite as weak as they
were.
So, partly from the carry-through effect on that, we get a very
large M3.
Mr. Chairman, there's one other point I should make and that
is with regard to Ml.
I'm afraid, again, that all it's going to show
is how little we can say about these numbers. We're publishing a $300
million decline for the week of January 5th. But in the week of
January 12th, for which we do have preliminary data--and that's the
first full week of Super NOW accounts--our preliminary data show a

1/14/83

$6.6

billion increase.

One would think that that might be

the Super

NOW account effect, and maybe it will turn out to be that.
I'll get
separate weekly data on Super NOWs a week from today for these few
weeks.
But in the week of the 12th the figures show the seasonally
unadjusted NOW accounts increased only $2.7 billion, little different
from their increase in the previous week. So the seasonal factor is
transforming this into a fairly big increase.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Does that include the Super NOWs?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, they are in there.
It doesn't look
strong. And the old M1-A in that week is increasing $1.8 billion on
these preliminary numbers.
So it's not clear from the data that we're
having any substantial effect from the Super NOWs as of now. We have
built some effect into the rest of January on that assumption; that's
why we have a January estimate, based on what we have through the 12th
for Ml, on the order of 15 percent.
We've assumed some further rather
moderate increase in the course of the month from the Super NOWs; if
the Super NOWs take off, we'd have a much bigger number.
MR. ROOS.
Wouldn't that mean, Steve, if the Super NOWs don't
take off, that Ml adjusted would be a more reliable target than either
M2 or M3?
MR. AXILROD. I don't have an Ml adjusted.
I did not work
through these data, such as they are. Ml adjusted is affected in
another way; some of the Ml would go into MMDAs.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What is Ml adjusted?

MR. AXILROD. I assumed President Roos was thinking of some
sort of shift-adjusted Ml.
We don't have one.
What I was trying to
say was that Super NOWs would tend to increase Ml but the shifts into
MMDAs would tend to decrease it.
We assume very little shift into
MMDAs from Ml because we couldn't see much actual change--an overt
obvious effect--in the weekly figures.
If you had assumed that Ml was
otherwise even stronger than we had in December, then you could put a
lot of shift in. We were reluctant to make that assumption.
So, I
have not worked through to get at what Ml would look like if you
abstracted from all these shifts, which affect it in different
directions.
MR. BALLES.
Steve, you might be interested to know that at
our board meeting yesterday the bank directors from all around the
West were pretty unanimous in the view that so far the Super NOWs have
been essentially a nonevent.
Banks weren't promoting them very
heavily nor were customers very interested, and not much was going on.
MR. AXILROD.
suggested.
MR. BLACK.

That's

[about] what our one week of data

The same is true in Richmond.

MR. GUFFEY.

The same is true in Kansas City.

MR. BOEHNE.

Also Philadelphia.

MR. FORD.

Ditto Atlanta.

-5-

1/14/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Who can make sense out of all these

figures?
MR. BALLES.

We were counting on you!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you're counting on me, you're
premature in getting any answer at the least.
I think this is
terribly confusing analytically and factually.
It just makes our job
in following these figures worse than it looked like [it would be] at
the Committee meeting, I would say.
Beyond that, I don't know what to
conclude other than that it's more difficult.
All these figures look
high; I don't deny that.
Whatever kind of adjustment one makes-unless there's something that we're missing here entirely--it's hard
to say they look on the low side.
I'm a little surprised about what
you said about M3 in January; to the extent that this shift in M2
comes out of M3, which some of it certainly does, you just don't add
the bulge in M2 on to the M3 figure.
MR. AXILROD.

No, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the latest data you had for M3 were
not particularly strong, were they?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was looking at the large time deposits.
We're assuming a drop in the course of January-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget everything you're assuming.
Assumptions aren't very good these days.
The last figures on M3 are
not nearly as strong as the M2 figures, are they?
MR. AXILROD.

In December, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
for January?

I know December, but haven't you anything

MR. AXILROD.
We don't really have weekly M3 data.
Well, I
have sort of an experimental look and based on that they tend to go
up.
They are very strong in the first 2 weeks largely because--if you
believe what I have for the first two weeks in January--we have a $39
billion increase in M2 and the M3 increase is $23 billion.
It's not a
bad relationship; that is, you're taking off $16 billion of the stuff
in [unintelligible].
That's why I said if M2 is really going to be up
in the 20 percent range, M3 would be high.
MR. GRAMLEY. You must be looking at an increase on average
in January of maybe $40 billion in MMDAs--December-to-January.
If we
had 10 percent of the increase in MMDAs coming from market securities,
that's $4 billion that comes out of market securities. Multiply that
by 12 and you get a [$48] billion dollar annual rate of increase, and
that's a lot in M3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

He was assuming more than that.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Yes, I know.
percent came from that amount--

That's why I say if only 10

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's assuming more than that.
figure isn't all that low to say the least.

The

1/14/83

MR. AXILROD. We have [assumed] more out of market securities
than out of large time.
Who knows how that will work out!
As I say,
it's a pretty big reduction in the components of M3.
But it can't
offset the big increase in M2 entirely, by any means.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Steve, we could have a big decline in CDs.
That is, I would think that a well funded bank would simply let its
Now, maybe you need to include Federal Home Loan
large CDs run off.
Bank borrowing in the adjustment there too, because some of it has
gone to savings and loans.
And they may be letting their own Home
Loan Bank borrowings go down pretty fast.
MR. GRAMLEY. But you can't adjust CDs that rapidly. At
least it seems to me that if they are not maturing right away-MR. PARTEE. But usually the maturity schedules have shown
quite a concentration in short maturities.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in the week of December 22nd, the rate of
decline in large CDs in the net component of the money stock, after it
abstracts from the money market fund holdings, was $6 billion.
Well,
when we started this in the week of December 15th, it was $1.7
billion; then the [first] full-week effect was $6 billion; then in the
week of the 29th it dropped to $3.1 billion; in the week of January
5th it dropped to $1 billion. We have a much bigger drop coming up;
we estimate a drop of $7 billion in the week of the 12th and then we
stay with declines of $3 billion. We're not really out of the pattern
here at all, so it could drop sensationally more but it would have to
be quite a sensational drop.
I have a bit of anecdotal
Steve, John Balles.
MR. BALLES.
evidence from a California bank president's group that I am meeting
A number of banks on the West Coast
with and talked to last night.
and maybe around the rest of the country, as you know, have been
offering premium rates on their MMDAs. As a result, they're having
trouble [lending out] that money profitably, so they have plenty of
incentive for the moment to let their big CDs run off.
They are
trying to find ways to put all this money in the MMDAs to work.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. There could be a much more
rapid runoff than we've had, which would lower the growth of M3 some.
But I think we'd still have a fairly big M3 growth here--bigger than
December for sure.
I don't see why they are having any
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
trouble making money, John, when they're offering 11-1/4 percent and a
You just do enough of that
bonus and the prime rate is 11 percent.
and you make a lot of money.
MR. BALLES.

Not according to them.

MR. PARTEE.

What, on the compensating balance?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. You probably don't
have any feel for this, but one of the unknowns here is that we
expected some limited but still significant portion of these MMDAs to
come out of NOW accounts or demand deposits. On the face of it, the

1/14/83

figures don't seem to suggest that.
that?

Does anybody have a feel for

MR. TIMLEN.
Paul, in New York we only have information from
2 or 3 banks and it's all switching basically within the M2 category,
with very little from the Ml.
That is just from 2 or 3 specific banks
that have told us what their situation is.
MR. BLACK. Paul, Bob Black. We have [responses] from only
17 banks so far on our survey, but it appears that 13 percent came out
of old Ml.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
a huge amount.
MR. AXILROD.

My word!

If it was that much, it could be

Yes.

MR. BLACK. Yes, that's right.
It's only 17 banks, but we do
know--don't we Steve?--that the shift-adjusted rate was probably well
in excess of 9.1 percent in December.
MR. AXILROD.

Well, it's very sensitive to these percentages.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you assumed any of it came out of Ml,
you would get "shift adjustment" of more than what the actual figure
was.
MR. AXILROD.

Do you mean on Ml?

MR. BLACK. I'm just saying M1 was somewhere in the doubledigit range for December. How high, nobody knows.
If any change-MR. AXILROD. Yes, probably. We have assumed very little
shift, but I'm sure whatever little shift there was could push it
closer to the double-digits.
MR. BLACK. We just did some figures on this and [I don't
know] if they amount to anything, but we came up with some shiftadjusted figures that were way up in the double-digit range depending
One came out 25 percent and one came out
on what assumptions we used.
28 percent.
But I wouldn't put much credence in those because this is
a very small sample.
MR. AXILROD.
Our figures on the shift out of Ml came nowhere
near yours, Bob.
Our estimate is really below 5 percent; it's more
like 2 or 3 percent.
MR. BLACK. You have more data; that's probably more
realistic. But [unintelligible] on the shift-adjusted rate for
December, unfortunately.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any more enlightening comments on these

figures?
MR. BALLES.
Well, Paul, just a reaction to these figures
Steve has been reporting:
The one that surprised me, at least based
on what we thought might happen when we were looking forward at the
December FOMC meeting, is how much M2 seems to have been impacted

1/14/83

here.
It's certainly more than I had expected.
I find that Steve's
evidence, which is admittedly and necessarily somewhat rough, is
fairly persuasive in the sense that certainly to some extent M2 has
been impacted and that, therefore, the target that we had set for the
December-to-March period probably needs some upward adjustment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't disagree with that as a
qualitative conclusion. I don't quite know what to do about it
because I don't have any confidence whatsoever about what other number
we would put down. What I would suggest in that connection is that we
look at this for another week and see whether we can make any more
sense out of it.
I'm not terribly sanguine in that respect but
[suppose] we just sit here and not do much; we're not taking any
action to ease beyond what we discussed at the last Committee meeting.
I don't know whether we [should] take some moderate action in the
other direction, but I'd just be inclined to sit here for another week
and see whether we can make any sense out of this instead of thinking
Let's at
of revising a directive in our ignorant state at the moment.
least wait another week.
MR. BALLES. Well, Paul, I would certainly agree with that.
I guess where I would come out--to put it a bit differently--is that I
would be reluctant to act too quickly here to clamp down.
I certainly share that view. And that's
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
equivalent, or the substantive result, of what I'm suggesting for the
next week anyway.
MS. TEETERS.
Desk, Steve?

What does this imply for the operation of the

MR. AXILROD. Well, we have been going along with the $200
million assumption that the Committee had set on borrowing. So, we've
been accommodating the nonborrowed to whatever changes in reserve
requirements and aggregates have been involved in these figures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
some reason.
MR. ALTMANN.
OPERATOR.

No, sorry.

She's going to dial you directly.

MR. ALTMANN.
OPERATOR.

Yes, President Horn.

Did she get through to you?

MR. ALTMANN.
OPERATOR.

Mr. Altmann has to interrupt again for

Well, I think it's a bit late now, anyway.

All right, I'll tell her.

MR. ALTMANN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I don't know whether it's late or

not.
MR. ALTMANN.

All right, have her dial.

1/14/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
OPERATOR.

I want to raise another matter.

All right, she'll be calling.

MR. ALTMANN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did, of course, contemplate this
situation in the directive.
I don't think we contemplated it in quite
the degree to which it exists, but there is an escape clause in the
directive for the moment. If that's the general view, I would not do
anything at the moment, but continue to look at this.
I have to be
gone the first part of the week, in Europe, but maybe we should be
thinking about having a further conversation next Friday.
MR. PARTEE.
I think that's certainly the right course, Paul.
We can't make heads or tails out of these figures. There's a big
shift adjustment occurring because the institutions have chosen to get
back their rightful share of the market.
It's impossible to see what
the stock adjustment is and it's certainly incorrect to annualize it,
whatever it is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever you say, even if we could make
out these numbers, my suspicion is they're going to look high. As I
said before, they've been running high for some months.
Put that
together with economic activity and it looks to me like we are going
to get, even on an adjusted basis, a further decline in velocity which
will make the sixth consecutive quarter--I guess not technically
consecutive because there's one quarter that interrupted it slightly-of a downward trend of some size in velocity. That is unprecedented
and brings me back to our yearly problem as opposed to our weekly
problem.
I don't know whether anybody has any bright new ideas on
that.
Steve did write something, which I have seen.
The course that
he chose, maybe sensibly, was writing something that isn't quite a
directive, but a basic summary as nearly as he judged any consensus of
what our conclusion might be on this matter.
I think it's a
reasonable sense of what that discussion was.
Whether it's reasonable
in face of the problems that we have for 1983 in judging precisely how
we want to approach this, I don't know, considering what is going on.
But it may be worthwhile, if you agree, just to send out something
like this to you.
It's not a draft of anything, really, although it
almost sounds that way. But I don't consider it a draft of anything.
I'd like to see to what degree this captures the spirit of what people
were talking about as a focus for making any other telephonic comments
that people want to make before we meet again. Does that sound like a
useful or a counterproductive idea?
MR. BLACK.
SPEAKER(?).
MS. TEETERS.

It sounds useful to me, Mr. Chairman.
I agree.
May I ask a question?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS.
I'm just curious whether any of you have
noticed any problems in the money market mutual funds as they unwind
and disinvest?

1/14/83

We've been
Peter Sternlight on this.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
talking to some of them, especially in that first week or two when
they had heavy outflows, and it looked like they were coping with it
pretty well through having positioned themselves to have greater-thannormal liquidity. And in the last couple of weeks, as you have seen,
those outflows have tapered off a good bit.
And we even hear from the
market that some of the funds are beginning to reach out a little, in
a gingerly way, to get somewhat longer maturities.
So, they seem to
feel that the worst of their hemorrhaging is over.
MS. TEETERS.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody was
scratching their heads over the holiday season and beyond and whether
anybody has anything they want to comment on in terms of our general
problem for 1983.
Let me ask that general kind of structural approach
question. And if anybody also wants to make any comments about what
they see going on in the economy, this is the appropriate time to do
it.
[Secretary's note:
Silence.]
I see you all were working very
diligently and were filled with new ideas during Christmas and New
Year's and beyond!
I draw a complete blank?
MR. MORRIS. Well, Paul, this is Frank Morris.
any new ideas but I have some old ones to state.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fair enough.
an old one with greater intensity?

I don't have

Do you want to repeat

MR. MORRIS.
Very simply, what we're doing here in trying to
assess the significance of these numbers as they come in continues to
suggest to me that M1 and M2 are no longer going to be reliable
yardsticks for monetary policy, not only now but in the future.
In
addition to these new accounts, we're seeing the money market mutual
funds begin to respond--and I think that response will broaden--by
offering unlimited checking on money market funds. So, this will
further confuse the situation. I think we should not assume that once
these new accounts settle down all further innovation in the way
people manage their cash balances is going to come to a screaming halt
and that, therefore, M1 and M2 will be useful guidelines for the
future.
I think until we face up to that fact, we're going to have
continued trouble.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But is the operational conclusion you draw
from that more emphasis on M3 and C and L or something different from
that?
MR. MORRIS.
I would say "yes" with regard to M3, which I
think is the only reasonably unimpaired monetary aggregate that we
have left, although it is subject to shifts out of market instruments
But adding to
into the new accounts as well as the other aggregates.
that some measure of total liquid assets or total debt will get us
away from these enormous shifts due to financial innovation.
MR. WALLICH.

Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

1/14/83

-11 -

MR. WALLICH. You remember that the textbook says that when
there's a shock to the money supply side, go with interest rates.
In
Now, the shock may settle down
a way this is what has been happening.
at the new higher level and then one can demonstrate that the demand
for money has increased, everything else constant. One can go on from
If it turns out that the demand
there and go back to the aggregates.
for money comes down again from this shock level, then one would have
to take account of that and settle on new aggregate targets at a lower
level.
It would be very difficult to diagnose. But right now we're
clearly in a situation of a money supply shock situation, which we
shouldn't allow to feed through to the real sector.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody want to make any comments on
Does anybody see any signs of change there
the business situation?
from what they thought before?
MR. BOEHNE.
I'm seeing more of what I saw before Christmas-very slight improvement in the tone.
I think it's mostly at the
psychological level yet.
Nobody has a lot of hard evidence that
business is picking up, but there's a feeling that things probably
will get a little better and the reports from the field seem to look
up.
But it's a very tenuous type of thing and it wouldn't take much
to upset it.
And I think any kind of significant backup in rates or
any sense that the Fed may be tightening would kill it in its tracks
because I don't think it's that strong yet.
MR. MORRIS. This is Frank Morris.
I would second Ed
Boehne's diagnosis. I think the economy is turning around here.
We're seeing a pretty widespread improvement in the leading indicators
and, of course, continued strength in the housing sector.
But we're
not going to get, at least on the basis of present evidence, the sort
of strong cyclical upturn that we've seen in typical past recessions.
And I think it would be vulnerable to any backing up in rates.
MR. BALLES. John Balles.
said both by Ed and Frank.

I agree with what has just been

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody have any sense of any
conviction on the inventory situation? We've seen some reductions
recently, obviously. And production has clearly been running below
consumption just recently. But we could still be a long way from a
turnaround there or we could not be.
I just don't have any strong
feel one way or the other.
I don't know whether anybody has any
conviction on that score.
MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. The people I talk with say
that they have their inventories down at such a very, very low level
that any increase in final demand at all would result in a pickup in
their production. On the capital goods side, they don't yet see that
[pickup].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was talking to a lot of capital goods
manufacturers the other day and none of them said they saw an increase
in orders at this point.
Does anybody have any questions?
MR. FORD. This is Bill Ford in Atlanta.
I'm in the middle
of a board meeting right now that I had to step out of, and our
directors just reported that in the Southeast we are starting to see

1/14/83

-12-

some pickup in forest products and that in certain regions around here
there are some very sharp improvements in housing conditions and so
on.
But I guess I'd go along with the consensus that says any sharp
tightening in response to these money numbers would certainly be
questionable policy.
On the other hand, looking at what is happening
to sensitive commodity prices, including gold, silver, copper, and
various other things, and the dollar against certain currencies, I
think it would also be a serious blunder at this point to give any
sign of pushing rates down further in the context of the uncertainty
that we're facing as to what's happening both in the real economy and
with the money numbers.
So where I'd come out would be to even keel
it for awhile until we have better information.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
I appreciate it.
If there are no
other comments, tentatively anyway, we'll plan to do something like
this next Friday.
We'll send something out to you. Thank you.
END OF SESSION

