Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 14-15, 1983

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Monday afternoon, November 14, 1983, and continuing
on Tuesday, November 15, 1983, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roberts
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Balles and Black, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell,
Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

11/14-15/83

-2-

Mr. Frost, Staff Director, Office of Staff Director
for Management, Board of Governors
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff
Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,
Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Henderson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Forrestal and Wallace, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Dallas
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Koch, Mullineaux, Parthemos, and
Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Richmond,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Bisignano, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 14-15, 1983
November 14,

1983--Afternoon Session

[Secretary's note:
The Committee convened prior to the regular FOMC
meeting to hear a presentation on inflation by Mr. Slifman, Ms.
Zickler, and Mr. Stockton of the Board's staff. Although the
presentation and subsequent discussion were not part of the official
meeting, the text of the Committee's discussion is shown below and the
staff statements are included in the Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a real performance. We have to
[decide on] the long-run [monetary] targets for next year soon and
present some [economic] projections.
There have been some proposals
that we present projections through 1988, which happens to coincide
with [the period covered in] the last table [distributed for this
presentation].
We're not yet obligated to do that; I don't know
whether we will be by the time we get around to presenting our longrange projections. We're going to have to decide how we will
collectively look at this situation. The staff has a pretty sharp
decline in M2 in 1984 to get on this track [toward price stability].
What is it going to be this year?
MR. STOCKTON. M2 in this price stability case is 6 percent
and that's down from our projection for 1984 of an 8 percent increase
at an annual rate.
MR. PARTEE. Did I understand you to say that if productivity
growth is 1 percent higher--that is, 2 percent rather than 1 percent-that the unemployment rate associated with this long-term projection
would be about a point lower?
MR. STOCKTON. That's correct. That's because if we assume a
2 percent productivity growth rate, the unemployment rate could fall
to 8.1 percent by the end of 1984 and then would stay at about a 7-3/4
percent rate throughout the last four years of the price stability
scenario.
MR. PARTEE.
a bit higher?
MR. STOCKTON.
MR. PARTEE.
output per worker?
MR. STOCKTON.
MR. PARTEE.

Would that mean that total output would be quite
Yes.

That's correct.

Because you have lower unemployment and more

That's correct.
I see.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to ask about the increase in the GNP
deflator in 1985.
If you take 6-1/2 percent as the natural rate [of
unemployment] and we're 2 percentage points above that in both '84 and
'85, that should get us, according to your formula, about a 1-1/2
percentage point reduction in inflation per year.
You offset that
with a drop in the average unemployment rate from 9-1/2 to 8-1/2
between '83 and '84; that should add about a quarter of a percentage

11/14-15/83

point to the inflation rate. So, on balance, one would think that in
'85 we ought to come up with about a 1 to 1-1/4 percentage point lower
inflation rate than in '84. But you have it going up. Can you
[explain]?
MR. STOCKTON. Yes. The difference is that the exchange rate
behaves quite differently. In the price stability case we still have
some depreciation of the exchange rate coming and that accounts for
the difference.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Thank you.

MR. PARTEE. You've taken a fairly restrictive definition of
price stability. How sensitive is this last table to that? If you
said price stability was 1-1/2 percent or something like that instead
of essentially [zero]--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

We see how tolerant you are!

In that case you should get [price stability] by

1987.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, there are a couple of things to keep in
mind about this price stability [scenario] that we're presenting. The
first thing is that in the next two years we think we're facing a
couple of hurdles that are going to make it difficult to reach price
stability: We have a food price shock that is going to be showing up
in 1984 and we have a substantial increase in the social security tax.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How big is that?

MR. STOCKTON. That accounts for about 0.4 percent on
compensation over the four quarters of 1984. So, that's almost a half
point added back onto compensation. We have some depreciation of the
dollar in any of the cases that we are examining and we have some
momentum of the recovery moving into 1984. So, we spend the first two
years in almost any of these cases just keeping the lid on the special
factors that we think are tending to boost inflation in '84 and '85.
Even in this case that we're presenting we achieve all the price
deceleration really in the last three years. So, we get the
deceleration occurring in three years but we have to spend the first
two years--the next two years--holding down those things that we think
are apt to boost inflation. In either case the costs, obviously, are
less the higher you make your target rate of inflation by the end of
the period. But it does require fairly low rates of growth,
particularly in the next two years.
MR. CORRIGAN. If by the end of the period we're shooting
for, say, 1-1/2 percent, would that loosely translate into saying that
we could afford 1 percent per year more real growth? Or, what's the
order of magnitude?
SPEAKER(?). We have not done that exercise specifically but
I would guess that it would just be a marginally lower unemployment
path on average compared to the one here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Morris.

Might as well go for broke--go for zero.

11/14-15/83

MR. MORRIS.
I have an intuitive feeling that your 1 percent
productivity assumption is too pessimistic just because I see so many
structural changes that were made in the last three years in terms of
reducing staff overhead and in terms of changes in work rules. When
we went through the 1970s with a lower rate of productivity growth
than we could explain on the basis of the ordinary analytical factors,
we got a big negative residual.
It seems to me that maybe we will
start to see some bounceback; maybe we'll start getting a positive
residual. What was the basis for your 1 percent productivity
assumption, which I think is 1 percentage point too low?
MS. ZICKLER. At this point in the business cycle we're
seeing increases that are largely cyclical in nature.
We try as best
we can to look through these increases and see what underlying trend
that type of behavior would be consistent with. And that's basically
how we came up with it.
Now, you're right, that during the last
recession we saw a lot of shedding of labor, a lot of changes that
kept productivity growing--even last year during a period when
normally it would decline.
So, to some extent, these developments
that you talk about could be once-and-for-all changes in the
productivity level that wouldn't become embodied in a continued
improvement in the growth rate. But to the extent that business is
making an attempt to invest in new technology and really change on an
ongoing basis some of those undefined things--things that we couldn't
define during the '70s very well--then, yes, we could be too
I think the coming year will be the critical year for
pessimistic.
evaluating where we are on this productivity path because generally
what shows up in the second year of recovery is a sharp deceleration
toward a trend rate of growth.
If we keep getting information that
tells us that the productivity is doing better than 1 percent, that
will firm up the view that perhaps the trend is changing and could be
closer to 2 percent or whatever.
MR. MARTIN. You didn't mention a more experienced labor
force and you didn't mention the impact of these high unemployment
rates you project. Do you discount those factors in getting back to
the 1.1 percent trend?
MS. ZICKLER. Well, certainly, some reversal of the problem
of having inexperienced workers contributed to moving [up] 1/2
percentage point to 1.1 percent.
Looking ahead, yes, the demographics
could help us out a bit.
There has been an ongoing trend.
For
example, women who entered the labor force in the '60s or '70s now
have career attachments to jobs or are staying in the labor force all
year and are likely more productive than the new entrants to the labor
force.
That could help us out; that sort of change occurs very slowly
and gradually over time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I would like to second what Frank said about
productivity. There have been a number of changes in the industrial
structure and demographics and I think your assumption probably is on
the pessimistic side.
The point that I want to make is that this
baseline case is really a gradualist approach to price stability and I
think that's the right way to do it for this kind of analysis. But
more realistically we would likely have a recession, say, in 1986 or
1987.
I wonder how sensitive this model is to having a third

11/14-15/83

recession in a period of 6 or 7 years. We have seen lots of forecasts
that are always based on a gradualist approach--that we're going to
bring inflation down gradually. In reality, if you look back at the
history of inflation, inflation really only comes down through
recessions. The last time we really knocked inflation in the head was
in the 1950s when we had three recessions over about an 8-year period
going into the early 60s. So, my question is: What does a recession
do in terms of bringing down inflation and in terms of these real
variables?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I think a recession obviously gets the
inflation rate down that much faster. And you're right that it's very
difficult with models to project business cycles. The earlier that
you have the reduction in output the more immediate effect you have on
lowering inflation. Then, that lowers inflation expectations through
all subsequent periods so that a sharp contraction of output could
lead to a substantial reduction in inflation and that would bring down
inflation expectations just as it has in the past two years. In
essence, the costs have to be paid in any of those cases [through]
recession or slow growth.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's also the case that where we have
'85 and '86 based on a little over 1 percent real growth, the economy
is really rather delicately balanced between small and no growth or
declining output. If you shorten the time horizon, the model is quite
willing to cycle into recession. It's not difficult to get the model
to fall into the negative side for real output.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. My question pertains to Chart 18 on the baseline
case. I want to precede that by saying that the reason I was so
impressed with this presentation is that it's a very useful device for
reminding us that an interaction goes on between the monetary side and
the real side of the economy and getting these outcomes for almost all
the variables we're looking at. With respect to the particular
baseline case, in light of the fact that some of us here--I at least-think that the velocity of Ml is in the process now, or soon will be,
of returning to a more normal historical pattern, I was wondering if
you've done any experimenting with what growth in Ml, or indeed other
monetary measures such as growth of total reserves, for example, might
be consistent with the outcome that you have in unemployment,
inflation, and real GNP?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, we looked at the path of Ml that would
be capable of generating our price stability scenario, and generally
the M1 path that goes along with the baseline case would be around 5
percent next year and would stay at about 5 percent the following year
and then drop off to about 2-1/4 percent by 1988.
MR. PARTEE.

Gradually?

MR. STOCKTON. Gradually, yes. It's not in a straight line,
like putting a ruler down to a piece of paper; it is gradually.
MR. PARTEE.

Is it something like 5,5,4,3, and 2 percent?

11/14-15/83

MR. STOCKTON.

[5.5,

5, 3.2,

3 and 2.2]

or something like

that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does this model assume about
real growth in the rest of the world and how sensitive is the
conclusion to changes in the assumptions on how the rest of the world
is growing?
MR. STOCKTON.

I think this model assumes about 2-1/2

percent.
MR. TRUMAN.
It's 2-1/2 percent on average and it's a little
higher than that in the rest of the world.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Steadily through the 5-year period?

MR. TRUMAN. Right.
It is likely reduced by about 0.3
throughout the period as a result of the slower growth in the United
States. So, it's a little under 3 percent on the baseline projection,
which is basically the staff forecast, and it's a little closer to 2.5
or 2.6 percent after you take account of the impact of the United
States on the rest of the world.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's aside from any influence on
the exchange rate.
I assume that, say, a 1 point gain in the economic
growth in the rest of the world doesn't have much impact on this?
MR. TRUMAN. In terms of the aggregate demand impact, you
mean?
Well, it would have an impact just like any other demand shift.
It would give you a higher level of aggregate demand and in that sense
it would put you on a different point on the given-MR. KICHLINE.

But it is a very small effect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. I just wanted to observe that I have a gut
reaction that this real GNP projection is perhaps understated,
especially for 1984.
But I really wanted to ask a question about the
deficit reduction. What kind of assumption are you making for deficit
reductions in 1985?
MR. STOCKTON.
In the baseline price stability scenario we
assume that starting in 1985 equal cuts are made in both taxes and
government expenditures, accumulating to $15 billion on taxes and $15
billion on expenditures.
So, we get $30 billion the first year, $60
billion the next year, $90 billion the following year, and $120
billion the following year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is remarkable that you can give a
presentation about inflation and never mention the deficit, and there
are a hundred eighty million people out there who think there's some
relationship.
MR. RICE.

It's in there.

11/14-15/83

MR. KICHLINE.
mentioned.

We didn't focus on that, but it's certainly

MR. RICE. That was part of the question I wanted to ask. Is
there a feasible monetary policy that is consistent with no progress
in reducing the deficit?
There certainly is.

If it required--

MR. STOCKTON.

Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN.

You don't want to hear about it.

MR. RICE.

Is there a feasible one, a doable one?

MR. STOCKTON. Yes. In fact if no fiscal action is taken, it
makes it a bit easier to achieve price stability. Now, the reason for
that is that cutting the deficit leads to exchange rate effects
through the effect on interest rates. As smaller deficits lead to
lower interest rates that has more of an effect on the depreciating
dollar, which leads to higher inflation, which you have to offset
through less output. So, in fact, the unemployment path needed to
achieve price stability, if we assume no fiscal action, would be about
0.2 of a percentage point a year lower than what we-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't agree with that, because at
some point as the current account deficit gets larger and larger and
larger, with huge leaps, we'll see higher interest rates. It's not
going to prevent some change--some depreciation of the dollar.
MR. TRUMAN. That's precisely correct, I think. Let me just
make two points to President Solomon. One is that to the extent that
we have built into the baseline projection some depreciation of the
dollar before price stability, essentially, I would view it as part of
the process by which we got the dollar very strong to build up the big
current account deficit. And in fact we don't have much more built
into there than is necessary to keep the current account deficit in
the current range. So, therefore, it is possible that it could go
further, as Mr. Stockton mentioned when he talked about other
exogenous factors--exogenous being outside what we currently
predicted--being part of the process. But in some sense that is part
of paying the price for the good luck on the dollar or the
appreciation of the dollar that we had gotten earlier which had
accelerated the short-run process of the disinflation. But once it
reverses itself, the lag comes through the system and we will get much
more. I would regard this projection as in some sense neutral or
agnostic to the extent that it doesn't involve a very big further
buildup in the current account. That's true of the baseline and of
the projection. Similarly, it doesn't involve so much correction of
the value of the dollar; it has as given a relatively moderate growth
in the rest of the world such that you get a big improvement in the
current account over a period. And in that sense I would say that
it's somewhat agnostic in the way it takes-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Let me ask a question of you. When
you answered Governor Rice that it would be easier to achieve price
stability if we didn't get rid of the budget deficit because of the
higher interest rate effect and the higher dollar, are you also
assuming a major recession?

11/14-15/83

MR. STOCKTON. No.
The output path there is associated with
the one here. It would be basically the same; there's no difference.
It's fairly uniform, adding output along those cases that were given.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you correctly, your
assumption on reducing the deficit is that it's bad for inflation?
MR. STOCKTON.

That's correct.

MR. KICHLINE.
I think we've been very cautious in presenting
the issues with respect to inflation expectations, and that's where
one presumably has the channel of influence in terms of deficit
actions feeding back on inflation expectations.
The model simply
doesn't capture that.
I think Dave has stated that.
So, it's in the
area of expectations that this model and most models are very weak and
that offers something very positive in terms of potential outcome.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's agnostic on the point that Mr.
Solomon is raising as to whether you can have those deficits and have
this nice smooth path?
MR. TRUMAN. The particular point is that by achieving a
better outcome in 1988 [unintelligible] defined this way to the extent
that a different fiscal/monetary [policy] mix over this period gives
you higher interest rates, a higher dollar, or a larger current
account deficit.
So, likewise, it might be if you look beyond 1988
that you would go backwards and have a correction of that process.
You would have to work harder just as we are now in terms of a
correction if you felt that that kind of current account deficit would
not be sustainable for an extended period of time. So, you would have
to pay a price later for that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much does the level of interest rates
itself affect your inflation forecast?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, the level of interest rates plays a
small role through cost of capital effects, capital being about 35
percent.
But we don't think that's a major effect in short-run price
determination.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

There's no cost push from high interest

rates?
rates.

MR. STOCKTON. There's a small cost push from higher interest
That's true of our general outlook.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say cost of capital, do you mean
in terms of cost or in terms of affecting the amount of investment?
MR. STOCKTON. I mean in terms of cost rather than affecting
the amount of investment.
MS. TEETERS. What level of interest rates and changes, then,
are required to get to the particular path of real GNP?
MR. STOCKTON. The federal funds rate is about 10-3/4 percent
in this path for 1984 and drifts down to about 9 percent by 1988.

11/14-15/83

MS. TEETERS. So the implication is rising interest rates in
the short term in order to produce a decreased rate of real growth and
price stability.
MR. STOCKTON.

That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still have 9 percent interest rates
with a 1 percent or 3/4 percent rise in prices?
MR. STOCKTON.

That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. This cost of capital of over 30 percent:
that include depreciation?
MR. STOCKTON.

Does

Yes.

MR. WALLICH. Can you tell me a little about the period over
which the data in the model reach? My impression is that the model
derives its data mostly from a period in which nobody believed that
inflation could be reduced to .7 percent, and so it naturally has
built in a very strong resistance to that. Now, if we could have a
credible policy--if it were believed that your alternative assumption,
the last one [listed], is possible and will be done--wouldn't that
invalidate many of the assumptions underlying the past data?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, it would certainly change. I hope we
made clear that our alternative assumption [of a "credible"
disinflation policy]--the last one we've listed under price stability
--is clearly a possibility and would alter the cost of achieving price
stability. Now, the past couple of years, this credibility issue has
been very difficult. I think many economists went out and said:
We've never had observations with unemployment that was this high and
that has stayed this high so long. And when they reestimated their
models they found it looked as if prices were more sensitive to higher
rates of unemployment than they previously had thought. But it's not
clear. We're not able to distinguish the hypothesis that prices are
more sensitive to high rates of unemployment from the hypothesis that
perhaps there was a credibility effect which was bringing inflation
down faster than might have been thought back in 1980.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. We went through a similar exercise using the
[MPS] model. But the difference from what the staff has done in the
baseline case is that we used Ml as the money growth rate. We started
with 6 percent for 1984 and dropped it 1 point per year for the next 3
years, using 5 percent for 1985, 4 percent for 1986, and 3 percent for
1987 and 1988. That does have some measurable effect on output in the
sense that it's just marginally higher in 1984 but is roughly a
percentage point higher in both 1985 and 1986. And it brings the
inflation rate down to 1 percent at the end of the five-year period.
So, what we did was to use Ml, dropping it 1 percent a year for the
next three years and then holding it stable at 3 percent. And that
does give a bit better inflation picture, bringing inflation down in
the years 1985 and 1986 a bit faster than is shown in the staff

11/14-15/83

projection, as well as about a percentage point greater [GNP] growth
in 1985 and 1986; it comes out to about the same in 1987 and 1988.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just explore this for a moment.
I
take it the staff does not agree that that is possible, [barring] some
revolution of expectations?
MR. STOCKTON.
model that--

Well, I'm not certain from the context of the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know about his exact Ml
figure but, if I understood Mr. Guffey correctly, he has a model that
gives us faster growth and faster deceleration of inflation at the
same time.
MR. GUFFEY. That's right. Faster growth in '85 and
faster deceleration in the inflation rate in '86 and '87.
MR. STOCKTON.
MR. KICHLINE.
have extrapolated--

'86 and

There are a number of other factors-One issue is the growth of productivity.

We

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know one can make other assumptions as
I don't think I said
to the growth of productivity and all the rest.
anything very startling.
Unless you make some other assumptions of
that sort, you can't come up with that kind of answer. You have to
find the answer in productivity or expectations-MR. STOCKTON.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. KICHLINE.

I think that's correct, yes.
I think we're using the same model.
Yes, we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll ask Mr. Guffey how he comes up
with a different answer.
Did you put in more productivity or
different expectations or what?
MR. GUFFEY.

I'll have to turn to my staff.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
percent a year.

Maybe they have the dollar rising 10

I think about 14 percent is close.
MR. GUFFEY.
the 18 percent that the staff is looking at.

It may be

MR. SLIFMAN. I was cheating and looking over your shoulder
and I see that the terminal unemployment rate is 8-1/2 percent in your
simulations and the terminal unemployment rate in ours is 8.7 percent,
so I really don't think there is that much difference between the
basic thrust of the results that your staff has gotten.
MR. GUFFEY. However, I think there is a difference in the
unemployment rate because it drops in 1985 to 8.2 percent as opposed
to your 8.6 percent and is 8.3 percent for 1986 as opposed to 8.4
percent. And then it comes back to about your level in both 1987 and
1988.

11/14-15/83

MR. SLIFMAN.

-10-

I couldn't read all those numbers!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a relevant question in a way:
How do
we do better than these numbers? Mr. Roberts, maybe you can tell us.
MR. ROBERTS.

sorry.

I really can't help you much on that;

I have two comments, which are sort of questions.

I'm

On the

productivity, I guess you took into account this major change from

manufacturing to services in the 1970s as one of the factors holding
back productivity. With services now such a large part of the
economy, would that from here on out tend to cause the same or an
increased rate of productivity if it stabilized, let's say?

MS. ZICKLER.

The bulk of the research that was done, as we

discussed earlier, was unable to pin that down for the 1970s.

Most of

the research showed that productivity slowed in service industries as
well as in manufacturing industries. The pattern of the slowdown was
at least the same across different types of industries, so we were
unable to pin this productivity slowdown on the growing services
sector. Looking ahead and having the services sector be one of the

growing sectors, I'm not sure that that should detract from the things
that seem to be important in the productivity slowdown, however
undefined they may be. There are some technological changes that
could affect the services sector as well as manufacturing.
MR. ROBERTS. That really is the point that I was coming to.
I think maybe some of the drag in productivity in the services sector
is now being overcome. Productivity is coming to the services sector.
And if you have lower [productivity in the] manufacturing sector also
as [the staff] has here--I'm just saying that I think productivity
estimates are too low for the short run anyway. Then I had a
question. I'm intrigued by this expectations effect on inflation. Do
I understand this correctly: That if someone expects inflation, it's
more likely to happen regardless of the policies in effect? That is,
if a person loses his job, even though he has expected inflation, it's
more likely to happen although the conditions are [such as] to cause
him to be unemployed?
MR. STOCKTON. Certainly, if we think of expectations in a
more general sense, obviously, the price expectations of the person
who is unemployed are exerting less influence on current wage
negotiations than those of the person who is employed. But our
general feeling is that the level of expectations of future inflation
is critical in determining the entire environment in which wages and
prices are being determined. We have situations where people have
[negotiations] going on for three-year contracts and they have to form
expectations about inflation over a three-to-four year horizon. We
have businesses making contractual commitments based on expectations.
It's certainly the policies that will influence the actual outcome;
but if we were to hold policies constant and increase everybody's
inflation expectations by 2 or 3 percent, we think that would lead to
higher inflation.
MR. ROBERTS. I guess what I don't see is how, if inflation
expectations rise and policies are in place so that the sales can't be
made at the higher prices, that really would affect real inflation.
It might in the very short run.

-11-

11/14-15/83

MR. STOCKTON.
Inflation in that case would be lower than
people perhaps had expected.
But the fact that they had expected
higher inflation would have been a marginal contribution to the higher
inflation.
MR. ROBERTS.

It would make it tougher for the policies to

work.
MS. TEETERS.
Is the message you are trying to deliver here
that the credible disinflationary policy is basically a long period of
very high real interest rates and high unemployment?
Is that the only
way we can obtain low or close to zero inflation?
MR. KICHLINE. No.
That was not the intent.
The intent was
to do this exercise and to look at what comes out and then recognize
that, indeed, we're using a model that has some deficiencies. All
models do. Outcomes can differ; they can be better or worse. And
we've tried to focus on those things that we felt could be important
in reducing the costs or raising the costs from a baseline case.
So,
it was really designed to be illustrative. And then one can think
about those things that over the longer run might cause the outcome to
be better or worse.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think that's precisely right.
I think
that they set themselves up here as a big fat target, and it's not a
very--

MR. KICHLINE.

I might say it was at someone's request!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's useful.
It shows the result.
It is
meant to be a vehicle for discussing how to get a better result.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think, though, that the result is
even worse than you have there. You have real interest rates rising
steadily from present levels to a point where eventually they are
about 4 percentage points or so higher than they are now. I find it
inconceivable that we wouldn't have a recession in this period.
And
for a period of time we would have a much higher level of unemployment
than you have. At least that seems to me more likely.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
lower level of prices.

If that's right, then we would also get a

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.
I guess I would say
that is a slightly better scenario.
I wouldn't want to be quoted on
this but it seems to me that a more realistic scenario would be a
monetary policy that keeps inflation in the 4 to 5 percent range for
the rest of the recovery and then one would hope that a normal
cyclical recession at that point would cut the inflation rate down to
maybe half of that and get it to the 2 to 3 percent range.
It seems
to me that, in terms of all the elements that have to be accommodated,
that is a more realistic way of trying to work toward long-run price
stability.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's examine that proposition.
I'll let Mr. Gramley answer that.

-12-

11/14-15/83

MR. GRAMLEY. I would like to ask the staff this question.
Did you by any chance turn this exercise on its head and say: Suppose
we were to walk the unemployment rate down gradually to the natural
rate by 1988? What results do you get then? I don't think they are
going to be all that bad, really.
MR. STOCKTON. In fact, we have done that exercise, and doing
that we end up with an inflation rate a little under 4 percent by 1988
and the unemployment rate would have gotten down to about 7 percent at
that time.
MR. GRAMLEY. And if we accept the definition of price
stability of the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
we're almost there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It surprises me a little that you get that
answer based upon these numbers. You get the unemployment rate down
to where? The natural rate is 6-1/2 percent?
MR. STOCKTON.

Seven.

MR. GRAMLEY. If you just take the straight Phillips curve
approach to it and make some rough ballpark calculations, leaving out
what happens to the exchange value of the dollar, it looks as if you
ought to be able to get [unemployment] even lower than that. I
suppose you have a very different effect on the dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can you? If the unemployment rate
went down steadily, you would be bound to have a higher inflation rate
in 1985, right?
MR. STOCKTON. That's correct. The inflation rate goes to
about 4-1/2 to 5 percent in '85, back down to 4-1/2 percent in '86,
about 4-1/4 percent in '87, and a little under 4 percent in '88.
MR. GRAMLEY. You're always above the natural rate of
unemployment. All that is happening then, if you reduce the extent to
which you get improvement, is that you have the speed limit effect.
The speed limit effect in any case is one that has been much in
dispute; not everybody believes the speed limit hypothesis. But if
you threw that out, you would get even better performance.
MR. PARTEE. May I just tack on to Tony's question? I was
bothered by that too. You just threw out a number on interest rates
in 1988 and I'm not sure I heard it correctly. I thought you said 9
percent or so for the funds rate. Is that with a $120 billion
improvement in the budget situation?
MR. STOCKTON. That's right. The actual budget deficits, of
course, still remain fairly high, but you get much weaker-MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's a $120 billion better budget deficit
than otherwise--that is, without a change in policy occurring. And
there's still a 9 percent funds rate with a 1 percent rate of
inflation? That sounds extraordinarily tough.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

-13-

11/14-15/83

MR. BALLES.
I'd like to come back just a second to this
inflation expectation problem that, as you said, your model can't
incorporate. As I look at today's Bluebook and the structure of the
alternatives there between alternative A and alternative C, the
interest rate levels projected show the T-bill rate going down to the
8 to 8-1/2 percent range under alternative A with a slight drop in
long rates.
And in alternative C the T-bill rate is up in the 9-1/4
to 9-3/4 percent range with a slight rise in long rates. My question
is:
Given the dramatic drop in inflation we've already had, what is
holding interest rates up at those levels?
Might it not, in fact, be
inflation expectations?
MR. AXILROD.
I can spare them an answer.
I don't think
these people have been involved in the rates.
You might want to wait
for another 20 minutes or so.
MR. BALLES.

I'd rather not wait, but if you have an answer I

guess--

MR. AXILROD. I was a little [reluctant] because there is a
large group of people here who don't attend the regular meetings.
MR. BALLES.

I'm sorry.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. If I understand the Phillips curve analysis
properly, your inflation forecast depends upon the markup over cost.
Is it possible that international competition could intensify to the
point that that could be very difficult to accomplish and
significantly affect your inflation forecast?
MS.

ZICKLER.

MR. BLACK.

That the market could be-Reduced.

MS. ZICKLER. Oh yes, that's a possibility.
In fact, we have
to take into account rising import prices--that there would be
domestic goods that compete with imports, and normally you would
expect [producers] to be able to raise their prices. But if that
competition is great, the market is limited and they may not be able
to do that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're assuming a sizable depreciation
in the dollar, so all those import prices are going to go up.
MS.

ZICKLER.

Correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Perhaps you said it and I missed it.
What is
your expectation with regard to labor contract settlements over this
period? The question has a basis--namely, that an awful lot of people
I've talked to are currently settling contracts in the 6 percent area
with 3-year contract periods.
But they do suggest that, whereas they
are sanguine about being able to hold this for the rest of this year
and for 1984, as they get further out corporate profits really begin
to improve.
I guess most people expect corporate profits to be very

-14-

11/14-15/83

good
hard
some
will
have

over the next few years and [thus] it's going to be very, very
There are still
to maintain that [pattern of wage increases].
COLAs around, and the expectation is that contract settlements
begin to move back up. What kind of settlement number do you
in mind during this period?
MR. KICHLINE.

5-1/2 percent.

MS. ZICKLER. The staff projection through 1984 has something
close to a 5-1/2 percent increase on hourly compensation. Now, the
data that we've seen on contract settlements so far this year have
been on average about 4-1/2 percent, I think, rather than 6 percent.
But I don't deny that there are some industries that are returning to
profitability where workers are going to be looking for larger
settlements. Within the context of our forecast, in 1984 the
petroleum industry bargains in January and then there's nothing very
By
much going on until we get to the auto [industry negotiations].
the time we get to the end of '84, moving into '85, we will start to
see some of these contracts turn over where there had been concessions
and some recognition that profits were low. And we would expect by
I haven't thought
1985 to start to see larger wage settlements.
through exactly what we're going to put down when we extend our
forecast, but we would be looking for larger settlements.
MR. CORRIGAN. In some ways that's the other side of the
productivity point, because to the extent they get a lot more
productivity they're going to get more profits and more cash flow;
that, in turn, will solidify even further on the part of labor [their
resolve] to get their piece of the action.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we could get a recession in
1986, which will head off unfavorable contract negotiations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By 1986 we will have had, with or without
a recession, 5 straight years of the consumer price index [in this
So, why should they
projection] being less than 4-1/2 percent.
That's your number.
accelerate beyond 6 percent?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, Joyce was referring not to this 5-year
scenario, but rather to-In the staff
MS. ZICKLER.
--the staff projection.
projection, we had consumer prices in 1984 up around 5 percent.
MR. STOCKTON.

About 5-1/4 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think one could argue, Paul,
that even if inflation continues at only 4 percent or 4-1/2 percent or
whatever, that we would still get a net increase in wage compensation
The only way we get today's low
beyond 6 percent for this reason:
average is by having extremely depressed wages and absolute cuts in
It's running much higher, as you point
many manufacturing industries.
So, if we have
out, in utilities and the financial sector, etc.
recovery in the smoke-stack area--even if inflation is still in this
[4 to 4-1/2 percent] area--we probably will end up with a higher
average wage in the country as a whole.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You read my speech!

-15-

11/14-15/83

MS. TEETERS. But in this projection, on chart 18 you don't
have tremendous increases in corporate profits and, therefore, you
don't have the upward pressure on wages.
MS. ZICKLER.

Chart 18 is not a staff forecast, necessarily.

MS. TEETERS.

No, but if we had the scenario in which--

MR. KICHLINE. No, that's right.
If we have low real growth,
we would not have a very bullish outlook for corporate profits.
MS. TEETERS. And as a result, that's part of the mechanism
by which you get a lowering of the inflation rate in there.
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but some of that probably is already
built in. Look at the auto industry:
The best guess now seems to be
that this year the auto industry is going to earn $5 billion in
profits, and that's in a context in which not insignificant
concessions have been made across the board in a setting in which the
wages are too darn high to begin with. I would just speculate, even
on the basis of what has happened this year, that trying to hold wages
in the automobile industry in any reasonable proportion is going to be
very difficult with that $5 billion in profits there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a couple of questions.
If you
extended this assumption for M2, the monetary policy proxy, of 4-1/2
percent for three more years--you seem to have a zero velocity in
here, roughly--what is going to happen to prices and real GNP in '89,
'90, and '91?
MR. SLIFMAN.

Well, zero velocity doesn't

[unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you still have inflation under those
assumptions?
You have an unemployment rate 1-1/2 or 1-3/4 percentage
points above the natural rate.
MR. STOCKTON. In '88 and '89 you probably would not have
positive inflation, but eventually your long-run equilibrium would
give you slightly positive inflation if you have 4 percent M2.
So,
you could probably have slightly lower M2 in the long run consistent
with price stability.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
would go plus again.
MR. STOCKTON.

It would go into minus prices and then it

Yes, that's the likely outcome.

MR. PARTEE. You're getting close to the long run now,
corresponding between money and prices-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't
it takes 8 years to get to the long
obvious question--you cut all these
level them off.
Where would things

know whether we ever get to that;
run on this model.
Suppose--the
money figures quickly and then
go?

MR. STOCKTON. Well, we'd probably get a recession or some
contraction in output in the '85-'86 period and that would get the
inflation rate down that much faster.

-16-

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
rate of unemployment?
MR. STOCKTON.

Where would we end up in '88:

a lower

Well--

MR. ENZLER. Those kinds of questions are very hard to
answer. Certainly, if you got more unemployment sooner, which that
would cause, it would be possible to end up with a slightly lower rate
of unemployment at the end that would still be consistent with price
stability. But I can't simulate in my head what would happen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there some monetarist here who will
give us a much more favorable hypothesis and explain it?
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, in light of the results in chart 17, the
remarkable thing is how well the Phillips curve model has done to
It got a little off track for a
explain what actually has happened.
while in 1981, but in terms of the overall performance of the economy
from 1978 on it has done very, very well indeed. So, I think the
result that the staff is presenting to us is eminently reasonable in
terms of outcome. If what you want to do is get back to price
stability, this is what you're going to have to suffer. And if you
want to get back to the natural rate of unemployment, you're going to
have to have a worse inflation outlook.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The Phillips curve in Chart 7 doesn't look

so good.
MR. BLACK. Well, didn't Henry put his finger on it a while
ago in pointing out that we can't incorporate expectations in there to
the extent that we probably should? That's the great missing thing,
it seems to me.
MS. ZICKLER. Well, to some extent the Phillips curves in
Chart 7 move across the page as the natural rate is rising and shift
up to the extent that inflation expectations were higher in the '70s
than in the '60s.
MR. GRAMLEY.
what is in Chart 17.

Yes, I don't think Chart 7 at all contradicts

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, but counting Chart 17
[unintelligible], assuming that there is that correlation, what level
of unemployment do you have to have to get price stability in 1988?
MS. ZICKLER.

In the quarterly model?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
as your baseline.

You come back to the same conclusion

MS. ZICKLER. The quarterly model is in the 6-1/2 to 7
percent area as well; that's the natural rate implicit in the model.
Shouldn't the natural rate be coming down over
MS. TEETERS.
the
'80s?
decade
of
the
To the extent that we get better
MS. ZICKLER. Right.
And to the extent
productivity performance, that should lower it.

-17-

11/14-15/83

that the demographics favor less of the sort of frictional
unemployment that was associated with the rapid rise in the labor
force in the '70s, that should bring the natural rate down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can make a simple point that if you're
not ready to attack the model, you have to live with it. Do you want
to attack it, Mr. Corrigan?
MR. CORRIGAN. No.
I think there's some good news and some
bad news. The bad news is:
My hunch is that, if anything, the model
as we're talking about it here probably underestimates the amount of
inflationary pressure in this period, even though I would agree that
it's likely that we're going to have more productivity growth than the
model suggests. My reason is that I think inflationary expectations,
however latent, are probably stronger than this model contemplates.
And I continue to believe that the speed effect, if that's what it's
called, in the short run will hurt quite a bit if prices even begin to
pick up moderately--say, gravitate up to 5 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
assumption of this model?

What is the inflationary expectations

MR. CORRIGAN.
I assume, and maybe I'm wrong, that it's
something like what is in that early chart, which basically says 4
percent.
MR. STOCKTON. It's a weighted average of past rates-probably more like 5 percent.
MS. ZICKLER. That weighted average that's on Chart 13 is
just geometrically declining weights.
It's similar to most of the
econometric [models with] distributive lags, and that's 4-1/2 to 5
percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose you magically changed that in your
model and made it 1 percentage point lower. What would that do?
MR. STOCKTON. The inflation rate that we're projecting right
along that path would come down 1 percentage point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

One whole percentage point.

MR. STOCKTON.

That's correct.

MR. CORRIGAN.

But the converse is also true.

STAFF(?)
percentage point.

Or one could lower the unemployment by maybe a

MR. MORRIS.
consumer--

One thing clear from Chart 13 is that the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wouldn't both happen?
If monetary policy
and everything else is unchanged except you have some deus ex machina
here that gets inflation expectations down 1 percentage point, the
inflation rate would be down 1 percentage point and the unemployment
rate would be down too.

-18-

11/14-15/83

STAFF(?)
Initially the inflation rate goes down, but I think
eventually the unemployment rate would end up lower too.
MR. CORRIGAN.

Would you like to hear my good news?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Not if it's like your bad news!

MR. CORRIGAN. My good news is that some of my staff have
developed an alternate model, which is a very interesting model.
It
basically says that the deficit over time effectively has to be
financed through inflation, with a very direct connection between the
size of the deficit and the amount of inflation in the system.
Now,
working backwards from that, we're going to see a happy result because
this suggests that if you could eliminate the deficit net of interest
payments, which are roughly $65 or $70 billion, quickly--say, in a
period of a couple of years--you could find yourself with the happy
result of a combination of real growth of around 3 percent and real
interest rates of around 3 percent.
I don't believe that,
necessarily-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The inflation rate is where?

MR. CORRIGAN. The inflation rate effectively would be zero
or something close to it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What does the staff say about that?

MR. KICHLINE. I've never fully understood that approach.
think that assumes, President Corrigan, that debt equals money.
MR. CORRIGAN.

I

Yes.

MR. KICHLINE.
It assumes that Treasury bonds equal Ml, and
it's just hard for me to relate those as one to one.
One can spend
Treasury bonds as readily as currency, perhaps-MR. CORRIGAN. No, I don't think you have to associate them
rigorously, but it does say that financing the deficit in effect can
only be done in one of two ways:
through new money, however defined,
or through inflation. But if you get rid of the deficit and you get
rid of that constraint, then you can have real growth and the real
interest rate at about the same level, 3 or 4 percent.
MR. ROBERTS.

Finance the deficit from overseas.

MR. GRAMLEY. But if you believe that theory, how would you
explain what is on Chart 1?
MR. CORRIGAN.

You couldn't.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
a one for one--

Turning to something else:

You show

MR. CORRIGAN. You couldn't explain Chart 1, but it does
provide to me a more useful framework for being able to answer the
question of how the deficit gets into all this. And it doesn't
produce the kind of perverse result we get here, which says you get a
better result if you increase the deficit.

11/14-15/83

-19-

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, but that's kind of a technical answer out
of a model which goes through the exchange rate.
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

MR. GRAMLEY. It doesn't say what kind of political pressures
evolve when high interest rates begin to upset the capital goods
industries and residential construction and the export industries get
devastated and trading partners complain a lot. All those exogenous
factors no longer stay unchanged. When you build a model that
endogenizes a lot of these responses, which never would take place,
you would get different answers. I don't know how you could argue
seriously that in the long run the only way to finance a deficit is
through money growth or inflation. That to me makes no sense. I'm
not a monetarist, but if you give me 30 years, I have to believe that
what happens to the money stock primarily determines what happens to
prices.
MR. CORRIGAN. All right, but that view is not incompatible,
because it comes down to the same thing. It would say in that case
that you will end up with more inflation because the deficit in effect
forced you to create more money.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, except if you go back to these 30 years in
Chart 1, they were years in which the federal deficit as a percentage
of GNP was dropping like a stone.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, for that whole period going back to the
1950s, the federal deficit net of interest payments was basically zero
until two years ago. For that whole period it was basically zero.
MR. WALLICH. This theory is based on the assumption, isn't
it, that there's some limit to the volume of government bonds that the
public is willing to hold and that, therefore, necessarily a
I don't know what that
continuing deficit leads to monetization?
assumption is based on, but the ratio of debt to GNP has been very
stable over a long period of time regardless of how the debt was made
up. The debt was large in terms of public debt, and private debt was
small; and later it changed to less public and more private debt. Now
it has been changing back to a greater proportion of public debt and
smaller private debt. Throughout, the relationship of total debt to
GNP has been very stable.
MR. CORRIGAN. But look out from where we are now and take
the latest CBO estimates of the deficits out to 1985. If you take out
interest payments and look at it that way, as a percentage of GNP
there is no precedent in the postwar period for the kind of phenomena
we're looking at in the period from now to 1988.
MR. WALLICH. Well, doesn't that mean that private debt
creation will be very small, which is the phenomenon referred to as
"crowding out"?
MR. CORRIGAN.

And interest rates are very high and growth is

very low.
MR. WALLICH.

That's exactly right.

11/14-15/83

-20-

MR. BALLES. And a large part of the deficit is financed by
imported capital, which is what is going on right now.

MR. WALLICH.

The general impression I get from this model,

frankly--aside from congratulating you on having the courage to remain
at zero inflation, which was by request--

MR. KICHLINE.

False courage!

MR. WALLICH.
[Unintelligible], which I think people believe
would change the nature of the problem.
I see this, as Tony Solomon

does, as a cyclical problem:
The economy probably will go into
recession one way or another after two or three years or a little more
after the last drop. And what your model seems to say is that it will
take more than one more recession in order to get to zero [inflation].
The next recession will start from 5 or 6 percent inflation and we can
cut inflation in half again. But that's not enough, so we have
another expansion of two to three years from a lower starting point.
And then maybe the next recession will get us close to zero.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And to continue on that line, since
you say in the earlier pages that if you have a 1 percentage point
less rapid rate of growth in '84 and '85, you get 1 percentage point
If you were basically following a
less inflation in '84 and '85:
policy along the lines Governor Wallich and I are talking about, is
there any additional reduced inflation payoff of running, say, a 1
percentage point lower rate of growth in the next year or two,
recognizing that what you're really trying to do in the broadest
policy sense is to contain inflation just where it is during the
recovery and then take advantage of the next recession to bring it
down somewhat more? Is there a significant advantage in running a
lower growth rate over the next two years--that's basically a cyclical
view--rather than doing this?
MR. STOCKTON. Over the next two years--again we have to run
slow growth just to contain those factors, we think--there may be a
loosening of inflation. But-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless you're lucky on some of the
other things, such as productivity and a couple of other things-MR. MARTIN. Let me tie on to that with a collateral
question:
Is there a one-to-one unemployment increase if you, let's
say, come down 1 percent in the rate of growth with contained
inflation?
MR. STOCKTON. No. Normally we think that every one percent
on growth might be 4/10ths on [the unemployment rate].
But the
problem is that it's hard to see any major advantages within the
structure of the model to pursuing what you're recommending. That is,
you may get benefits from lower inflation and the value of the dollar.
But again you have to pay back part of that once the economy begins to
go upward. You may get lower benefits from concessions on
compensation, but you may have to pay back part of that. The benefit
you get from running lower output early is lower inflation
expectations for the remaining periods of the simulation. In that
sense, the sooner you reduce output, the easier it is to bring down

-21-

11/14-15/83

inflation because you've lowered inflation expectations for all
subsequent periods.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I understand that. But if we were
able to prevent the rate of inflation from going up beyond the present
level during the rest of this recovery, though I don't think we will
be, I would guess that there would be a very, very widespread
expectation in the financial community that the next recession would
bring the rate of inflation down significantly. We would get a very
favorable expectational result if, over the next year or year-and-ahalf, we could stabilize this level of inflation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

This level meaning what?

4 or 4-1/2 percent. The [financial]
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
community is expecting basically a 1 to 2 percentage point rise in the
rate of inflation over the next 2 years.
to
MR. GUFFEY. Well, it seems clear that that is our task:
keep it from accelerating. And that's what their model shows--the way
If in '84 and '85 we're going-we get it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This model shows [that we get it] with a
more restrictive monetary policy than what we have heretofore talked
about, if I read it correctly.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what does it assume for
If we drop [M2 growth] to 6 percent
velocity of circulation for M2?
in 1984, what velocity of circulation does that assume?
MR. PARTEE. Between [unintelligible] and 4.2 percent
increase in velocity in '84 and a lower increase in velocity in '85.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
than we normally adhere to?

Yes, but isn't that a lower velocity

MR. WALLICH. It drops each year.
because the nominal GNP is less than M2.
MR. PARTEE.

Eventually, velocity drops

Yes, it does.

If you let
MR. WALLICH. It does unless interest rates--.
interest rates rise as you seem to [assume] here, velocity ought to
increase.
MR. PRELL. Interest rates are declining in the latter part
of this projection period and that is giving you some decline in
That wouldn't
velocity--some stronger demand for M2 relative to GNP.
be a continuing factor, if you extended this out beyond 1988, but it's
a factor in 1987 and 1988.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What assumption do you make about M2 or Ml
or anything--zero [effect] except as it affects nominal GNP?
MR. STOCKTON.
expectational effect.

That's correct.

It doesn't have a direct

11/14-15/83

-22-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
your model, doesn't it?

But it has an interest rate effect in

MR. STOCKTON.

Oh, sure; that's the channel.

MR. KICHLINE. I thought you were referring to expectations.
There's no feedback effect on price expectations from altering money
growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have two columns here.
It doesn't
tell you anything--it's some pure guess--about velocity.
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, it's a model that in effect--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a guess; it's your model of velocity.
But its influence [unintelligible] model.
Well, I'm left with my
Either accept something like
question to the group, not to the staff:
this model, [which has] satisfactory results from most points of view,
I guess, or say how you would change any of these factors to get
better results. You have to come up with a better model or a
different model if you don't like these results.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I think a different model, like the one
that Tony talked about that incorporates-I don't think that's really a different
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
model.
There's a different timing with inflation [unintelligible].
But you don't have different factors to play around with; [you have]
the same variables.
MR. MORRIS.
If you plugged in a couple of recessions in the
model, you'd get different results.
MR. MARTIN.

Or higher productivity.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would get different numbers, but
you're still using the same model.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the expectation, as I was
trying to say earlier, is a little different and the scenario is
different.
If you contain the existing rate of inflation during the
recovery, you will get a very significant drop in inflationary
expectations in another couple of years. That, I think, is
significant in working the model.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's the key:
If we could cap
inflation at 4 to 4-1/4 percent, while the economy for the next two
years is growing at, say, 4 percent.
MS. TEETERS.
But that doesn't work. That's not what this
says.
It says the faster the economy grows, the more inflation you're
As nice as it would be to cap the inflation, we don't
going to get.
have any way to do it except by slow growth.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Tony wants it to.
MS. TEETERS.

It would be nice if the world worked the way

Yes.

-23-

11/14-15/83

MR. GRAMLEY. But we've just been through an experience in
Here it comes, guys; we're
which the Fed said to the world in 1979:
going to put you through the wringer. And what we got, if you believe
the model, and there have been other studies that confirmed this, was
by-and-large the response of prices to the degree of slack in the
Why do you think
markets--period, end of story. Now the question is:
It would be
it's going to work any differently the next time around?
nice if you were right, Tony, but I don't-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not saying it's going to be right
or that this is going to happen automatically. And I don't want you
to assume that I'm going to vote the way I'm now going to suggest.
But if we reduce the speed of recovery by 1 percentage point over the
next year and we get 1-1/2 to 2 percent growth, and assume no action
on the deficit until 1985 and then only half of what we are thinking
at this time, I was wondering what that would look like. We might
very well not have any increase in inflation in the next couple of
Maybe you fellows
years because of the exchange rate effects as well.
A 1 percent lower rate of recovery over the
worked this out roughly:
next two years during this-MR. PARTEE. This package is 3.3 percent next year and 1.5
percent the year after.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I'm talking about this earlier

scenario.
MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about chart 15--the staff
And there we have
projection chart--not the experiment over 5 years.
assumed, I think, a 4-1/4 percent rate of growth in 1984.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they already assumed a 1 percentage
point lower growth in the briefing.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

You have already assumed in '84 and

in '85-MR. KICHLINE. Yes, this says you can hold the inflation rate
constant with essentially a little over 3 percent real growth in 1984
and a little under 3 percent in 1985.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
growth],

In '84 and

'85 we have reduced [real GNP

if I understand it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't understand that because
chart 18 has 3.3 percent in '84 and 1.5 percent in '85.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
they otherwise--

I think it's 1 percentage point lower than

MS. ZICKLER. Chart 18 is not the staff projection. Chart 18
is the model projection, not the staff forecast as shown in the
Greenbook projection. Chart 15 represents our forecast.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But at the moment in the real
world we are assuming that growth in 1984, if we were to continue with
the present monetary policy, is likely to be 5-1/2 percent. At least

-24-

11/14-15/83

that's what we are assuming in New York;
have.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

it's higher than you people

And we are assuming 4-1/4 percent.

4-1/4 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. With the present monetary policy?
So, we are assuming significantly higher growth. Am I right on that,
Peter?
MR. FOUSEK.

5-1/4 percent.

Okay, 5-1/4 not 5-1/2 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I'm saying--well, I guess you can't compare the rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
same inflation prediction?

And

You're assuming 5-1/4 percent with this

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Our inflation prediction is somewhat
higher; I think we have a rate 3/4 of a point higher than the Board
staff has.
MR. GUFFEY. With the current monetary growth rate as your
assumption for '84?
Without any reduction in money growth?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are assuming basically that we
have a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate.
MR. GUFFEY.

Now, what about money growth?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I don't worry about that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 5-1/4 percent real growth if they
have 5-1/2 percent on prices.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, [unintelligible] in the same ballpark
because you are talking about roughly 1 percentage point. That's the
real growth, and we would have a higher price forecast for that.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, in other words, if I'm correct:
To maintain 4 to 4-1/2 percent inflation, assuming that's what we have
now, you would have to cut back real economic growth in '84 according
to your model to what level?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, in 1984 real growth would be in the area
of 3 to 3-1/2 percent and in 1985 2-1/2 to 3 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you had 1 point more in
productivity, you wouldn't have to cut back quite that much?
If
They're about offsetting.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right.
you get that 1 percent higher trend growth of productivity, then you
could get the same inflation outcome that we have without cutting back
on real growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Wallace.

Well, does anybody else want to comment?

11/14-15/83

-25-

MR. WALLACE. May I ask a question for clarification on this
With respect to the factors that you've
natural rate of unemployment?
Is it your assumption that on balance the
listed on chart 8 here:
thrust of those factors would reduce the natural rate in the year
ahead rather than the productivity that you talked about?
MS. ZICKLER. No, as a matter of fact, on income support
programs there has been some cutback--more stringent eligibility
requirements introduced on unemployment insurance and benefits--which
should work to reduce the natural rate. Those sorts of things are
hard to estimate. And to the extent that we have seen some
improvement in work rules and labor/management relations, that makes
[Those are] conditions that
the labor market a little more flexible.
would help. But that has been continuing as the recovery goes on.
MS. TEETERS.
But the most important thing in reducing the
real natural rate of unemployment is the shifting demographics.
MS. ZICKLER. Well, I think the sharp [deceleration] of
productivity growth was far more important in and of itself in the
'70s than the demographics, in terms of the percentage points that
added to the natural rate. On the demographics I think the story is a
little uncertain. You have to assume that all these workers who have
come into the labor force have been getting work experience and have
developed career attachments to jobs. As that happens they improve
their job performance.
MS. TEETERS. Yes, but just the demographics are going to
reduce the rate of growth in the labor force.
MS. ZICKLER.

Oh, in terms of the major unemployment rate,

yes.
We
I think the answer is clear, Mr. Chairman:
MR. MORRIS.
have to get the productivity gain up to 4 percent. That would take
care of the whole thing!
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If capacity is increasing at less
So, at this speed of
than the postwar average or [unintelligible].
recovery, at least it's a normal recovery but we are moving up faster
in utilization of capacity. This is where the Carter Administration
ran into trouble quickly because there was a theory that utilization
of capacity was supposed to [unintelligible] noninflationary growth
[unintelligible].
I've put a lot of emphasis on capacity utilization.
And it's very disturbing not to have it growing at a normal rate, even
I attribute this to the
though we're having a fast recovery.
However, we are getting a lot of spending on
inflation rate.
equipment but not on plant; presumably the spending on equipment will
extend the rate of productivity for [existing plants].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can leave this for the
I think we
day. But I would urge people to look at this question.
But I have not heard a
have a rather pessimistic [unintelligible].
great deal of attacking of this today. You're simply saying we are
better off with higher productivity if we could only achieve that.
They can have a wrong estimate. But people might want to think a
little about how we can improve this situation or even
We will attend to it briefly at the next meeting.
[unintelligible].

-26-

11/14-15/83

If we have enough time, maybe we can go through the Managers' reports
this afternoon.
Mr. Chairman, I wonder if in this review at the
MR. BALLES.
next meeting we could have the advantage of having sent to us the text
of the staff's views given in the chart show today so that our own
We'll see if our [unintelligible] and
staffs may work on an analysis.
weigh them a little.
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, there's no problem there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's a little more to be
considered, consistent with that. This is very much internal staff
It has no Committee status and there's no Committee-speculation.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seem to me that the
[unintelligible] means more optimistic. But I would like to know how
to be able to avoid a significant effect rather than a lower growth
with such an elusive combination of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you may be taking it too
literally. I don't think this is a business cycle forecast.
It's
kind of a structural forecast with growth tradeoff [unintelligible]
these recessions.
MR. MARTIN.

of

It depends on when you have recessions--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
[Unintelligible] factors cyclical.
I don't even
It's unlikely that the recovery would last beyond '87.
And if you
think we should wait until '87; we ought to go for '86.
factor in an enormous [unintelligible] then we could get worse
inflation. I don't know how to look at this kind of policy.
MR. BOEHNE. Are you talking about an improvement in the
presentational sense or one that we really believe?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'm only interested in what we can

believe.
MR. BALLES.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or have somebody believe; it may have some
correlation in the presentation.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I think the main thing is to be skeptical
with respect to the model even though it has tracked very well in the
last two years, because the very fact that it has tracked well and
inflation came down is a surprise to people. And from here on out
there may be less resistance because there was a lot of resistance to
bringing inflation down built into the numbers of this model.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm curious, but I won't prolong this, how
you get this similar result from a long lag money growth model and a
short lag money growth model in the chart that has the deflator and
Do I interpret that correctly?
This Ml only goes through '81.
Ml.
MR. KICHLINE.

Which chart?

-27-

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Chart 2.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
growth--maybe in 1981.

I don't remember a 10 percent rate of

MR. BOEHNE. Do you think, Jim, if you had made this
presentation three years ago, that under any realistic kind of model
you would have come up with 4-1/2 percent inflation?
MR. KICHLINE.
If you told me that the unemployment rate was
going to be over 10 percent, I think we would have come out fairly
optimistic.
I wouldn't say that our staff view on inflation has been
much more optimistic generally than outside forecasts; outsiders
beginning in 1982 have moved their forecasts down substantially
relative to the staff forecast.
Now as we look ahead to '84 and what
is happening in light of a lower unemployment rate, our staff forecast
has been edging up.
So, I'm not so sure. We wouldn't have had 4-1/2
percent inflation, but I'd say we would have had in the context of 10
percent plus unemployment rates, very strong improvement on price
performance. But we missed on that, as you well know.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. KICHLINE.

So did we all.

And the strength of the dollar.
Yes, right.

If
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On a purely monetarist approach here:
you looked at this first chart, chart 2, you would have the money
You've got its growth coming down to below that of the
supply lower.
[deflator] for a while and kind of coming back in line with prices,
right?
MR. KICHLINE.

[Unintelligible]

based on recent performance.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then you would show a sharp increase,
which would imply a sharp increase in unemployment at the same time we
were going into a recession if we maintained the recent rate of growth
of the money supply.
MR. KICHLINE.
I think that's right.
That shaded area is the
area where there are some questions about the performance of the money
stock relative to nominal spending and that was part of Steve's
presentation last time. And that's where the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, this is really before the most severe
[unintelligible].
This money supply stops in mid-1981.
MR. PARTEE. That would be in the summer--the third quarter
of '81.
You only plotted M1 through the third quarter of '81, so
there's another spike in here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because if you get in there--.
Well, Mr.
Sternlight. No.
First, the meeting has to come to order and we need
to approve the minutes.

-28-

11/14-15/83

MR. RICE.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
larger leeway.

Without objection.

Mr.

Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Well, you might explain why you need a

MR. STERNLIGHT.
Over the intermeeting period our projections
indicate a possible need to add something in the area of $4 to $5
billion to System holdings, and I think we could run into the normal
I would suggest enlarging the
$4 billion intermeeting limitation.
leeway to $5 billion until the next meeting, Mr. Chairman.
Is that an average figure?
MS. TEETERS.
be over $4 billion on average?

Is it that it can't

At any point
It's not an average, no.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
within the period we would not be able to increase outright holdings
by more than $4 billion from the starting point.
MS. TEETERS.
I was wondering because that
the repurchase agreements.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
agreements.

doesn't include

It does not include the repurchase

MS. TEETERS.
So, the big operations--whether the Treasury
balance is running out or not--are not the subject of this.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
repurchase agreements?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

That is true.

Correct.

You don't have any limit on your

That's true.

About
As Mr. St Germain pointed out.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Why
a year ago he wrote me a letter, which was in the press, asking:
We wrote back explaining the
are you doing such a huge volume of RPs?
reasons why and I never heard from him again.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
On a commitment basis we're not changing the
System's holdings [when we do RPs].
You have had to ask every once in a
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
while before, Peter, for this kind of temporary increase in the limit.
Wouldn't it make more sense, if you can establish your case, to have a
permanent $5 billion [intermeeting limit] instead of having to come to
the Committee each time?
Well, this was reviewed--I forget when--and
MR. STERNLIGHT.
The Committee has gradually raised
we went to the $4 billion limit.
When it was reviewed a year or so ago, I think it was
this [limit].
raised from $3 to $4 billion; the feeling was that with $4 billion

11/14-15/83

-29-

there were likely to be maybe one to two occasions a year when we
would have to come to the Committee [for a higher temporary limit].
I
think the Committee's preference then was to set it a point where once
or twice a year we did face the limitation and had to come before the
Committee rather than to set it so high that it very rarely, if ever,
needed review.
MR. BOEHNE.

This is typical for this time of year, isn't it?

MR. STERNLIGHT.

Fairly typical for this time of year, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll come back to that. Are there
any other questions on that point or any other point? Operations are
all lucid as a spring [unintelligible] flowing out of that swamp.
MR. BALLES.

We need some harp and string music here!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're saying that if by some chance
the Congress were to reach the end of the week without raising the
debt ceiling, you think the Treasury could get through until early
December?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Does the Congress know this?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they do, yes. The Treasury has a
low point in [its cash balances around] the mid-month and [then] they
can get through to about the end of the month.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might discuss this a bit tomorrow; I
don't think we should take time now on the debt ceiling. I sent a
letter to Mr. Regan telling him what horrible things would happen if
they do run out of money now or later. I presume that will be
published at some point but we could distribute it. Or did we
distribute it, Mr. Axilrod?
MR. AXILROD.

I don't think it was distributed generally.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe we can distribute it tomorrow
morning so people are aware. It has strong operational-MR. RICE.

Any reply?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not yet. I don't know what happened.
I've been out for a couple days; I haven't had a chance to follow up.
Any other comments or questions? We need to ratify the transactions.
Without objection. We have this proposal on increasing the limit.
Without objection, we will approve that. I don't know how I got you
out of order, Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
I also have a
recommendation, Mr. Chairman. All of the Federal Reserve System
regular swap arrangements with foreign central banks and the BIS will
come up for renewal in December. And I recommend that all the swap
arrangements be renewed. We would propose no change in the terms of
the agreements except that in the swap arrangement with the Bank of
Japan we are discussing a possible change in the interest rate

-30-

11/14-15/83

provision. The change under discussion would provide a more favorable
basis for calculating the interest cost in the event of a United
States drawing under the Japanese swap arrangement.
We still do not
have that negotiated with the Japanese but if it comes about in time
and we can do it, we would like to introduce that change in the
renewed Japanese swap agreement.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

What if it came about two months

after?
MR. CROSS.

We would revise it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
authorization?
MR. CROSS.
MR. PARTEE.
agreements?

You wouldn't need a new

Well, I would inform the Committee.
Is this to make it more parallel with the other

MR. CROSS.
Yes.
There is a difference in the rate we would
pay if we should draw on the Japanese arrangement and in the basis on
which we calculate our earnings on investments with the Japanese
because they were negotiated at two different times. As we looked at
them, tracking them over the period of the past several years, one
seems to be consistently a bit below the other and we're concerned
about that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
and invested--

This contingency would be if we drew yen

If we drew yen, the interest rate that we would
MR. CROSS.
pay on those drawings is based on Japanese rates and would be slightly
less favorable to us, we think, if looked at over time, than the rate
that we would get on investments.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
understand it, is the bond rate
whereas the rate we get when we
And there is a few basis points
we were ever to draw on the yen
MR. WALLICH.
difference?

The drawing rate we pay, Paul, as I
three months before the bond matures
invest is the 3-month rate on an RP.
difference here to our disadvantage if
swap arrangement.

Is this a controlled set of rates?

Is that the

MR. CROSS.
No, they are not.
But when we draw we try to
work it out so that what we pay is based on a short-term Treasury bill
In Japan they don't have any such thing, so we base it on
type rate.
a longer-term seasoned bond which is maturing but has only a short
period to run. That rate, for reasons I can't entirely explain, seems
to be consistently a little higher than the so-called Gensaki rate,
It seems
which is a [rate in the] much more liquid repurchase market.
to have rates that are slightly lower and that's the rate we would get
So, we want to try to bring about a change.
on our investments.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
and discussions are going on.

And the Bank of Japan is sympathetic

-31-

11/14-15/83

MR. CROSS. The Bank of Japan is sympathetic but it is always
a long and tedious process to have to negotiate anything like this
with the Finance Ministry, so it has taken time. But we are trying to
work it out.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are there any other comments or questions?

MR. BOEHNE. Maybe this isn't the right time or maybe it is:
Does anybody want to comment on the international debt situation?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just leave that for
tomorrow in view of the time.
MR. ROBERTS.
Just a quick question on Schroeder,
Meunchmeyer, [Hengst & Company]:
Did they have a lot of foreign
exchange positions in the market?
Was it a fairly small bank?
MR. CROSS. There were no foreign exchange implications in
that problem. It was local.
MR. ROBERTS.

Just the bank?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think the one thing that is
worth commenting on--I don't think Sam mentioned it--is that the price
of gold was declining during this period of enormous "safe haven"
flows. The dollar has basically replaced gold and that has shocked a
lot of Europeans and Arabs and a lot of other people. But they
basically told them there are all these events--Lebanon, the
Caribbean, etc.
They would all expect the price of gold to go up
instead of going down.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. PARTEE.

The price of silver has gone down.
A lot more.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might say a few words about the debt
situation tomorrow, Mr. Truman.
MR. KEEHN. I keep reading that there's a large German bank
that has some problems and I assume it's not Schroeder. Is there any
truth to that?
MR. CROSS.
Well, there are a lot of rumors about banks and
they are usually denied. The foreign exchange market on Friday was
subject to a certain amount of [fluctuation] when we were closed
because of alleged problems with respect to German banks.
But, again,
sometimes they talk about the situation in Luxembourg branches that
we're not aware of.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions.
Without objection. We have this proposal for authority to renew the
swaps with the possibility of one small change.
Without objection.
We will see you tomorrow at 9:30 a.m.
[Meeting recessed]

-32-

11/14-15/83

November 15,
MR. TRUMAN.

1983--Morning Session

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Is there anything you want to add, Mr.

Cross?
MR. CROSS.

No.

I agree with everything Mr. Truman said.

MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question? Have they been able to
keep the regional and smaller banks on these loans to the debtors?
MR. CROSS. Well, they generally have, with a certain amount
of effort of pulling and clawing.
I think the success has been pretty
good so far.
There are a lot of questions about whether they will be
able to bring them along this next go-around, but so far it has worked
reasonably well.
I don't know of any small bank that
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
has refused to reschedule, as distinct from coming up with new money.
At least I haven't heard of any lawsuits, attempted lawsuits, or
attempted cash-ins, and I find that comforting.
MR. CROSS.
The expectation is that this time it will be more
difficult. On the other hand, there is greater recognition of the
I think that the banks
depth and pervasiveness of these problems.
also are more aware of the situation and probably have less, or not
much, chance of doing anything but going along.
MR. TRUMAN. There were dissents on the other side of the
[unintelligible].
I think they are realizing that this is not a
short-term problem, and that leads to increasing concerns among the
more thoughtful banks, I think, in terms of considering how it will
work out over a medium-term rather than a more short-term set of
operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think a major problem still is the
likelihood that some major debtor country will ask for better terms.
Argentina is discussed frequently on the front pages, even though that
is the more moderate of the candidates [unintelligible].
I still
There are
think that [such a development] is more likely than not.
various ways in which that request could come forward. Hopefully, it
would be in private and in a moderate form and not be accompanied by
any threats of a standstill. How the banks will respond to that is
still a big question mark, if that does occur.
MR. ROBERTS. Has any consideration been given to changing
the nonperforming loan classifications that might develop at year-end
if there were major failures to pay interest?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we hope that Brazil will get its
interest arrears up to date by the end of the year. Can they or can't
they if this [loan] goes through?
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. CROSS.
will go.

Yes, they can.
They can do it if things go as we are hoping they

11/14-15/83

-33-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that case, the question wouldn't arise
in any important way. There is a lot of accounting controversy and
discussion and all the rest as to how these [items] are reported. The
SEC wants some reporting of them as troubled reschedules, or whatever
they call them. There will be more disclosure at the end of the year
but they won't go into a nonperforming category, I don't think.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if they are more than 90 days past due, I
think they are statutory bad debts and they have to be [so reported].
The accountants would certainly be negligent not to require that they
be counted as nonperforming.
MR. ROBERTS.

There are reversals of interest accruals also.

MR. PARTEE. I guess that's right, if they are past 90 days.
I don't know that anybody is [past due] 90 days.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Argentina will be, I guess, if they don't
make some payments. Brazil is more than 90 days, but that presumably
will be cleared up first.
MR. TRUMAN. There's a reasonable chance that in Argentina's
case there will be enough disbursements so that interest will be
current on the public sector debt through the end of September, which
would obviate, for the moment, the 90 days requirement.
MR. ROBERTS. What is the latest on the IMF bill?
likely to be approved soon?

Is that

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we only have a few days [before we
know] whether it's going to be approved or not going to be approved.
There's great negotiation going on; it got tied up with the housing
bill and, in a satisfactory way, from the standpoint of the Democrats.
That obstacle seems to be removed but there are still a lot of
questions. They have to get the appropriation as well as the
authorization and it hasn't been through the Appropriations Committee.
They are going to try to short-circuit that; whether they can isn't a
hundred percent clear. But that is being negotiated right now and has
been for the past week.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They still haven't reached an
agreement on the [unintelligible] side on the communist countries?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; in the Congress it
varies from day to day. They were not going to have the communist
countries; there's still some controversy about the apartheid.
MR. TRUMAN.
agreement.

I think there may be a consensus but not an

MR. KEEHN. What about the reserve issues? I remember there
is a difference between the Senate bill and the House bill.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those things have all been fixed up
satisfactorily, I think. But there probably will be some reserving,
not for these big countries, in accordance with proposals that we gave
Congress when it was before the Senate. When the loan is in
protracted difficulty or whatever we called it, there would be some

-34-

11/14-15/83

mandatory write-off on reserves. This would be for Zaire, Sudan,
Poland, and some Latin American countries.
MR. TRUMAN.

Bolivia.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is being worked out now and will
probably happen in the next week or so is that some directive will go
out.
The amount is not massive in total; it would be a maximum of
$300 and some odd million dollars for all the banks together, less
anything they have already written off, which is a very foggy notion.
But it's enough potentially, if they haven't already written some off,
to have an impact on some of the bigger banks in reducing their
In terms of the psychology, it will
earnings in the fourth quarter.
raise the question: If it's Sudan, Poland, and Zaire now, when does
Mexico follow and when will Brazil come down the pike and so forth?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

But you agreed to create a fourth

category in between weak and substandard, I gather.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's different. This is at the
opposite extreme where these [loans] are really weak. We will rename
those categories so we will have a category that some of these Latin
American countries will fit into where the loans won't require any
reserving but will get a notice in something like a special-mention
category for foreign loans.
MR. KEEHN. This is action we are taking, as opposed to
action that is a part of the IMF legislation?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's consistent with a provision in
the IMF legislation. But we would be taking the action a little in
advance in a sense.
Presumably, the legislation will have passed
It's totally consistent with the Senate version of the IMF
anyway.
It will be the
legislation but it raises some questions of precedent.
first time we have done it and will raise those kinds of questions.
It won't apply to any of these countries that are in negotiation with
the IMF or have IMF programs and so forth, but I think it will send a
little tremor through the banks.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the foreign central banks and
banking commissions are beginning to require a provisioning against
[Unintelligible] for this year
[loans to] Latin American countries.
are requiring 5 percent of the exposure for the first time and they
are talking about 5 to 10 percent next year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this question will arise. Some work
also is being done on proposals that we came up with at the time of
that [unintelligible] and rejected for the time being--whether to
require a reserve against the aggregation of all this if it's too big.
MR. WALLICH.
It is reported that the German banks have
written off enough in Latin America so that they would be amenable to
one of these solutions where the interest rate is lower and the
principal is funded into a long-term security.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very hard to know what this reserving
They say they reserve. The question
is for our banks or other banks.
is whether they are increasing their total reserves more than they

-35-

11/14-15/83

otherwise would or are saying within some total they have anyway that
they are allocating this to Brazil, Mexico, or whatever. I don't
think anybody knows the answer to it completely.
MR. PARTEE. In our case, Paul, I think we ought to recognize
that that will be a segregated reserve and will not be counted as
capital. For these $300 million-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or they will write them off. I think many
of them will just prefer to write them off for their [unintelligible]
balance sheet.
I say write them off; it's just a partial write-off.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the banks' CEOs said to me
that they would be most reluctant to start provisioning if the
reserves were [not] tax deductible; they are concerned that the IRS
regs would not-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a foggy area.
equivalent is what we would be [unintelligible].
MR. PARTEE.

This write-off

It's mandated.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They don't want the write-off
equivalent. And you're saying that the specific reserve provisioning
would be deductible?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only this particular type of specific
reserves. Our banks are very reluctant to write off or reserve in a
way that really adds to the reserves.
It has been argued so many
times that we can't do enough to make any difference, and it just
raises questions about the loans.
Our banks operate more in a
goldfish bowl than any of these other banks who can write off without
telling anybody their reserve [unintelligible] and they haven't got
any hidden reserves. The allegation by many of our banks is that they
are reserving whereas these other banks are not really reserving.
They just move something out of hidden reserves into calculated
reserves.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And the argument against write-offs
is that the debtor countries become aware of it and would have less
interest in trying to keep paying.
I'm not sure whether that is an
honest point or not.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
these extreme ones.

Some of them have written off some of

[Unintelligible]
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know.
trying to differentiate between those that have been charged off or
written off and those that haven't.
So, I'm not sure at all that
there is that much validity to the argument that one reason they can't
write them off is to take advantage of the tax cut [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an ideological question for some of
your New York banks who refuse to accept [unintelligible].
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Privately

[unintelligible].

-36-

11/14-15/83

MR. MARTIN. Ted, what happened to the negotiations or
alleged negotiations with the Mexican private sector credits-exploring the notion of a rollover that would be part debt and part
equity. Was that just talk?
MR. TRUMAN. There have been some of those, I think, in the
big conglomerate cases.
I don't know how widespread it is; I think
it's fairly limited.
MR. MARTIN. But if it were rolled over into part debt/part
equity, would the accounting or the reserving or the nonperforming
status be affected at all?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
But the accounting on those private
sector loans is easier to handle. They just fall into the normal rule
So, they would be handled just
more easily than a sovereign credit.
like domestic credit.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We still don't have a definitive
clarification from the Comptroller on the legal limit being exceeded
and how that is to be treated when everything gets rolled over.
MR. BRADFIELD. The staff is still working on it; there
hasn't been any definitive clarification. In fact, the Comptroller's
staff and our staff are meeting today to discuss it further.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
involved in that now?

Any better feel on how many banks are

MR. BRADFIELD.
From the data that are coming in so far, it
doesn't look like a serious problem. There are individual banks that
I don't think it is more widespread than we thought
have problems.
earlier.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought earlier it was less than a dozen
banks but I fear it is more.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the thing I didn't understand is
that, in my naive mind, it looks like an evasion. Bank of America has
said that they would exceed the limit so, therefore, they are going to
make the loan from their holding corporation and not from the bank.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.
MR. PARTEE.

That's a possible way of doing it.

That's one way around it.
The lending limit is on the bank.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Does that meet the spirit

[of the

law]?
It doesn't diversify for the stockholders of
MR. ROBERTS.
the holding company, but it meets the statutes of lending limits for
the banks.
It meets
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not probing too closely.
In terms of the Mexican [situation] and
the technical [requirements].
the interest rates, that is in my judgment the opportunity for the

-37-

11/14-15/83

banks to provide a lower spread--a positive spread, but a much lower
one. They stuck Mexico last year. And we will have a provision in
the legislation that gives strong moral endorsement at the very least
on the part of the United States--it's a Congressional directive--to
look for lower interest rate spreads on these.
It's a bit of price-fixing by the Congress.

MR. MARTIN.
MR. RICE.

It looks that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the language, I guess, is all right
now. I don't think it's so bad to have a little moral suasion coming
out of the Congress. We didn't want it so mandatory that it would
foul things up. Mr. Truman and Mr. Bradfield have [determined it is]
satisfactory, I hope. I haven't looked at it closely.
MR. TRUMAN-. Mr. Bradfield still thinks it can be improved.
He believes in this [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff forecast is about
right, but it's a little cautious on the current quarter. The current
quarter seems to me possibly a little stronger than is forecast. I
think the economy is slowing down from the third quarter, but not as
I'm particularly impressed with the
much as [the staff projects].
labor market numbers. There has been some decline in industrial
production over this month from last month. But all the other numbers
seem to show continued strength at roughly the same momentum as in the
last quarter. I wouldn't be at all surprised to see this quarter turn
out closer to a 7 percent real rate of growth than the 6-1/4 to 6-1/2
percent that has been forecast. So, I would say the forecast for this
quarter is a cautious one. Again, I think the longer-run forecast for
1984 is about right. The main difference that I would see is that the
strength of consumer expenditures may continue longer into the early
part, or the first half, of next year. And the swing toward inventory
accumulation may last longer than is projected, which of course would
then mean that the growth rate for the first half of next year would
be somewhat higher than is now forecast. I would consider that to be
unlikely. But I mention it just to suggest that if there is any error
in the forecast, it is that the outcome is likely to be stronger than
is now forecast. I was one of those people, I would remind you, who
in the spring of this year were concerned about whether the recovery
was really as strong as most people thought it was. I'd like to say
now that I am convinced and that it's probably stronger than forecast.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Could I ask a question with regard to price
changes and the price outlook, Jim? As you know, several of us have
had some discussion with regard to futures prices and spot prices and
commodity and producer price indexes and so forth. What would be your
judgment as to what the spot and futures markets are showing with
regard to the first signs of reinflation or the lack thereof?

-38-

11/14-15/83

MR. KICHLINE. I don't think they're showing much. In terms
of industrial materials, prices have perked up a little recently.
There is still a good deal of weakness in a couple of markets such as
copper and I guess silver and lead. What has been changing is that
the very rapid run-up in prices in futures markets that we had seen
In fact, our projection of food
for grains has backed off a bit.
prices next year would seem to be high now if you were to take what is
So, I don't see a
going on in the futures markets as a likelihood.
big problem there. We are getting hints in some of the markets of a
tightening in supplies, but it's not really dramatic at this moment.
But, Jim, you have the GNP deflator
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
going from 3.5 percent in the third quarter to 4.6 percent this
quarter; that's a substantial rise of 1.1 percentage points.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, I think Mr. Truman is doing that to us.
It
We tried to offset him; I must say I worked very hard but failed.
has to do with oil imports and oil prices and the screwy way in which
they enter the deflator.
MR. TRUMAN. Which I'm not responsible for!
responsible for the raw material!

I'm only

MR. KICHLINE. Apparently it is the mix of commodities that
That
affects this, particularly on the imports side--the oil imports.
may not be clear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
going down?

Does that mean that oil import prices are

MR. TRUMAN. They were up in the third quarter and the mix
was high. They are going down and, therefore, we get a larger
deflator--more negative.
MR. KICHLINE. They are subtracted out and it works the other
way in the initial quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Wallace.

Jim, the retained earnings of corporations have
MR. WALLACE.
apparently been an important factor recently in holding down the rise
in interest rates. I notice in the flow-of-funds tables that this has
Has that changed or
changed or is changing in the second half of '83.
has the financing gap become positive at this point?
It's
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is in the process of change.
very clear. In fact, we have raised our projected external needs for
funds in the corporate sector especially in 1984 because we've raised
our forecast of business fixed investment. Unfortunately, I have a
flow-of-funds table here that has about 50 pages and a million numbers
and I can't find the line I'm looking for.
MR. WALLACE.

I was looking at line 6 on the highlights in

table 1.
MR. PARTEE. You have a positive financing gap of $8 billion
in the second half of '83, according to Monday's [staff] presentation.

-39-

11/14-15/83

MR. KICHLINE. The negative that we have in this forecast in
the financing gap, as noted, ran through the first three quarters of
the year, and we have a financing gap of around $17 billion in the
fourth quarter. So, our expectation is that this quarter will be the
first one where the financing gap has swung from a negative to a
positive and it rises further throughout 1984.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to make a modest request that
occurred to me earlier. These flow-of-funds figures are always shown
in half-year terms. Could you put them in quarterly terms for the
period?
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, as long as you recognize the volatility
and the substantial revisions in those numbers that half-year
patterns--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

You like this volatility submerged!

If you want the full display, we can certainly

do that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else is going to comment at the
moment, let me ask you a question, Mr. Kichline. Mr. Rice said he
thought, if anything, that the forecast may be on the low side.
Suppose we want to explore the opposite. I'm not saying you would
forecast it, but what plausible scenario could you make for
substantially more weakness in the first and second quarters than you
have projected? What would you expect to see happen if the economy
gets weak?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we'll put Mr. Truman on the spot. I
think one of the areas of potential weakness is on the foreign side.
Obviously, as the dollar continues to be very high, it raises
questions about performance on the foreign side. That's one area of
[potential] weakness. Another may well be in residential construction
activity. We've seen fluky numbers there--shooting up in August and
dropping back in September. Our view is that that's about the bottom,
but that's not necessarily clear. It could easily go a bit weaker.
Another is this dramatic increase in business fixed investment, which
has shown up in terms of orders and shipments in the durable equipment
area. And we've had a lot of gyration on the building side in
nonresidential construction. There were deep declines in commercial
construction in the spring and then big increases in the summer, and
it's hard to read those numbers. It may well be that there's not as
much happening on the structure side of business fixed investment, and
that would turn our forecast weaker. I would note particularly that
we continue to get very bearish reports in office construction; the
numbers are still quite weak. We have built in here a flattening out
of that--very little growth next year. But it may well be, given the
dramatic increase in vacancy rates in many areas across the country,
that office building construction is winding down and will go more
deeply negative. So, in the investment area and in residential
structures and the foreign sector I think there are potential
negatives.
MR. PARTEE. May I just note, Jim, that you have brought the
saving rate back now, but it's still not a high saving rate.

-40-

11/14-15/83

MR. KICHLINE. No, that's right.
It's in the 5 percent area
which, as you know, is very low. And we have perceived that to be a
constraint on consumer spending next year.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. KICHLINE.

To hold that up?
Yes.

MS. TEETERS.
You have assumed that interest rates are going
to stay where they are now, is that right?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, they're a few basis points higher; they
are a little higher than the forecast we had used last time, but it's
a quarter of a point or so--nothing dramatic.
MS. TEETERS.
interest rates?

One of your contingencies is not rising

MR. KICHLINE. You mean in the fourth and first quarters--in
my answer to the Chairman?
MS. TEETERS.

Yes.

MR. KICHLINE. No, I didn't sprinkle that in.
If you were to
talk about a significant rise in rates, which we have not built into
this forecast, again, it seems to me that certainly the residential
structures area could be hit early on. But it would have to be much
more than we have built into the forecast to alter the picture in the
very near term. I think it would have a longer-run implication.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
I just have a comment on capital goods,
particularly for those industries or those companies in the Middle
West. While there has been some improvement, I think, nonetheless in
a broader perspective many of these industries are still doing very,
very poorly. We took a look at four components of the industrial
production index--farm equipment, construction equipment, metal works,
and railroad equipment--all of which are terribly important in the
Middle West.
We compared their current levels of operations with the
third quarter of 1981, which was for many of them a high point. And
these four individual sectors are still operating at a very, very
depressed level.
I'm sure they will come along, as Jim is suggesting,
but I also think some of them have undergone some pretty important
structural changes.
They are still operating at very low levels and
the people running these companies continue to be quite depressed
about the outlook.
So, if there's any error at all, in my judgment it
certainly is in that area on that side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The four you mentioned were what?

MR. KEEHN. Farm equipment, construction equipment, metal
working, and railroad equipment. Railroad equipment, for example, is
currently operating at 81 percent under where it was in the third
quarter of 1981.
It has some very individualistic circumstances,
which caused that, but it's an industry that is-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

An 81 percent decline from 1981?

-41-

11/14-15/83

MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

That's freight cars.

MR. KEEHN. They are going to deliver about 5,000 freight
cars this year, and it's an industry that has frequently delivered,
say, 80,000 in a year; and that has been as high as 120,000 in a year.
MR. KICHLINE.
In the index, I might note, I'm told there was
The numbers were just released; it's
a dramatic increase in October.
up about 50 percent or something like that. The index level goes from
It was 100 in 1967, so it's
13 to 19 or something like that.
operating at 87 percent below where it was in 1967.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I'd like to ask whether, in terms of our
capacity limitations, the labor supply limitation is more or less
severe in your judgment than the capacity utilization. As I look at
the numbers here, you forecast that by the end of 1984 we will get to
82.5 percent capacity utilization, which I would regard as close to
the flash point, even though that's hard to define. And at that time
we get to 8 percent unemployment, which is still well above a
reasonable range for the noninflationary rate or non-accelerating
inflation rate of unemployment. Does that mean that we have a tighter
capacity ceiling over us than a labor supply ceiling?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's a very murky area, as you know.
Our concern at the moment runs in the direction that capacity
utilization appears to be rising more rapidly, given growth in the
economy, than it did in previous cycles. But there are some factors
One is that we apparently do have
that clearly could affect that.
substantial additions [being made] to business equipment at the
moment, which would presumably add something to capacity growth.
We're uncertain about how to measure recent capacity growth and,
indeed, some of the facilities that were removed from the capital
stock or allegedly closed down may come back on stream depending on
So, it may be that the numbers
what happens to the economy.
[projected for] a year from now or two years from now are not as tight
as they look. But for now I would very much agree that it appears
that the risk is on the side of capital shortages rather than labor
shortages.
MR. MARTIN. Jim, wouldn't you add the question of world
capacity and the business relationships that have been entered into by
American firms with foreign suppliers over this last four-year period?
Obviously, you have built into the forecast changes in the exchange
rate, but I think the business relationships, contracts, and so forth
If you talked to
to some extent transcend the exchange rate question.
some of Silas' constituents and some of the others, they say they are
going to continue to use those foreign sources. Now, that's too flat
a statement, but isn't that-MR. KICHLINE. No, I should have mentioned that. That
clearly is very important in our thinking about all of this and about
the price pressures that might stem from rising capacity utilization.
I would say that it's particularly important in the context of a very
sluggish current and prospective recovery abroad. So, there appears
to be in many key areas ample world-wide capacity.

11/14-15/83

-42-

MR. MARTIN. Let me ask a second question with regard to
labor resources. If your productivity figure is indeed too low--as I
have said innumerable times that I think it is--where does that leave
you with regard to unemployment rates?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think in the shorter run we will
probably be talking about higher unemployment rates. It's conceivable
that in the short run it means that businesses would not be adding as
much to payrolls as we have projected in this current forecast. So,
we would expect that to give us perhaps a bit higher unemployment rate
in the shorter-run context--that is, the demands for labor would be
weaker.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the conditions in the Sixth
District are substantially different from those reported by Si Keehn.
In practically every sector, with very few exceptions, we're seeing
very, very robust growth in the economy--August auto sales, retail
sales, housing construction, and so on, and even areas that have been
badly hit by the recession and were giving us very gloomy reports
until recently. Alabama, Louisiana--particularly due to the energy
sector--and Mississippi are reporting substantial gains in their
situations. Even the areas that I mention as exceptions--housing and
agriculture--are doing better. The farmers, of course, were hit by
the drought and the excessive heat during the summer. But the PIK
program has insulated a lot of them from difficulties, and their
revenue will probably be up. When you put all of this together, as
far as the Sixth District is concerned, we see very, very robust
growth ahead for the rest of '83 and for '84.
I don't have any particular quarrel with the staff's analysis
but like Governor Rice I would think that the strength of the economy,
if anything, is being underestimated, especially for the fourth
quarter. So, we would be looking for higher rates of growth in the
fourth quarter and probably in '84. Associated with that, I would
say, too, that we think the staff's inflation forecast for '84 is
perhaps a little on the low side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. The situation in the Ninth District is a lot
like what Bob Forrestal has just described in the Atlanta District.
The reports that we're getting are of strength across the board, even
in some of the areas that have been very weak, such as iron ore and so
on. It's not booming yet but the mere fact that one of the big
taconite companies has just announced that they're recalling 1600
workers as of January 1st, in the context of the situation up there,
is quite a dramatic development. The lumber and timber areas are
very, very strong. There is even a renewed surge of activity--I don't
want to call it a burst yet--in the oil and gas producing areas in
western North Dakota and Montana. The number of operational rigs in
the field has doubled--from admittedly a low level--in the last couple
of months. The farm price situation as it was reported to me is
probably compatible with what Jim said earlier; in a sense it's
looking better. If anything, our people are suggesting that they
think it looks even a little better than Jim says. One of the things
that is now being cited is that the change in the dairy and milk

11/14-15/83

-43-

program that was enacted by Congress last week in all likelihood is

going to put a lot of milking cows into the slaughter market and that
will work to hold down the widely expected big jump in beef prices
So, by and large, our agriculture price outlook is thought
next year.
to be improving, if anything.

In the Twin Cities area, the character of the situation, I
think, really has changed. For example, we even heard reports last
week of strengthening in office space rentals in a context in which
there's a tremendous amount of new building going on in the Twin
Cities. And last of all, in terms of an anecdotal leading indicator,
I've been struck myself just noticing the number of help wanted signs
in the store windows of small businesses throughout the Twin City
area. That is something that I certainly can't recall seeing since
I've been up in those parts of the woods. On the housing side, though
I don't know to what extent this is generalized, I get the sense that
the housing market is being held up by the increased acceptance of
variable rate mortgages on which the initial rate, the rate that
people are looking at today, is a relatively moderate rate compared to
the rate on conventional fixed-rate mortgages. To what extent that
will last is another thing. But right now I think it is one of the
things helping to hold up the residential side.
I also think, as I have for some time now, that the risks are
on the up side in terms of the economy and clearly on the up side in
terms of inflation. I've looked very hard to find any hard evidence
of a resurgence of price pressures and can't really find it. But I
must say I have the distinct sense, extracting from the numbers, that
it's either there or lurking close at hand. Certainly, we do get a
lot of reports of disappearing discounts--in some cases substantial
discounts off posted prices for industrial goods--which may or may not
be captured in the price statistics. And, getting back to the
discussion of yesterday, I think the character or the chemistry of the
recovery as it pertains to the interaction of wages, productivity,
unit labor costs, and cash flow to the business sector--any way you
look at it--clearly is about to change. Even if productivity is
stronger than the Board staff's forecast, we still are going to have a
marked shift away from the phenomenon of the last few quarters in
which wages were decelerating, productivity was growing very sharply,
and unit labor costs were actually declining for two quarters running.
So, even if productivity is stronger than the staff estimates, which I
think it will be, I still think that the character of the recovery as
it pertains to cost-price pressures is about to change. And that is
one of the reasons why I think it's going to be very, very difficult
to hold the inflation rate in the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. With regard to the economic outlook in the Fourth
Federal Reserve District, I thought I would come at it from the side
of some of the industrial developments in the District and what they
might mean for the near-term outlook for inflation. It has been said
many times around this table, and I just repeat it, that the labor
concessions that we've seen have been in industries that are under
severe market pressure and are fighting for survival. Of course, the
question remains: How long-lasting will those concessions be in
industries that pick up? They may, of course, continue in those
industries that are getting smaller over the long term.

11/14-15/83

-44-

Let me make some specific industrial comments.
First, about
autos and the nationwide Chrysler settlement that had been followed by
the local settlements:
All the locals settled except Twinsburg, Ohio,
which is the metal stamping plant for Chrysler, and Twinsburg went out
on strike.
The settlement of that local agreement was considered a
union victory to be settled regardless of cost to the company, which
in lost earnings was somewhere between $50 and $100 million. I think
there are reasons to argue that that is overstated and that Twinsburg
was unique.
There had been a terrible industrial accident there in
which a man was crushed to death in a stamping machine. The working
conditions are bad in metal stamping plants and that is an old
stamping plant.
In addition, it had a rather unique situation in
having quite radical union leadership at that plant. Nonetheless, I
think what happened at the Twinsburg Plant is indicative of workers'
attitudes and it is one of the things that makes me apprehensive about
the upcoming auto negotiations.
It makes me think, as we look at
those negotiations next year, that maybe a number like 6 percent is on
the low side of what might come out of those negotiations in an
industry that has been quite profitable.
In thinking how auto
negotiations might affect inflationary expectations and inflation
through the economy, one can look at other sectors of the economy
where there is some strength and talk about those being the next to
go. One strong area that we see, of course, is trucking. That might
be the dynamics by which inflationary expectations build.
Let me turn to another industry that's heavily represented in
the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which is steel.
That brings
questions of both capacity and productivity. Capacity has been
discussed, of course, and capacity growth rates have been slowing
domestically in a number of our industries, and in some industries
we've even had liquidations. This brings forth a great question of
how we measure capacity and when the cost pressures will show through
into prices, as has been discussed.
Steel causes me to see the
productivity outlook as mixed.
On the positive side, I agree with a
number of comments that have been made to the effect that if you talk
to businessmen, they think that they not only have accomplished
significant increases in productivity but they see ways that they will
continue to increase productivity in the future. On the negative
side, if you look at some of our beleaguered industries in the Fourth
District and talk about labor attitudes toward productivity, it's very
difficult to convince organized labor that productivity increases are
important. We tell them [they are].
I think they believe quality
increases are important--that they are not competitive because their
product is shoddy compared with a foreign import.
But I think they
see productivity increases as a way to lose jobs.
It's like the old
story about when oil prices were going up and people were supposed to
use less electricity, and they paid more for their electricity.
It's
the short-run effect.
It is very hard to convince labor of the
importance of productivity increases, particularly in industries
facing severe international competition. To go back to the Twinsburg
situation, in the context of productivity, I think almost the most
important thing that came out of Twinsburg was probably the reevaluation of the way of doing business that we thought was going to
happen in the auto industry. It still may, but I think they are very
carefully looking at something like a just-in-time concept of
producing products because they found out that if they don't have the
same kind of labor market conditions as they have in Japan, an
inventory control method like just-in-time can shut down their

-45-

11/14-15/83

business. And at least at Chrysler they are really evaluating their
possibilities.
MR. PARTEE.

That might lead to larger inventories?

MS. HORN. Yes--not labor productivity but capital management
productivity, that's for sure. I think that's a very serious outcome.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm getting worried about whether or not
we're going to get the speed and the degree of slowdown that the staff
has forecast. I agree with Governor Rice that the current quarter is
one in which we may end up with more GNP growth than 6.3 percent. I
wouldn't worry too much about that, but I would worry a lot if growth
in 1984 didn't slow down to somewhere close to the 4-1/2 percent or so
rate the staff is forecasting. One can make a strong argument, based
on past cyclical performance, that we're going to get a lot less
thrust from those two areas that typically lead the recovery--housing
and inventories. What we don't know at this point is the degree of
strength that is developing in the business fixed investment area,
which tends to replace the strength that comes along from housing and
inventories in the first year of recovery. We're in a very difficult
position, I think, in trying to predict that because the investment
intentions surveys that we used to depend on so heavily have become
almost totally worthless. The two private surveys we have gotten now
for 1984 are predicting increases in nominal terms of between 9-1/2
and 11 percent. And the staff has said, quite properly, that those
numbers can't possibly be right; a lot more has happened. The other
kinds of information that we've tended to use are the contracts and
orders figures, and they show simply enormous strength. The contracts
and orders figures in September in real terms are up at a 25 percent
annual rate [from] the fourth quarter of 1982. The problem with
forecasting from those figures is that they carry for about a quarter
or maybe two quarters but not much further. The staff's forecast for
business fixed investment is reasonably strong for next year but it
shows a progressive slowdown in the rates of increase from what we've
had recently--from a 15 percent annual rate in third quarter of 1983
to 13 to 11 to basically 9 percent. And if that doesn't happen and we
get something more toward the upward end--in the 10 to 15 percent
range--then we have a lot more growth ahead of us than we've allowed
for.
The other reason I think we ought to ask ourselves whether

past cyclical patterns of slowdown in the second year are going to
emerge is the policy assumption the staff is using on the monetary

side. It is true that we've had a very, very substantial slowdown in
the growth of the monetary aggregates, but we've also had a very
substantial turnaround in the performance of velocity.

The staff

here--and there are many other economists who have been doing the same
thing--have been using what we call effective money growth or what
other economists call adjusted money growth. I have been looking at
some of the numbers. What you do is ask yourself what would have
happened to the money stock if the relationship between money and GNP
and interest rates had been what it was prior to 1974. Now, that's a
wild kind of thing to have to do, but it yields some interesting
results. What it says is that effective money growth in the first
three quarters of this year was about 6-3/4 to 7 percent at an annual

11/14-15/83

-46-

rate, about 5 percentage points below the actual figures.
And in the
fourth quarter it's going to be reversed; it's going to be about 8-1/2
percent at an annual rate, about 5 percentage points [above] the
growth forecast by the staff. Next year the staff forecast assumes
that 7 percent is appropriate; but if we translate that to effective
money growth, it comes out to 8 percent.
And that means, if you
believe the staff's forecast for real money growth, that Ml is
increasing at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate next year.
That is very,
very high by historical standards.
On the fiscal side, I would remind
you that we still have a lot of fiscal spending ahead of us.
The full
employment deficit, based on the 6 percent unemployment rate
calculation, went from a $10 to $15 billion range in the first half of
1981 to a $65 to $70 billion range in the first half of 1983.
It goes
up to a range of $115 to $120 billion in the first half of 1984 and to
$125 to $130 billion in the last half of next year.
I have to figure,
with that kind of fiscal stimulus and monetary expansion still
proceeding quite rapidly, that the chances of an overrun of the
staff's forecast for next year are very substantial.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Wallace.

MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, I could echo the kind of bullish
report that you heard from Bob Forrestal and Jerry Corrigan as far as
our District is concerned.
Of course, I'm talking primarily about the
state of Texas; the recovery is very much in evidence there.
It was
fueled initially by the construction industry, which remains a strong
element of that recovery, at least on the commercial construction
side.
I think residential construction has plateaued at this point
but now we're seeing strength developing more generally from the
industrial side of the economy. That is in evidence in such
industries as aluminum, copper, and steel; and although the evidence
in the high-tech electronics industries is spotty, that is still a
source of strength. And we're beginning now to see some evidence of
recovery in the energy sector though, of course, it's also not as much
as in the District economy generally. But we are seeing evidence in
the variables we tend to look at such as the active rig counts, which
have shown a 23 percent increase since July, and the seismic crew
counts in the District, which have increased 20 percent since
September. This is occurring throughout the four-state region that we
So, there is evidence of some
look at but, again, primarily in Texas.
upturn in activity in that industry. That does not indicate that we
will see relief any time soon in the sense that some of the bad loans
in regional banks that have been very much in the news recently will
necessarily get paid off, but at least over a long period of time it
should provide some relief there. The services side of the energy
industry is still very much depressed--the mud suppliers, the welders,
the truckers and all that goes along with it. That has not shown any
evidence of picking up yet.
Of course, this is attributable to
several things but it's not attributable to any prospect, at least at
this point, of higher oil prices.
It seems to be resulting from lower
production costs and the fact that the economy in general is showing
some increased strength. Certainly, the weakest part of our economy
at the moment continues to be the border region, which I think we
would have to say is still in a state of depression. There has been
some improvement in the economy in the El Paso region but not in areas
farther down such as Laredo, Brownsville, McAllen, and so on. Those
cities are flat on their backs. The city of Laredo at this point has

-47-

11/14-15/83

the distinction of having the highest unemployment among those cities
recorded in the labor statistics.
We have noticed some curious activity in certain parts of the
District. One of the questions that you raised with us when you were
down there last week was about land prices, and we talked with a few
Some prices of raw land are being bid up on the
people in this area.
basis of the prospective development of retail strip shopping centers
and that sort of thing. We've uncovered a few instances of land
changing hands as often as 3 or 4 times a day in this process, which
we hope is not a usual situation, but that was the latest-MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLACE.
SPEAKER(?)

It has to be set up in advance.
It could be.
But not in Texas.

MR. WALLACE.
For example, there are instances of land as far
as 25 miles out from the central business district of Dallas where
prices have been bid up to $5 to $6 dollars per square foot on the
anticipation that these properties will be prime sites for shopping
center developments and that kind of thing. That, of course, would be
along major highways. One of the members of our staff attributes this
to unsophisticated developers being fueled by unsophisticated lenders,
primarily in the thrift industry. Unfortunately, this is not a very
But I think on balance the economy of the
favorable development.
Eleventh District is very strong at this point, and I certainly would
agree with Jerry Corrigan's comment that the risk is on the up side,
and I think we will continue to see increasing inflationary pressures
in the months ahead.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else see the kind of land
speculation that is going on in Texas?
MR. BLACK.

You mean land changing hands three times?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
or six times.

Prices are up in some areas four or five

MR. WALLACE.
I don't want to leave you with the impression
that this is a common everyday occurrence; on the other hand, I don't
know that it's not either.

MR. PARTEE.

That's better than $200,000 an acre!

MR. WALLACE.
That's right:
is $250,000 to $300,000 an acre.

$5 to $6 dollars a square foot

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, New York real estate is still
[unintelligible].
To the extent that people are looking around for an
inflation hedge, the collectibles market has picked up quite rapidly
in the last two months; much higher prices are being bid at auction
houses.
It's almost as though people are thinking in the inflationary
hedge terms we saw a couple of years ago.
I can't understand why
there is such a rapid rise in prices at the better end of the scale.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

-48-

11/14-15/83

MR. BALLES.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I continue to be impressed
by the differences in the strength of an aggregate like real GNP,
which is looking strong, versus the reports I hear around the table
and the conditions I witness in our own District industry by industry.
Basically we have both great strengths and great weaknesses.
Perhaps
that is what one expects in a recovery that is less than a year old.
Certainly, if you disaggregate the economy, you get a marked
impression that things are not going well across the board; some
things are going very well indeed and some things aren't going so
well.
It's only in some aggregate sense that the economy is
continuing to move upward.
But I'm beginning to get concerned about
some of the distortions that are taking place in some key industries,
despite overall growth in employment and production--in areas such as
construction, trade, finance, services, and so forth. The drop in
housing starts that we had last September of some 15 percent is really
beginning to feed back into the forest products business now, and the
recovery that had taken place in the state of Oregon clearly has
stalled.
Unemployment is rising again.
In our aerospace business,
our country's biggest company has continued to reduce its payroll up
until very recently. But there is some good news there because they
have just gotten a heavy inflow of new orders for commercial aircraft.
New orders in the last month or so have been greater than all the rest
of 1983 put together and the backlog of unfilled orders is now rising.
And that's, of course, good news for the Pacific Northwest.
MR. BLACK. John, are they domestic orders or a combination
of domestic and foreign?
MR. BALLES.
It's a combination of domestic and foreign in
the commercial field. I'm not talking about the military areas now.
The other thing, which is disturbing in the sense of representing some
real distortion in the structure of production in the country, is that
we have important agricultural economies in the the western region-California, of course, being the country's biggest single agricultural
state--and I keep hearing many of our directors sing the blues about
what the high value of the dollar is doing to export markets.
This
ranges all the way from log exports to Japan to cotton exports coming
out of the central valley in California to a good part of the rest of
the world.
So, even though yields on a good many agricultural crops
are reaching new records, the markets for these products are lousy and
that's a direct reflection of the value of the dollar on the exchange
markets.
I think we ought to keep these kinds of things in the back
of our minds as we assess the outlook, [knowing] that not all of
reality gets captured in things like real GNP.
MR. RICE. Doesn't our forecast call for a decline in
agricultural output?
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. RICE.
to be observing.

Yes.

That's somewhat contrary to what John Balles seems

MR. BALLES.
It depends on which commodity you're talking
about, Governor Rice.
MR. RICE.

Agriculture overall.

11/14-15/83

-49-

MR. KICHLINE. I think overall it's a small decline in
output, but there really is a bad mix problem in terms of some
components rising and others declining substantially.
MR. BALLES. My information, Jim, is that the wheat crops
around the whole country will be at a new record level by a big margin
and that the foreign demand for it just isn't there and the farmers
are very worried about price prospects. Does that jive with what you
hear in your District, Roger?
MR. GUFFEY. As a matter of fact the wheat crop has received
moisture and looks very good at this point. Lots of things could
happen between now and harvest, to be sure. But if it comes forth as
a good year, then we could be in trouble again in wheat.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS. In the Eighth District, things are looking
good. I would say we've moved from what I previously called reluctant
optimism to near euphoria. Sales, which reflect consumer attitudes,
are running very strong. The merchants we've talked to in the major
cities in the District think we're going to have a very outstanding
Christmas season. Automobile sales are good; they are running about
21 percent over a year ago. Unemployment, which has been high, is
coming down now very noticeably and the Missouri Division of
Employment is predicting substantial reductions beginning in December.
A large part of this is due to planned expansions at the area's auto
plants. Ford and GM are planning expansions around the first of the
year and Chrysler is going to add a second shift of 1,200 workers to
one of their assembly plants, number 2. There is an interesting
anecdote regarding this workforce expansion--some good news and some
bad news, I guess. Chrysler is limiting applications for the jobs to
a total of 6,000. They're taking 3,000 applications through their
Presswood employment office but they distributed 3,000 interview cards
to present employees to give to interested parties. The story going
around is that employees are selling these cards for about $200 a
piece, which either indicates that there are still a lot of people who
want to be employed who aren't or, if you figure the chances of being
hired are about 1 in 5, that the present value of the rents after
union dues is $1,000 per worker at the Chrysler plant. I guess that
tells you something about why we don't do well with import
competition. GE is adding 1,400 workers to its Louisville appliance
plant by mid-January--again, an indication of a tough area that's
coming back. Granite City Steel is going to add 1,000 to its
workforce, and steel has been a very depressed area. Even residential
home sales are looking good. They're below the peaks but still strong

and well ahead of a year ago. Construction of new homes is brisk.
have good order backlogs. I hear the builders expressing optimism
again after being rather blue a couple of months ago. Residential
construction in St. Louis is up 21 percent.

Nonresidential

construction in September in Missouri was double the September '82
figure.

Overall, the nonresidential numbers are looking quite good.

So, except for agriculture, where we've had the worst drought in 50
years and where with the PIK program we've had big reductions in
yields in corn, soybeans, tobacco, and cotton, I would be with the
optimists in terms of the outlook, for the fourth quarter in
particular.

We

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

-50-

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to address some of
the downside risks with regard to the expansion in order to get that
on the record and also some pessimism as to prices.
Obviously, our
goals are both disinflation and growth. And those of you who have
served on the Federal Reserve Board since 1979 deserve all the
recognition that you'll never get.
But this is not an expansion like
that of the 1970s.
We don't have the kind of world inflation or the
kind of economic growth in the OECD countries or in the less developed
countries that we've had in other periods.
I wonder if, in a global
sense, the problem today isn't the illiquidity of so many financial
structures and corporations around the country and the slow growth
that characterizes most of the world outside the United States. We've
talked about productivity, and certainly that is a positive factor in
terms of future inflation. But that should be coupled with the kinds
of comments of an anecdotal nature that I have picked up from my
business contacts.
Certainly, the businessman is going to try to
raise his prices.
Certainly, the union leadership, particularly the
new young faces you see in union halls who have taken over from the
old guard, are going to try to make their reputation. But we have not
talked much about the natural rate of unemployment and the current
rate of unemployment and the projected rate of unemployment since
yesterday.
That kind of analysis is still before us.
The anecdote I
hear is:
"We're going to try to raise our prices but we're not so
sure in terms of world competition that we're going to be as
successful in that as we have been in previous recoveries."
This is still a typical recovery. I think we are talking
about it here a little in terms of our awe that we have so exceeded
our own forecast. But if you look at the 5 or 6 recovery periods
since World War II, on an average basis we're talking about 5 percent
real growth or so in the first three quarters of a rather typical
upswing.
[As for] the expectational side of what data we can get-what President Corrigan [mentioned]--I've certainly examined these
data.
If you look at the commodities, spot and future price indexes,
other than what has happened in the past few days, you find if you go
back a month or two months that index after index on the spot market-seven or eight of them--is down or pointing in that direction.
If you
take the futures market, it's not so clear. But of 10 or 11 indices
there 7 out of the 10 are pointing downward.
The stock markets, once
you get beyond the misinformation of the DOW and look at the other
market indices, are down; the common stock prices of the NASDAQ and of
the AMEX and the general markets are certainly not pointing toward a
revival of inflation. It seems to me, then, that looking at the world
situation and looking at how we stand vis-a-vis previous recovery
periods something can be said for steady-as-you-go rather than using
out intuitive feelings about a revival of inflation.
Rates, both
short and long rates, have already revived some; they have gone up
some since the last FOMC meeting.
There may be a question that we
should keep in mind about 1985 and how we're going to sustain the
expansion into 1985 when inflation is still perhaps not as revived as
our intuitive sense would say and unemployment is going to be very
substantial and the world economy is probably not going to be that
recovered.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I think the Tenth District is
sharing the general optimism about the recovery, particularly as it

11/14-15/83

-51-

relates to consumer retail sales. Residential construction has picked
up.
For commercial construction, on the other hand, it depends on
what area of the District one is talking about. The Denver area was
in a boom for a number of years and is well overbuilt, and that's not
a very vigorous sector. But if you begin to disaggregate the basic
industries or areas of economic activity in the Tenth District--if you
look at energy, there has been some moderate upturn in the number of
rotary rigs actually working. But it is only modest, even though
percentage-wise it looks pretty good.
It is maybe 40 percent greater
than 8 to 10 months ago, but that was a very low base level from which
they are working up.
Mining, on the other hand, particularly coal, is
flat. There is certainly no increased activity in the mining
industry. That whole industry hasn't begun to recover yet.
Commercial aircraft, which is a very big segment of our economic
activity, is flat on its back, contrary to what John has reported
about the Northwest. There is no backlog of orders; as a matter of
fact there are continuing cancellations of commercial jet aircraft
orders. The one bright spot is a military contract landed by the Lear
Company down in Wichita and in Arizona, but that's just one blip on
the horizon. As for the rest, they are looking at a rather dismal
outlook.
With respect to the agricultural sector, you spoke of land
prices. As I think most of you around the table know, through this
recession agricultural land prices fell somewhere between 15 and 21 or
22 percent, depending upon whether it was dry or irritigated land.
And those prices have not yet turned up.
As a matter of fact, the
report that I've had is that there will be some continuation of
foreclosure on farmers and ranchers as a result of their not being
able to service their debt. Although there's a good deal of optimism
at the moment in the farm area over the PIK program, which has given
them a cash flow so that some of them can service their debt, I think
the observation is correct that without some improvement in the export
market, there isn't a great deal of hope for substantial improvement
in the period ahead.
As to unemployment, it has been decreasing; one of the
principal reasons is auto assembly, which is a fairly large segment of
our economic activity. Auto plants have put people back to work and
as a result the unemployment rates have dropped dramatically in
Missouri, as has been observed by Ted Roberts, as well as in Oklahoma
where there are auto assembly plants. With regard to the mainstream
merchant in the agricultural area, it's a mixed bag. In the
agricultural chemical area, they have had a very good fall season and
look forward to a good spring. On the other hand, for the farm
It's
equipment manufacturers there's nothing going on in sales.
obvious that the ranchers or farmers are just not buying any
additional equipment; they are not making any capital expenditures.
They're just sitting and waiting to see what will happen.
So, in
summary, it seems to me that we're enjoying the benefits and the
optimism of the consumer but the underlying support in the Tenth
District isn't all that great.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Listening to the reports from around the
Districts, by and large they certainly do show a change in attitudes
as against two or three months ago, probably just because we've moved

11/14-15/83

-52-

to a later stage of the business cycle. We're now clearly in the
expansion phase of the business cycle and that's reflecting itself
very broadly across the economy. There are structural differences,
and I don't think we ought to be misled by them. The policy mix in
particular creates different circumstances than in previous
recoveries.
John is concerned about his agricultural industry and his
lumber products, but that's a direct result of the change in policy
mix; we have higher interest rates and a higher dollar than we would
And the counterpart of it is generalized purchasing
have otherwise.
power, reflecting more [after] tax [income] that people are earning.
That just goes throughout the spectrum and brings us these reports of
better retail sales and consumer optimism and so forth; that's just
So, taking that into account, I don't
the other side of our picture.
think there's anything that unusual, after adjusting for the policy
[mix] change, in the recovery.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't business fixed investment
stronger than one would expect with that policy mix?
MR. PARTEE. The difficulty there is that we don't know how
It may be that the tax incentives are
much the tax incentives are.
offset by the [higher] interest rates in the aggregate. Although I
must say, speaking to Governor Gramley's comments, that I'm inclined
not to think that there is much strength in the business fixed
investment area.
I don't think it has that thrust and momentum; and I
On the
don't believe it's going to be that strong looking out ahead.
other hand, I'm impressed by what Karen Horn says about inventories.
I've noticed that in the last several months we've had very [sizable]
accumulation but the ratio of inventories to sales has not improved at
all; it's right at the bottom. And if business should have a view
that in order to take advantage of opportunities it needs a little
thicker stocks, we could get quite an inventory accumulation,
particularly if it should follow a Christmas season with very strong
consumption because people feel good this year. Therefore, there may
be a little more [upside] hazard in the combined inventory-consumption
area for the expansion. But I don't agree that plant and equipment is
Maybe I'm just too much of a Midwesterner and I'm
all that strong.
impressed by the continued weakness in the basic industries which
In sum, I
seems to me to be still, as Si says, very, very marked.
rather agree with Pres Martin that we're having a good expansion.
There is some danger that it may run too strong as time goes on, but
we don't have any indication of that at this point. And we don't have
any indication of a heating up of inflationary pressures. And,
therefore, perhaps what we ought to do for the moment is to sit back
and enjoy it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without any other comments, we'll ask Mr.
Axilrod to deliver his remarks.
MR. AXILROD.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You can put a doughnut in your stomachs

now!
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess as Mr. Axilrod carefully
explained to us, we have somewhat conflicting feelings and signals of

-53-

11/14-15/83

I just had Mr.
great ebullience and some [concern] about the economy.
Kichline check, and you have to look fairly hard among past recoveries
to find three consecutive quarters [of growth] as high as [we have
now], including the projection for the fourth quarter.
Interestingly
enough, 1958 was a bit more rapid and immediately terminated after
three rapid quarters.
MS. TEETERS.

There was a steel strike.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
end so abruptly.
MR. MORRIS.

Maybe it was the steel strike that made it

The first two quarters of 1981--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I mention that because I think some of
these things about the strength of the recovery are a little
misleading. We started out with a fairly slow quarter. That's
probably an accident of when somebody dates these things or just how
it starts out.
The recovery really is in my judgment somewhat above
average since it has gotten some momentum; it may be quite a lot above
average. We have some weakness in Ml; I don't think we have too much
weakness in the broader aggregates at the moment. That Ml weakness
comes against the background of having had a big increase earlier and
having raised our target in effect by rebasing it.
I'm not sure there
are grounds for making any very violent move at this point. But,
let's see what other people think.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I just want to bring up one thing
that I don't think has been touched on, except in the early discussion
this morning.
I'm not sure we have an awful lot of room to do very
much because of the foreign international debt situation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In a tightening direction.

MS. TEETERS.
In a tightening direction, that's correct.
I
happen to agree with [the view] that this is a typical recovery at
this point; if anything, it's a little stronger than even I predicted
a year ago.
But I don't see any great need to move it down because
it's going along at a very nice clip, though perhaps a little too
fast.
I don't see that we have any upward mobility at this point, at
least until we have some of these things a little more firmly set in
the international area. And I think it would be extremely dangerous
to make a major move of any sort at this point.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. KEEHN.
MR. PARTEE.

I second it.

Third.
Fourth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear any sentiment for a major
move now. Maybe we'll do this in a different way. Does anybody want
to make a major move?
MR. RICE.
at this time.

I think we have no basis for a major move downward

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Or up.

-54-

11/14-15/83

MR. RICE.

Or up.

MR. BOEHNE.
It seems to be in the nature of human beings to
want to complain a lot when things go poorly and to want to worry a
lot when things go well. As I was listening to what was being said
around the table I thought that at least central bankers are human:
Things are going pretty well, so we'll worry a lot. But I think now
and then we ought to have the courage, as Chuck said, to sit back and
enjoy it.
So, I'd fifth or sixth or whatever [the motion] and leave
well enough alone.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Well, I guess I'll take on the role of the
school of contrary thinking for about the third month in a row, just
so we don't get too complacent. What I'm referring to, Mr. Chairman,
is the move we made--with which I agreed at the time and which we all
know about--to deemphasize Ml and to pay more attention to the broader
There was good reason for doing that. We also said to
aggregates.
ourselves, I think [the record] will show, that when and if Ml began
to behave more normally again, particularly in terms of velocity, we
would reconsider whether more emphasis ought to be put on it. A
couple of months ago--specifically in August--I circulated a paper
that had a couple of key conclusions.
One was that the broader
aggregates, M2 and M3, looked to us to be highly unreliable as a
forecaster of income, prices, or anything else for the last couple of
years. Ml admittedly wasn't perfect but it was a lot better than the
alternatives had been in the past, and I expect it will be again in
the future once we get a revival of velocity looking somewhat normal.
We were forecasting in our Bank at least that that would happen by the
closing months of this year, and that forecast looks better than ever
now. It is pretty much expected--I see similar figures in the
Bluebook--that we will have a strong rise in velocity of Ml in the
fourth quarter. And for that reason I'm again suggesting that we not
wait too much longer before putting Ml back as one of the primary
intermediate targets, along the lines it used to be, simply because I
have such a big distrust of M2 and M3 telling us anything.
We went through a big recession and now have a strong
recovery, and we hardly would have noticed it from what happened in
the behavior of those broader aggregates. I recognize your point, Mr.
Chairman, that the recent slowdown in Ml has to be viewed against the
background of the strong growth earlier and the fact that we did
rebase in July. Having said that, I'm not sure I'd be comfortable
with seeing another month or two of very low growth in Ml just because
it seems to be coming back on track in terms of behavior, including
velocity behavior now. Our San Francisco money market model would not
suggest any major move and I too am against a major move in policy at
this time.
But I would suggest a modest move toward nudging that
funds rate down at least 50 basis points in order to get a little
stronger Ml growth in the remaining months of this year and bring it
by December at least a little closer to the midpoint--though it would
still be under the midpoint--of that 5 to 9 percent range.
Frankly,
I'm skeptical about whether we're going to get the 7-1/2 percent
growth in November-December mentioned in the Bluebook, given the
So, in a word, I would be in
recent level of the federal funds rate.
favor of moving toward the specifications of alternative A in order to
accomplish what I just outlined.

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

-55-

Let me just comment that I think it is

possible that more predictable relationships may be returning to M1
I
but, speaking for myself, it's a little too early [to be sure].
think we probably are going to have a very big increase in velocity
here, which will make up for some of the reverses earlier, but what

the trend is going to be in the future isn't clear.

I wouldn't assume

that this increase in velocity is going to continue. But whether it
will lapse back [unintelligible].
But, given the burst that we had
earlier and now the retracing of it, partially anyway, at what point
does one assume that [a return to normalcy] begins?
It still
mystifies me.

proposal.

MR. PARTEE. John, I think technically that's a reasonable
But I must say that you're making an awful lot of small

differences in Ml growth. The projection is for pretty good growth.
If it doesn't occur, of course, then we have a situation that needs to
be confronted. But the projection is 7-1/2 percent [for November-toDecember] and 5-1/2 percent for the September-to-December period. And
it seems sort of strange to be reducing interest rates significantly
with the background of the economic discussion that we had before the
coffee break. It almost requires, it seems to me, a confidence in the
technical relationships that exceeds what I'm able to have in them.
So, I just can't agree with your particular proposal, but I do agree
with your general comment that Ml is a lot better than it has been
cracked up to be and quite a bit better than M2 and M3. And we ought
to review this in connection with the posture we take for next year,
which I guess would be at the next meeting and the January meeting.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's right, Chuck. I didn't expect to
change many minds today, but one of the reasons I wanted to raise this
flag of caution here is that, as I look back at the 11 years I've been
sitting around this table, I think the mistakes that we've made have
been ones of intuitively trying to look through the intermediate
targets to the economy as a whole, while officially we never did, if
you wish, target real GNP and even interest rates. That has led us
more often than not into a pro-cyclical monetary policy. And it was
one of the reasons that the Chairman proposed to this group in October
of 1979 that we get off our interest rate stabilization in the short
run and onto monetary targeting. I think what we really have been
doing in the past year de facto is targeting interest rates, and I'm
afraid that again that will lead us to some pro-cyclical monetary
policy if we keep it up too long.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I shudder to think of what would
have happened to the economy if we had followed Ml on its crazy turns
in the last year.
MR. BALLES. Well, I would never have proposed that we follow
it in the last year, Tony, because we did realize in a timely way that
something funny was going on in velocity and were wise enough to
offset it. It would have been a disaster if we had not let Ml
increase by 8-1/2 percent in 1982 instead of the targeted 2-1/2 to
5-1/2 percent in view of what in fact was going on in its velocity and
the big drop that we had first in inflation and then in interest
rates. We are convinced, and I think a lot of people around the table
would be too, that what happened was that the opportunity cost of
holding money dropped very significantly with that drop in interest
rates and, therefore, more money was demanded. It wasn't that the

11/14-15/83

-56-

demand curve was shifting but that the amount of money demanded moving
along a given curve was going up, given the fact that interest rates
were coming down.
MS. TEETERS.
John, I think there was one cost of our
monetarist experiment that tends to be overlooked, which was the
extraordinary economic cost of the volatility of the rates.
The
volatility of short-term rates is not all that serious, but when it
was transmitted totally and completely into long-term rates it helped
to destroy the long-term market.
I think not only the level of the
rates but the volatility of the rates was just economically
unacceptable. And if we do consider going back to Ml, I think we
ought to keep in mind that it has a very high cost in other areas.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I've been troubled by the great deal of
stability that we've had in the funds rate, which does seem to harken
back to olden times.
But the error that was committed in olden times
was not that we became too tight as a result of holding the interest
rate but that we became too easy.
The natural tendency in an
expansion, it seems to me, is to generate that kind of pressure.
Inflation expectations rise and, therefore, the real rate falls, and
at a given [nominal] interest rate we have really less restraint than
before.
Then the aggregates have tended to expand too rapidly. We
have not had that this time, if we discount the earlier behavior of
Ml.
But I think one can't discount it completely; at least one has to
give it a chance to unwind now, as Steve said.
If too much of it went
into the economy earlier, there's a good reason why it should move
more slowly right now. I think the whole picture of the economy that
we're seeing is one of much greater strength than we expected. Half a
year ago we talked about the fragile expansion. Now, each time we
meet the expansion is a little stronger and the forecast is raised a
little more. We're not borrowing from the future and cutting down the
amount of expansion we see hereafter; but we're more or less
maintaining the projection for the future, which means that the
economy is moving at a higher level and, therefore, a potentially more
inflationary level.
The tendency to approach the capacity ceilings
early is part of that general picture.
So, if I had to make a move
right now, I would certainly want to make it in an upward direction.
But I think we don't really have to make a move. There are a lot of
factors on both sides and enough leeway continues to exist so that we
can wait; I don't know whether we should enjoy but, at any rate, we
can wait.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Wallace.

MR. WALLACE. Mr. Chairman, if I may be permitted a somewhat
different view:
I come out very supportive of the position that
Governor Wallich just expressed, although I think that perhaps some
move is called for.
It is becoming increasingly clear that the
recovery is more robust than we expected earlier, and I think that
combined with the prospects of continued high deficits will put upward
pressure on interest rates, notwithstanding Secretary Regan's
position. I think we will see increased inflationary pressures. As
Governor Partee has observed, inventory building is going to continue;
the inventory/sales ratio is low; corporate retained earnings are
ceasing to be a factor holding rates down.
So, I'm inclined to

-57-

11/14-15/83

believe that the best thing that we can do now is to let the funds
rate move up closer to the 10 percent level and send a signal to the
market that we continue to be concerned about future inflation.
Therefore, I would come out in favor of a "B-" position or "B" perhaps
with a higher borrowing assumption that would carry a clear indication
that we would like to see the funds rate move higher. I might add
parenthetically that my preference would be to see the record stated
in terms of that rate. But knowing that that's not an option we have,
I would opt for "B" or "B-."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS. Well, I share John Balles' concern about the
persistent deceleration in the rate of Ml [growth] as evidenced from
August through October. I don't think any major change is called for.
Alternative B, which would show [M1 growth] rates of 6 percent in
November and 9 percent in December would be fine with me. I would be
cautious in view of the character of the expansion about moving over
to "A," because if we were successful in achieving it, John, that
would have us moving into the new year at an 11 percent rate of growth
in Ml, which I think would be excessive. I agree that there has been
some unwinding, but all of our research would indicate that if we
persist in restraint of this magnitude, we will in fact stop the
recovery sometime beyond midyear of next year. So, I would like to
see us get back on track and address the issue in terms of the
monetary base and Ml and let the interest rate fall out wherever it
does.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm very much in John Balles' camp.
Or, to put it in a slightly different way, he has returned to a camp
that I never left. We've heard a lot of criticism of Ml during recent
years and a lot of it I think has been warranted, but nobody has put
forward anything that seems to have any promise, from my viewpoint, of
being a better intermediate target. Just to cite one case: The only
thing that would have led anybody to predict the amount of strength
we've had in the recovery was growth of Ml.
So, I still focus most of
my attention on Ml, but I'm very pragmatic about it. If Steve's
probing into the behavior of M1A or anything else turns up something
that will behave better, then I'll gladly switch. Given that
position, on the basis of past experience I think there's a legitimate
reason to be concerned about this deceleration that we've had in M1
and to conclude that it conceivably might have a negative impact on
business next year if it continues. So, I can understand why John has
some sympathy for easing up a bit to stimulate the rate of growth in
the money supply. I would have a lot of sympathy for that point,
particularly if I thought that if it turns around the other way we
would move as quickly to snug up. But there are a couple of reasons,
or maybe three reasons even, why I don't think that would be very wise
right now. One, of course, is that the economy does seem to be very
strong. I will buy pretty much Lyle's and others' argument on that.
And after the kind of growth we've had in the money supply, again
narrowly defined, I think it's probably inevitable that we will have a
few bumps and grinds as we try to get this back down to where it ought
to be.
SPEAKER(?).

Bumps and grinds?

11/14-15/83

-58-

MR. BLACK. That was a Freudian slip! But in more technical
terms, we've been playing around inadvertently with the seasonal
adjustment factors.
I think it's at least conceivable or plausible
that the introduction of the MMDAs and also the advent of the OCDs and
the inadvertent seasonal adjustment that seems to have gotten into our
monetary policy the last several years may have biased our seasonal
adjustment factors upward for these last three months, in which case
the reported figures are going to be lower than they really ought to
be.
If that analysis is right, then that's a reason for not being
quite as concerned about the weakness we see there.
So, to get to the
bottom line, which I probably should have gone to directly, I would go
for alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor what I would call
a small precautionary move in the direction of firming a little at
this point.
What I would have in mind is perhaps letting the
borrowing level go up to $750 million or so, or maybe a bit higher,
with the funds rate moving from 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent to 9-1/2 to
9-3/4 percent, at least for the time being. I say that, of course,
primarily because of the way that I'm looking at the economy. Again,
if I look at the staff forecast for 1984 fourth-quarter-over-fourthquarter, nominal GNP growth is 9 percent--4.3 percent real and 4.9
percent inflation.
If indeed the risks are on the up side, as I think
they are at the moment, it seems to me quite plausible that we may be
looking at a situation in 1984 where we will have to try to restrain
somewhat the growth of prices and nominal GNP. Now, when I look at
the specifications that Steve has put together, even though one has to
take the numbers with a grain of salt, alternative B growth rates for
Ml, M2, and M3 basically between October and December range from 7-1/2
to 8-1/2 percent, which are still pretty robust numbers.
I don't
think I would care too much if growth came out in that range, but I
sure wouldn't want it to come out much higher than that. Those
considerations, in combination with my view of the economy, lead me to
believe that a small move in the direction of a little precautionary
restraint right now might prove to be very helpful in the longer run.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. I share Governor Wallich's concerns that we're
looking at an economy that is growing a lot faster than we thought it
was going to. And I think it's probably still going to show a lot of
robustness over the next couple of quarters.
If I think about the
kind of posture monetary policy for the course of 1984 that's likely
to be consistent with keeping the economy's growth rate down to 4-1/2
percent or so and inflation no worse than 4-1/2 to 5 percent, I end up
concluding that we're going to need higher interest rates.
I just
don't see how we can run a monetary policy that provides the kind of
expansion in the money supply that is in the staff's forecast for 1984
together with this horrendously stimulative fiscal policy in an
economy that has a tremendous amount of cyclical momentum developing
and not have an outcome that's rather different from what the staff is
suggesting. I've listened to what [Governor Martin] has said with
great interest.
I think there are considerations on the down side
that we need to think about.
But in my judgment the risks of an
overrun are much greater at this point.
So, I agree with Jerry fully.
I think a precautionary step in the direction of firming is necessary

11/14-15/83

-59-

and desirable. It wouldn't have to be done today. It can even
until the December meeting. But the sooner we make it, I think
better off we're going to be. Jerry's specs were a "B-;" I had
down $700 to $800 for borrowing and 9-1/2 to 9-3/4 percent [for
funds] and that's exactly where he was. So, I agree fully with
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

wait
the
put
fed
him.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I have a good deal of sympathy
with the comments that John Balles made about Ml. I think the time is
fast approaching when we need to take a hard look at restoring Ml to
some degree of respectability, which apparently was lost along the
way. But I part company with John at that point. Even if we look at
Ml, the situation of the economy is such that I don't believe any
degree of loosening would be appropriate at this time. I would
associate myself with the remarks just made by Governor Gramley. I
think that the concern we have is with a very robust economy in 1984.
The projections, even of the money supply, are on the high side. So,
the bottom line for me is "B-."
I too had a borrowing range of about
$750 million with a fed funds rate of 9-3/4 percent. So, I would come
out for a B- alternative, although alternative B would certainly be
acceptable. But I wouldn't like to see the Committee move below "B"
to a position closer to "A."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to enter a vote for
alternative B. One reason is my concern with regard to our leadership
in the world economy and our impact as the world's biggest market for
the less developed countries. Speaking on a domestic basis, though,
we are not yet back to a trend line in real GNP, described using the
last decade or 1973 to 1980 or whatever you feel is the appropriate
period. Things have changed so much, though, in the last few years-financial institutions, financial instruments, business institutions
and the way they're dealing with their unions, and the world
competition that has now been vectored into this country. But I think
any fine-tuning, considering how little we know about our institutions
and their financial instruments and how they perform today, would go
just as fine-tuning has always gone--not so fine. So, a slight
firming of interest rates or so-called precautionary firming, given
the disappearance of Reg Q and given the removal of other estoppels
that the government had built into the financial system, means that if
we're going to tighten it has to be, in my not so humble opinion, a
major tightening--not a firming of a 1/4 or 3/8 of a point. And I'm
not prepared to support either a fine-tuning or a major move. I
understand most of us are not willing to support a major move. I'd
like to see the status quo and borrowing between $600 and $700
million, with emphasis on the lower number.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On balance, I also come out for
staying as we are, although I do think it's quite possible that next
month we will have to give more consideration to a tightening move.
In addition to the arguments that have been offered around the table
against a move at this point, I would add that a tightening move at
this point really would not be understood in the markets. It would be
totally unexpected in the country at large. And I think there would

11/14-15/83

-60-

be a lot of speculation that the Fed is expecting much more inflation
next year, notwithstanding the Chairman's testimony in which he said
it could be 4-1/4 percent or less.
I think the only way the country
would understand a tightening move at this point would be [to
conclude] that we privately are expecting significantly higher
inflation. Obviously, I'm not saying that that should be the sole
governing consideration, but it does seem to me that, even though one
can make an argument for a precautionary move, the force of the
justification for that might be very much clearer at our next meeting.
So, I would vote to stay where we are and for borrowing in the $650
million area.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I have some
sympathy for those around the table who have spoken for returning to
Ml, but not now.
I also have some sympathy for those who expressed
the position that we will indeed face a period in the future when some
additional tightening is needed, but I think not now. I would come
out very much as Tony has for retaining our current position with a
borrowing level of about $650 million. This may be the month to sit
back and enjoy it.
Come next month, before Christmas, I believe we
may be the grinch who takes away Christmas.
It may be appropriate to
make a modest move, even in view of the international situation, in
the upcoming month or two.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I would end up associating myself with
those who are in favor of continuing the current policy, probably
alternative B.
I think we are in a period in which things are going
well, and that suggests that change would not be appropriate.
It's
clear that the economy is far better now than we expected earlier and
If this continues into the time of the
it is continuing to improve.
next meeting, we may want to move modestly toward tightening. But I
think there still are enough uncertainties that I'd like to see a few
more cards before taking that move. Therefore, I favor alternative B
with a borrowing level at about its current target level.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Well, Mr. Chairman, even though I believe in an
activist monetary policy, I think there are times when the best thing
It seems to me that the case that Lyle made
to do is to do nothing.
is one which has a reasonably high probability of being right.
I
think we have an environment for a strong surge in capital spending
next year but the case is not that clear that we ought to be moving
right now. One thing that I think we learned from the May 24 decision
of the Committee is that with the new mortgage market we really have a
very powerful instrument in monetary policy in that the mortgage rate
now is so responsive to changes in monetary policy. We used to think
of a six-month lag between a change in policy and the impact in real
activity. What we found when we pushed up interest rates in June is
that we got a decline in new home sales in July, a decline in permits
in August, and a decline in starts in September. The textbook would
suggest that we should not expect that prompt a response.
I think the
reason we got it is that we now have a mortgage market in which the
thrift institutions are mortgage bankers; they take in mortgage

-61-

11/14-15/83

packages and sell them in the market. And they have to get a market
rate on them if they're going to sell them. So, that means that a
fairly modest change in monetary policy can have a pretty big impact
on the housing sector pretty fast.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How do you explain the fact that in
the last month or the last few weeks--I don't know exactly what time
period--while there has been a firming in bond yields there has been a
slight lowering in mortgage rates?
MR. MORRIS. Well, there certainly hasn't been much of a
firming in bond yields and the short-term money rate structure has
been moving down.
MR. MARTIN. Tony, the variable rate mortgage is coming into
its own; it's 30 to 45 percent of the market. I mean no disrespect,
but we don't have good measures of those rates and how those loans are
traded in the markets. If we had that data, I don't think you'd find
the discrepancy. You're talking about fixed-rate mortgages.
MR. GUFFEY.
S&Ls recently.

There has also been quite an inflow into the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. The explanation I heard is that
the competition among the thrifts has become more intense for mortgage
business and they are-MR. PARTEE. That could be true and Frank's point could still
be right. But I think it is true that we have a very responsive
mortgage rate.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I wasn't disagreeing with that.

MR. MORRIS. I think this is the tool we can use when we get
evidence that the capital goods boom is really taking off. I don't
think the evidence is strong enough yet, so I would argue for
alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Does anybody else have a comment?

MR. RICE. I'd just like to register a position on this.
Because of the way I see the economy developing, I have a good deal of
sympathy for the position taken by Lyle and Jerry. That is, I can see
the case for some precautionary firming at the present time. But I'm
not prepared actually to move in that direction at this time. I do
agree that we have to be looking in a firming direction and I agree
But I think Tony put
with Tony that it may be next time [we meet].
his finger on the problem and that is that if we took any firming
action at all at the present time, it simply wouldn't be understood.
The public and markets are looking at the aggregates and they see them
either well within the ranges or toward the bottom of the ranges. And
if we firm up now, even in a slight way, it simply wouldn't be easily
understood. But at the same time, we still ought to keep ourselves
looking in that direction. And if we expect that we may have to take
some firming action next time, perhaps we ought to find some language
in the directive this time to prepare the markets for such an action.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

11/14-15/83

-62-

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, perhaps I should defer; my
question has nothing to do with current specifications.
I would like
to ask Steve a question about our meeting yesterday after you get
through this.
Pardon me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a couple of people for whom I do
not have an opinion indicated, if they want to express an opinion.
MS. TEETERS.
I thought I did at the beginning.
I'm very
much for just staying where we are and not moving one way or the
other. But I'm a little curious:
What do you expect to know in a
month that we don't know now?
We will have one more unemployment rate
and we will have the flash on the fourth-quarter GNP, which is not a
very good number.
MR. PARTEE.

We won't have Christmas sales yet.

MS. TEETERS. And we won't have Christmas sales.
So, I'm not
sure that we're going to have that much more information in another
month. Now, if we go into February, we'll have a firmer number on the
GNP and another two or three months of unemployment data and hopefully
good information on the international side.
Those seem to me the
things necessary for making a decision.
MR. GRAMLEY. I agree with what you say. You're right that
we are not going to have any better numbers a month from now. The
problem is that if we wait until February the capital spending plans
for 1984 would be set in concrete; they are all being developed now.
The Christmas sales boom will have taken place and there is all the
inventory planning that stems from that. And it then becomes late.
If I'm right in my hypothesis, and I may not be, we're going to find
ourselves in February wishing we had acted last August.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I agree that we won't
have any better monthly numbers, there would be some anecdotal
information. We may have a better feeling for how the fourth quarter
will be coming in and what is happening in business fixed investment.
MR. BOEHNE.

Ideas grow on people over time; they sink in.

MR. RICE. The most important thing is that there will be
time for a few more public statements to the effect that we might be
firming.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Have you expressed a view, Governor

Partee?
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, I'm for staying right where we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

I thought I had that correctly.

I thought I rebutted John.

MR. BALLES.
It would have been a very peaceful meeting
except for me; I'm sorry about that.

-63-

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a lot of people who want to
stay more or less where we are, with some tendency toward tightening
by some. I don't recall many times when we've tightened prematurely.
MR. PARTEE.

I do.

MR. MARTIN.

Let's keep it up.

MR. RICE.

Yes.

MR. MORRIS.

January of 1981.

SPEAKER(?).

January, 1982.

MR. MORRIS.

January, 1982.

MR. PARTEE.

How about May of 1975?

MS. TEETERS.
MR. RICE.

May, 1983.
We tightened because the aggregates went up.

MR. PARTEE.
MR. RICE.

How about May of 1983?

To no avail.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We tightened in January '81,

if I

remember.

MR. MORRIS. We pushed short-term interest rates up 400 basis
points in response to a rise in Ml.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, we'll have to discuss next time or

the time after how we get into a disinflationary policy if we want to

have a disinflationary policy over a period of time.

A five percent

M1 figure, if M1 is going to return to normal, looks a bit high to me.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Five percent Ml?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I'm talking about next year.

That isn't what the staff is projecting for

next year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
it looks a bit high.
MR. GRAMLEY.
like?
look
percent
MR. PARTEE.

I don't care what the staff is predicting;

Yes, but if 5 percent looks high, what does 7
Very high!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it returns to normal--I don't know if
it's going to; that's a big if. Well, I could convince myself to
tighten up a little now, although I don't feel that strongly about it.
But I'm not sure we will want to wait for the next meeting if the
aggregates turn out on the high side and the business news remains
that good. We can start off where we are and stay there if everything

-64-

11/14-15/83

goes according to the forecast.
If the aggregates or the economy come
in more strongly, obviously, we have room in these directives to move
anyway.
I think we ought to discuss how to bias this a bit, if we
want to.
I don't know that it takes any change in the wording. What
does the [current] directive say?
Maybe we should start out by saying
"maintain the existing [degree of reserve restraint]."
And if we
believe what the staff tells us, that 8-1/2 percent [for growth in M2
and M3] can remain, I think. We're in a mid-quarter meeting; I don't
see any necessity [to change] the second sentence. The third sentence
may be a question. Let me just look at it.
MR. WALLICH.
the economy."

We could say "further evidence of strength in

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I could reverse the sentence in a sense,
and say "Depending on evidence about the strength of economic recovery
and other factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook,
greater restraint would be acceptable in the context of more rapid
expansion in the aggregates."
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. PARTEE.

That sounds good to me.
And then pick up the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Reverse

[the order].

MR. PARTEE. Yes, because we might well have continued slow
growth in the aggregates. That [bounceback] is something that has
been projected; we don't see it.
If you think of this seasonal adjustment thing--

MR. BLACK.
MS. TEETERS.

We can reverse it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
possibility.

Well, reversing it is an obvious

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't there an implication if we
say that greater restraint would be acceptable should the aggregates
expand more rapidly, that that's the only condition under which we
would go to greater restraint?
And yet, of course, we could have
weakness in the aggregates and still have enough business evidence
that we would want to move a little. What I'm saying is that we ought
to put a little more emphasis on the strength of the economic recovery
considerations in that sentence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have discovered historically
that we can't take care of every permutation and combination in these
sentences, but-MR. RICE.

Well, we do mention the strength of the economy.

The beginning clause "Depending on the evidence
MR. MORRIS.
about the strength of economic recovery and"-I just felt
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand that.
[we needed] a little more emphasis there rather than on the
aggregates.

-65-

11/14-15/83

MR. BOEHNE. Well, instead of "would" we could say "might."
It seems to me that that's a slightly weaker word.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I don't think that would be--

MR. GRAMLEY. If we leave it the way the Chairman has
expressed it and we understand that he's thinking of taking into
account particularly the business news as well as the aggregates, that
seems to me to be reasonable. We can't express all the different-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it this way, the first half of
the sentence seems to be simple enough. If you want to put in a
But it's weighed somewhat
balancing thing on the other side--.
"Depending on evidence about the strength of
differently, I guess.
economic recovery and other factors bearing on the business and
inflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable
should the aggregates expand more rapidly."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You could achieve what I want simply
"Depending on evidence about the
by putting in one adjective:
increasing strength of economic recovery."
MR. PARTEE.

But the rate of increase is decreasing.

MR. RICE. Well, it's a question of whether it really is
increasing. The rate of expansion [may be] decelerating at some point
and if you get that and continue to do so-MR. PARTEE. We just received the production number today and
that is a half point less than last month.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
quite technical-MS. TEETERS.
MR. RICE.

Okay.

What I'm trying here may be

How about "continued"?

Yes,

"continued" would do it.

If we do
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, or "continuing."
that, it gives a flavor of the Committee's concern that there may be
something further down the road.
MR. MARTIN.

Some of the Committee's concern.

MR. PARTEE.

Yes, that's acceptable to me.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
suggested, Paul.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

What change that I suggested?

Reversing the clauses.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

MR. PARTEE.

And then make the change you

Reversing.

The market might notice that.

11/14-15/83

-66-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite see how to word this second
thought. We could just put in a semicolon and say "lesser restraint
would be acceptable in the context of a significant shortfall in the
growth of the aggregates from current expectations."
I'm not sure
we're saying that; I don't know what significant is if business looked
even stronger and the aggregates had a shortfall.
That's the main
problem. Then what would we do?
MS. TEETERS.
MR. BALLES.

Call a meeting.
Have a telephone call.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could do it that way. We could
just put a semicolon and say "lesser restraint would be acceptable..."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

How about "might be acceptable"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, that's all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Now, what number do you want to put in

there?
MS. TEETERS.

Shouldn't we put 7-1/2 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
put 7 percent or less.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. PARTEE.
December.

We had 7 percent before?

I think if we leave 7 percent, we have to

"Or somewhat more."

It's 7-1/2 percent.

It's 5-1/2 percent.

MR. MORRIS.
But we could change it to read October through
Then we could put 7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could do that but it's finetuning.
I think we can either put in 5 to 6 percent percent or 7
percent or less.
Or we can change it to October through December and
leave it at 7 percent.
MR. PARTEE.
I think I prefer September to December, Paul.
We [generally] follow this policy and I'd keep it. And I think 5 to 6
percent sounds like a quite respectful growth rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Put 5 to 6 percent?

MR. CORRIGAN. For September-to-December 5 to 6 percent gets
you almost up to the top of alternative A.

on this.

MR. PARTEE.

Or almost down to "C."

MR. MARTIN.

Somewhere between "A" and "C."

MR. PARTEE.

It's just an indicator.

We're not even running

-67-

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind putting in "7 percent or
less," as a matter of fact. I'd just put in the "or less" to take
But 5 to 6 percent
account of the fact that we've had some [slowing].
is all right with me.
MR. PARTEE.

5 to 6 percent or less.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

7 percent or less.

MR. GRAMLEY. That "7 percent or less" sounds so blooming
high that it leaves the whole thing wide open.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, isn't "7 percent or less" saying that
we're staying on the track that we were on but weren't accomplishing?
Isn't that all it's saying? And that implies a higher growth rate
from now until year-end, which is in line with "B."
MR. CORRIGAN. For September-to-December 7 percent growth for
M1 is higher than 9 percent-MR. ROBERTS.

He said "7 percent or less,"

MR. PARTEE.

Zero is a lot less than "C."

MR. MARTIN.

We could say "zero or more"!

I thought.

MR. ROBERTS. I don't think we ought to imply that 5-1/2
percent is the desired path from here forward.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ROBERTS.

Do you think it's too low or too high?

I think it's too low.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We did rebase.
rebasing, I presume, so haven't we-MR. ROBERTS.

You were critical to

Monthly rates aren't affected by rebasing.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. But I don't see the reasons for
pushing hard to get above the bottom of the rebased range.
MR. ROBERTS. I'm not thinking about the base or the range.
I'm thinking about a very restrictive 3-month pattern that is likely
to extend into at least another month, and I would like to see a
pattern of expansion in the money supply from here forward so that
we're getting back more on the track that we set out to be on when we
said we wanted a 7 percent rate of growth.
MR. PARTEE. Well, 5 to 6 percent, Ted would give you what
you would require--quite a lot of expansion.
MR. ROBERTS. Yes, I understand.
with 7 percent or less or 5 to 6 percent.
anything wrong with 7 percent or less.

I could go either way:
I just said I don't see

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can certainly go either way. I
don't think it's a terribly sensitive decision given our ability to--

-68-

11/14-15/83

MS. TEETERS.
I think 5 to 6 percent gives a little more
information to the market.
MR. PARTEE.
I'm worried about the open-end nature of the "or
less."
If we say "or somewhat less," that perhaps is sending it too
high, so I prefer 5 to 6 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.

Do we want 5 to 6 percent?

Yes, 5 to 6 percent.

MR. ROBERTS.
That should imply tightening, while in
actuality we're loosening if we accomplish this. A 5 to 6 percent
growth gives you 7-1/2 percent October to December, and we've been
saying 7 percent from another period. Now if we say 5 to 6 percent,
it sounds like less but it's really more.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to put in a phrase at the
beginning of the sentence such as "Given the relatively slow growth in
October, the Committee anticipated..."?
SPEAKER(?).

That would do it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, are we putting the 6 to 10 percent
[funds rate range] down at the bottom?
MR. PARTEE.
the credit numbers?

Are we looking at the long-term aggregates or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the

We don't put credit numbers in here.

MR. PARTEE. It's in there somewhere--that they are within
[long-term] range or something.
MR. AXILROD.

It's right after that part of the sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the figures aren't right up-to-date
but we have had a quite rapid increase in the liquidity figure through
the period for which we last had figures and the debt figure was
within the range but not low.
MS. TEETERS.

They include Treasury borrowing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They include the Treasury bills. Those
have been going up, commercial paper has been going up, and bankers
acceptances have been going up.
Over the summer liquidity was rising
at an annual rate of around 8 to 12 percent. Anyhow, I guess this is
where we are.
If nobody has any comments, we can vote.
MR. BLACK.
M3 growth?

Mr. Chairman, do we have 8-1/2 percent for M2 and

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
that's what "B" shows.

Yes, 8-1/2 percent for M2 and M3.

I think

MR. ROBERTS. Before we vote, Mr. Chairman, what does this
imply about borrowing?

-69-

11/14-15/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

$650 million.

Steve, is
MR. ROBERTS. May I ask a question of the staff?
the $650 million intended to be consistent with your November and
December [projections of] 6 and 9 percent growth in Ml?
MR. AXILROD. That's what we are projecting but with regard
to 2-month projections for Ml, as the Committee knows, the results can
be highly variable.
MR. ROBERTS. You don't see anything in the level of
borrowing you've been assuming that is associated with these
constrictive growth rates up to now?
MR. AXILROD. Well, we assume that the market conditions
associated with this level of borrowing--I'm not sure I'm answering
your question--would result in roughly a 7-1/2 percent growth in Ml.
Now, the market conditions can be a little variable with this level of
borrowing, depending on other things, and the demand for money can be
a little variable. But that is our best estimate at this time.
MR. ROBERTS.

That's what I wanted to know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
called a big fat guess.

MR. AXILROD.

It's the best estimate, which might be

No, it's a careful study of various models with

judgment applied!
MR. PARTEE.

Plus or minus 300!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What they are saying is that, with this
rate of business activity, they think it's going to pull up M1 even at
the current levels of interest rates and borrowings. But that is a
judgment about this unwinding being over or possibly over.
But who
knows?
MR. AXILROD. And I might add, Mr. Chairman, just in the
context of what was said before about business activity being strong,
that it's not clear to me from the recent performance that that
It could be that people are just
necessarily means stronger Ml.
writing checks on their NOW accounts, which is sort of stored up
savings, and we could get lower Ml with strengthening business
activity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven't looked at the figures in
the last couple of weeks, but I think one can argue that the money
market deposit accounts, which are not in Ml, remain very low, don't
they?
MR. AXILROD.

They are edging up, but essentially--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's beginning to go up again.
But it looks suspiciously like there was this great attraction into
that account when it was first offered. There was a lot of publicity
People put more money in there than
and very high interest rates.
they wanted to hold in there permanently, and as things settle down
they are taking advantage of other slightly higher rates in 6-month

11/14-15/83

-70-

certificates or 3-month certificates or something else. And we may
get some of the same phenomenon perhaps on NOW accounts.
MR. AXILROD. It really isn't worth making a federal case,
but with respect to the alleged pickup in activity in September and
October, if that occurred, the component of M1 that showed the
strength was currency, where growth picked up to 10 percent.
It's
probably a coincidence, but right in that same period the NOW account
growth virtually stopped.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the thing that has looked best over
the past year or the past two years is not Ml but old M1A.
What has
that been doing recently?
MR. AXILROD.
I'll get the figure here in a minute. That
grew very little.
In September and October it picked up to around a 2
percent annual rate of growth, which is slow, and it declined slightly
in August.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you have an increase in currency
offset by a decrease in demand deposits?
MR. AXILROD.

That's right.

MR. WALLICH. Wasn't there a reason for that--namely that the
interest-bearing checkable deposits went up?
So, you can't look at
M1A in isolation anymore.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Except old Ml was just as weak,
apparently, in that time period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, during this very recent period
apparently.
But last year when Ml was going up so rapidly and
velocity was declining, old M1A was not going up so rapidly and the
velocity looked more normal.
That may have been a pure coincidence,
but I-MR. AXILROD. Well, we've had for three months this sort of
unwinding of the build-up in demand deposits, which we were somewhat
at a loss to explain. We really expected that to start coming down
earlier in the summer. We've had that in August, September, and
October. And now we're anticipating that that will stop and will
start going back up.
"maintain the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we have is:
existing degree of reserve restraint."
We have 8-1/2 percent in those
blanks and then "Depending on evidence about the continued strength of
economic recovery and other factors bearing on the business and
inflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable
should the aggregates expand more rapidly; lesser restraint might be
acceptable in the context of a significant shortfall in the growth of
the aggregates from current expectations. Given the relatively slow
growth in October, the Committee anticipates that M1 growth at an
annual rate of around 5 to 6 percent from September to December will
be consistent with its fourth-quarter objectives for the broader
All the rest would remain the same with 6 to 10
aggregates..."
percent [for the funds rate range].

11/14-15/83

-71-

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
Governor Gramley
President Guffey
President Keehn
Governor Martin
President Morris
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
President Roberts
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Secretary?

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

I guess we are finished aren't we, Mr.

END OF MEETING

