Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 19-20, 1983

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 19, 1983, at 3:00 p.m., and
continuing on Tuesday, December 20, 1983, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roberts
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Balles, Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Prell, Siegman,
Scheld, and Zeisel, Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

12/19-20/83

-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff
Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,
Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Koch, Mullineaux, Keran, and
Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, Philadelphia, San
Francisco, and Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Broaddus and Burger, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond and St. Louis
Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
December 19-20, 1983
December 19,

1983--Afternoon Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have an addendum to the minutes from
the last meeting, which has been distributed to you. I'm going to ask
for approval of the minutes as amended. We do need a motion.
MR. MARTIN.

So move.

MR. PARTEE.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Approved, with no objection. You have
seen the Report of Examination, I assume. Is somebody here to talk
about it or to answer questions?
MR. PARTEE.

That's as clean as a whistle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do we have any questions about it?

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I thought I would just ask
about that foreign exchange loss.
Is that due to intervention or swap
agreements or what?
SPEAKER(?).

Not intervention.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

It's mark-to-market, isn't it?

MR. CROSS.
It's due to the change in the value of the dollar
relative to these other currencies.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What policy do we follow now?
Do we
Do we mark-to-market every month?
update these every month?
MR. CROSS. We have to update, that's right.
So, when the
dollar rises relative to the other currencies, in terms of dollars our
currency holdings show up as bookkeeping losses not as realized
[losses].
before we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not permitted to ask questions
[unintelligible], I suppose.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. BLACK.

I beg your pardon?
That's a bad omen!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are there any other questions on it?

MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, with such a clean letter as this,
it makes me wonder about the auditors!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's our own examination people
[unintelligible] looking embarrassed.
MR. PARTEE.
It seemed to be absolutely clean, though.
you say that's right, Clyde?

Would

12/19-20/83

MR. FARNSWORTH.
MR. PARTEE.

No reservations whatsoever?

MR. FARNSWORTH.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, they were quite clean.

Very straight[forward].

Move to accept the report.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't imply anything about the

policy?
MR. PARTEE.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do we have a second?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the absence of any objections, it's
approved.
[The next item on the agenda is] a preliminary report on
contemporaneous reserve accounting. Who is introducing this subject?
Mr. Axilrod?
MR. AXILROD. I'll say a few words and Mr. Sternlight might
also. We really have very little to add, Mr. Chairman, to our eightpage note. The memorandum takes the opportunity to explain how, under
present procedures, one would construct paths under contemporaneous
reserve accounting and review the paths in the course of the two-week
reserve period. The memorandum then goes on to suggest possible
additional procedures or alternatives the Committee may wish to
consider, which introduce [various] degrees of automaticity to take
advantage, so to speak, of the contemporaneous reserve requirements.
These, in effect, would let misses in deposits, strong or weak
relative to the path, be reflected. In the case of strong deposits we
would have somewhat higher borrowings, and in the case of weak
deposits somewhat lower borrowings within the reserve period--to some
degree automatically, depending on the limits the Committee may wish
to set, if indeed it wants to go in that direction. We suggested a
couple of rather arbitrary procedures, that the Committee may want to
consider, in a somewhat limited effort to get at this under current
conditions, where there's some uncertainty about the meaning and the
use the Committee may wish to make of Ml, the variable to which
contemporaneous requirements are tied. I don't know if Mr. Sternlight
would like to add a word or two.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think Steve summarized the note that
came from us. But the little that I would add at this point is that
we still would have, I assume, nonborrowed reserve targets for each
reserve period. I would see those as remaining the central focus of
Desk activity. With a two-week rather than a one-week period, our
perspective would change somewhat, but I think the main focus would
still be on the full reserve period. With a longer settlement period,
we would probably give more attention to the profile of excesses or
deficiencies within the full period. To some extent, we still would
look at weekly reserve levels, but there wouldn't be the same need as
now to strive to meet those individual weekly targets. But we
probably would want to avoid sizable accumulations of excesses or
deficiencies within the two-week span. I don't see any need for
different operational techniques from what we work with now.

12/19-20/83

MR. BOEHNE. Do you have some sense as to how much more
variability there might be in the funds rate?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it might depend on how one responds
to the point that Steve was outlining about the degree of automaticity
the Committee may want to permit to occur.
MR. AXILROD. We have two problems to look at. We have a
longer reserve period by one week; we have a two-week period. Right
now within the reserve period we have some variability, particularly
on the last day of the week or before the weekend on special holidays
or something like that. What we can't tell is--and we've surveyed a
number of banks--[how banks may change] their reserve management
procedures under contemporaneous reserve accounting. The answer
generally is that they don't plan to change anything they have been
doing, and they were doing different things. They're going to
estimate their required reserves; I think they're going to be off to a
degree. And then they're going to continue doing what they have been
doing. Those who tried to play the funds rate within a one-week
period are going to continue that and try to play it within a two-week
period. And those who wanted to stay in balance day-by-day are going
to try to stay in balance day-by-day. With a two-week period there is
a greater opportunity to run bigger deficiencies or surpluses in the
course of the period. That means there's more they have to make up
later. So, it seems to me there is some possibility of a lot more
variability in the funds rate within a period if banks happen to allow
big deficiencies to pile up and then wait until the 14th day, so to
speak, and have to make up twice as much as they previously did.
That's one factor. On the average, in a two-week reserve period, our
research suggested we missed on our required reserves estimate by $100
million or so, after some revision in the course of the period. And
that would have almost an unnoticeable effect, I would suspect, on the
average funds rate variability. Of course, if the Committee were to
permit a more deliberate miss, that might add a little to it and there
could be some more effect. I'm not able to quantify it to any great
degree, but I would suspect we would have somewhat more variability
within the period and from period to period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [With regard to] the miss in required
reserves that is discovered at the end of the period, to what degree
is that related to a change in Ml and to what degree is it related to
other factors?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was thinking of a miss in general when
I gave that $100 million figure--$100 to $200 million is what I think
I have in here as the [average] miss. I don't have it refined at the
moment between what might be so-called multiplier misses on government
deposits and interbank deposits and what might be just Ml itself.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
with further looking?

Can you say anything sensible about that

MR. AXILROD. I think probably with some detailed looking we
might be able to break it [down].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Partee.

That might be worthwhile.

Governor

12/19-20/83

MR. PARTEE. Am I right, Steve, that this doesn't begin until
the first of February?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The date it begins is the first of

February?
MR. AXILROD. The reserve maintenance period begins Thursday,
the 4th and for deposits it's Tuesday, the 2nd of February.
MR. PARTEE.
So, we're talking about something that could
receive attention again at the next meeting, I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a little problem here, it
seems to me.
It occurs to me that we better tell the market what
we're doing; we should have a little statement. I don't know how
we're going to come up with a statement before the next meeting.
MR. GRAMLEY. One problem I had with the analysis is that it
What
seems to imply that we're looking at Ml as our principal target.
What do we do in a world of CRR if we're continuing
I'm wondering is:
to target primarily on M2?
It seems to me that we ought to have an
If we [use Ml], we would be changing our operating
analysis of that.
techniques in that event.
MR. PARTEE. That was going to be my comment, too. This
gives us the opportunity for paying more attention to nonborrowed
reserves and letting shortfalls and excesses show through.
But that
does seem to me to require some determination by the Committee as to
the amount of emphasis it wants to put on M1.
That's why I asked
Also, the figures
about the timing. It could be deferred somewhat.
may be suspect for a while, given the [new] procedures and all that.
Peter said we will be setting nonborrowed reserves just as we do now,
but my impression is that what we set now is borrowings, not
nonborrowed reserves. And if we really did set nonborrowed reserves
again, and then contemporaneously it ran off, that would put pressure
on the discount window, as was our typical mode of operation when we
voted to put in contemporaneous reserves.
So, I think it all needs to
be considered in that context.
I guess I'm doing this as much as
anything to remind the Committee that one of the decisions we need to
make is the attention to be paid to Ml.
I would ask the
MR. BALLES.
That's a good point, Chuck.
question:
If we went back to the approximately equal [weight]
scenario that we had some years ago, that would not take care of all
It might take care of what-of the problems we're raising, would it?
half?
MR. PARTEE.
I think the proposal, if I understood it from
the staff, was that we might start off letting 25 percent of the
overshoots and undershoots show through automatically and that might
not be too inconsistent with something like equal attention to the set
of the aggregates. But perhaps Steve ought to answer that.
MR. AXILROD. In sum, the problem we had in analyzing M2 is
that if you are thinking of an automaticity in response, there is none
The only
on M2 except to the degree that its Ml component moves.
required reserves that move contemporaneously, after adjusting for

12/19-20/83

-5-

multipliers, are those on Ml.
So, anything the Committee wants to do
with M2--that is if M2 were weak and the Committee wanted to move
borrowing or whatever--could be done quite independently of
contemporaneous reserve accounting. You wouldn't need contemporaneous
reserve accounting to do that. We were trying to think of things that
were in some sense uniquely related to contemporaneous reserve
accounting. And with a lag we could observe M2 and make whatever
adjustments in response to changes in M2 the Committee wished to see
made. But the question that arises with contemporaneous reserves is
automaticity--letting it happen if we aim at a nonborrowed or total
reserve figure. What happens is pretty much purely Ml, if we make the
proper multiplier adjustments in a contemporaneous way. M2, to the
extent it is affected, is only [affected] by Ml.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, I guess I was reading between the lines.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
adjustment for M2.

In a particular week we could make an

MR. AXILROD. Sure you can. There's no question about it.
My only point was that that wasn't uniquely related to the
contemporaneous reserve accounting. That could be done either way.
MR. PARTEE. That's why I thought you suggested 25 percent-to give some weight but not overwhelming weight to Ml behavior.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. And we did have in there at one
point a paragraph that I took out about the various things to do if
the Committee wanted to put some weight on M2. But that didn't strike
me as uniquely related to the contemporaneous reserve accounting. We
always have done that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we don't make any more changes
in our procedures than Steve and Peter have suggested, I think we're
missing a mighty good opportunity on our control mechanism. At least
some of us supported this [change to CRR] primarily in the hope that
eventually we'd be able to control total reserves better than we could
under the lagged system. It's rather painful to me since I had
something to do with the lagged system and I hate to see the one
contribution I thought I had made go down the drain and turn out not
to be a contribution! But in any event, I became persuaded that we
could control total reserves better under this system than we could
under the lagged system. I recognize, of course, that the two-day lag
imposes some of the same problems that we had with the full lag, but
not quite as much. And if we deemphasize Ml, then certainly we pretty
well have to stick to the procedures that Peter and Steve were talking
about. But I hope that this is just an initial step toward moving
eventually to emphasizing Ml. If we assume that the present
nonborrowed reserve target procedures are going to be continued under
this new regime then, as I think Steve has indicated, with this
greater variability in federal funds we ought to be prepared to let
that much show through to the extent that [the variability] results
from unexpected changes in required reserves stemming from demandinduced changes in Ml. That would be a self-correcting brake on
I also think we ought to install
whatever might be happening [to Ml].
as much automaticity in this as we possibly can. Right now, under our

12/19-20/83

present procedures, the Committee is really out of it once it chooses
its initial borrowing target unless we have another meeting. And this
puts a tremendous burden on you, Mr. Chairman, in deciding the extent
to which the borrowing target will be altered. I would greatly favor
a more automatic procedure because it would probably operate better.
The only alternative is an ad hoc procedure. So, I think the 25
percent is unduly low.
Finally, it seems to me that if the system is going to work
very well at all, we have to force the banks to adjust during that
part of the reserve maintenance period that overlaps the other period.
This would mean that in the last two days of that reserve maintenance
period we ought not to let federal funds be subject to overly strict
control or else the banks and other depository institutions are not
going to adjust during this two-week period at the beginning. If we
don't do some of these things, or move in that direction, we really
have put the banking system and now the thrift industry through a
tremendous amount of pain and suffering for something that's really
not going to make us that much better off. We are not only going to
have a lot of trouble computing these things but, in my judgment,
we're apt to get a lot of errors because it's frightfully complicated.
We have to make use of these potential improvements in the mechanism,
it seems to me, or else it's all for naught.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS. It has been my assumption that the purpose of
contemporaneous reserves, which have involved an enormous effort to
put in place, is to improve control over the aggregates, particularly
Ml.
I don't want to repeat what President Black said; I'd like to
associate myself entirely with his views. I concur with him.
If the purpose is
I was going to ask the question, Steve:
better control of the money supply, wouldn't we be better off
targeting on total reserves?
I think we should [exercise] reduced
flexibility rather than the other way around. The only problem that I
can see from that is increased volatility of interest rates, which I
think the market would adjust to readily.
MR. AXILROD. Well, if we had every multiplier adjustment
right, that would probably be the case. We don't normally get the mix
even in money supply type deposits--those at small banks and those at
large banks--exactly right. So, that tends to throw us off.
MR. ROBERTS. The multiplier differences are generally very
short term, though, aren't they?
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right; they might average through.
But on the technical side, the study we did a couple of years ago-before we had contemporaneous reserves, but even after we tried to
allow for it--seemed to suggest, surprisingly, that nonborrowed
reserves were probably better in controlling Ml on a month-by-month
basis than total reserves so long as we didn't have exactly the same
reserve requirement on all types of demand deposits. We have reduced
zero, a small
those variabilities. We only have three classes now:
one, and a large one. Still, I would suggest that you would be
surprised that total reserves would [not] do quite as well as you
think it would.

12/19-20/83

MR. ROBERTS. I'm thinking about our target in recent months
and our actual experience and wondering about our control.
MR. BLACK. Steve, this gets closely at the point that
Chairman Volcker was raising a while ago. Two kinds of demand
deposits are in there that are [not] normally in Ml: government
deposits and interbank deposits. I would think one could pretty well
estimate what they are going to do over an extended period of time; at
least what little work I've done on it suggests that. Insofar as
shifts between large banks and small banks [are concerned], yes, in
the short run that is important; but over the long run I wouldn't
think that really messes us up very much. The whole thing has been
designed--at least I've perceived it this way and I'm sure others have
also or it wouldn't have [been adopted]--to control Ml because, as you
mentioned, that's the only aggregate that is subject to
contemporaneous reserve requirements. All the rest, M2 and M3, are
subject to lagged reserves. So, we go into a reserve period and
supply what reserves are needed against those liabilities that have
been lagged. Then we put in an additional amount to take care of the
interbank and government deposits plus what we think is necessary to
achieve the right expansion in Ml.
I believe that's manageable,
although, of course, we have to agree that we want to control Ml
before we can do that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, it seems to me that we ought not to use
the existence of CRR as a reason to go to M1 or not to go to Ml. We
ought to give more or less weight to Ml depending on our judgment as
to how good an intermediate target it is. CRR is a means to an end;
it seems to me that we have the argument backwards when we say we
ought to put [more weight on] Ml because we now have CRR. There is
probably a case to treat Ml on the same footing as M2 and M3--not that
Ml is particularly good, but it's not a whole lot worse than the other
two. So, I think there is a case to give it equal weight. If we give
it nearly equal weight or equal weight, there is a case for some
degree of automaticity, and it strikes me that something like 25
percent is not a bad way to start. It's a reasonable blend with which
to begin to experiment. But the main point is that we ought to judge
Ml on its merits; I don't think whether we have CRR or not is a reason
pro or con to give additional weight to Ml.
MR. BLACK.
misled you.

If you thought that was my [predilection], Ed, I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. It seems to me, as has already been said around
the table, that if we really are going to implement CRR and make it
meaningful, we have to elevate Ml to the essential, intermediate
target we follow. I have two comments about that: First, I do not
believe the informational content in Ml relative to income is
sufficient that I would be prepared to do that; and secondly, we're
moving into a period where the commercial banks are learning how to
operate under contemporaneous reserves and that uncertainty would
suggest that at least for some period of time--maybe as much as six
months--we would want to continue to operate very much as we have in
the past. We may want to run an experiment along the side to see what

12/19-20/83

would happen if we adjusted 25 or 50 percent. But I would not run
policy in the upcoming period--at least until July--given the
uncertainty that falls out of CRR and the uncertainty that falls out
of the relationship of Ml to the real economy. As a result, I would
propose that we not change operating procedures until we get a good
deal more experience than what we will have on February 2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I was not terribly sympathetic with the
procedures we followed from October '79 to October '82 in the first
place and I haven't looked back on that period with any different
view. I'm even more reluctant to see us go in that direction now by
elevating Ml even partially toward an intermediate target or by
increasing automaticity. That's not just a matter of week-to-week or
day-to-day or even month-to-month variability in the funds rate that
we would be looking at, but it's the fact that we're looking at
relationships between Ml and GNP since the fourth quarter of 1981 that
simply have no parallel in prior history. To make it very simple, let
me take the past several months. The staff has been anticipating a
substantial increase in the growth rate of Ml, as I have, because we
have such a strong economy. It hasn't happened.
If we had had the
kind of operating techniques that we did earlier and they were
augmented by CRR, we would have experienced in the past couple of
months a very substantial decline in interest rates. And from my
reading of the economy, we need a decline in interest rates and a
stimulus to economy activity to go with the fiscal stimulus like we
In my judgment, we're looking at a very
need holes in our heads.
strong economy--an economy in which the risks are too much expansion,
rather than too little, and more inflationary pressures.
I recognize
that not everybody agrees with that, but that's my view. And that's
why I would be very, very reluctant to see us go back to an automatic
response pattern and the use of Ml as an intermediate target now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. There has been some change, at least in my
thinking, and I think in the broader perception, of the desirability
of very tight money control since we adopted CRR. We went to CRR, I
think, in order to achieve this tighter control of the aggregates;
we've seen that it can miscarry.
I have become more concerned about
wide fluctuations in interest rates and, therefore, more concerned
about the possible consequences of a rigorous application of
contemporaneous reserve requirements on an M1 basis and on a fully
automatic basis. We made this decision and I think we have to move
somewhat in that direction. Also, I don't think we can be quite as
relaxed about Ml as we had a right to be while it was misbehaving. I
think it is beginning to establish somewhat greater credibility but
it's certainly still under some degree of suspicion. So, since CRR
does point toward Ml, with the relevant reserves that are
contemporaneous being for the most part against Ml, I think we can't
I
avoid giving more weight, though perhaps not full weight, to Ml.
think some automaticity is desirable because that's the nature of the
whole operation.
If we didn't have automaticity, why have any form of
contemporaneous or lagged reserve control? But I would not make it
total; something in the range that has been suggested by the staff
strikes me as a reasonable compromise.

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, as almost everybody knows, I was never
persuaded by the case for CRR to begin with and I'm still not.
I
never thought it would make that much difference in terms of how well
we could control Ml even if we decided that we wanted to control M1
and nothing else. I do agree with Mr. Boehne's point, however, that
the logically prior decision here is what we want to do with Ml.
But
quite apart from that, I must say that my hunch is that we're going to
end up with more [interest rate] variability than Steve and Peter seem
to expect. That's just my hunch; I can't prove it either, but I think
that's the way things are going to go--that we're going to have more
noise and little or no improvement in the control of Ml.
So, if I
really had my druthers, I'd drop the whole thing. But I don't think
we can do that.
I think it does argue, though, for what I would call
a "go slow approach," particularly for the first few months.
I have
always liked a degree of automaticity but I would be willing to
compromise that in the interest of trying to get this in place in an
orderly way.
I suspect that the full impact on data flows and on the
operations of cash managers of big banks and small banks has not been
fully digested in spite of the enormous amount of work that has been
going on around the Federal Reserve in trying to get people up to
speed on this.
In short, I don't think the operational impact either
on us or on the banks has been fully digested up to this point. That
again would argue, in my way of thinking, for a go slow approach. As
far as our own operations are concerned, I must say that I did not
walk away from reading the memo with a great deal of confidence that
we know what we should do ourselves, much less that we know how the
banks will respond to what we do.
Maybe I missed something but the
bottom line is that I'm distinctly uneasy about the whole thing.
MR. AXILROD. We were pained, Mr. Corrigan, to leave options
for the Committee and not make a recommendation that would sound as if
we were certain about how we're going to approach it.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not thinking so much of your 25
percent [suggestion] in there.
I'm just thinking of what lies behind
all that. This question of whether we have a miss because of what you
call multipliers as opposed to a shift in money demand is a profoundly
important question. Which side of that coin one is on [is important]
even on a week-to-week basis.
It seems to me that it's going to have
very, very sizable implications for the amount of noise in the money
market.
MR. AXILROD.

Mr. Chairman, there is one thing--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are you going to give us a little analysis

of it?
MR. AXILROD. Yes, but I thought in the context of this
discussion that there is one thing that perhaps is not clear enough
[about] the automaticity in response to Ml.
For example, if M1 were
weak by an amount that said borrowing would drop, say, $50 million in
that week, we did not necessarily concede that the next week we would
start off at a lower level of borrowing. That would be a matter of
decision for the Committee.
So, for example, if M1 were weak and M2
were on track or strong, with any automaticity in there, borrowing

-10-

12/19-20/83

might be $50 million [lower one] week but the next week we could start
off with borrowing where it was earlier.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We always come within $50 million anyway!

MR. AXILROD. That's right! And the next week if Ml were
strong, borrowing would be up $50 million and it could fluctuate; we
wouldn't make judgmental adjustments of borrowing unless the whole
bunch of the aggregates seemed weak or strong relative to the
Committee's anticipation or whatever rule the Committee might want to
use.
MR. PARTEE. When you say $50 million, where do you start
off--where you were before?
I don't quite understand.
MR. AXILROD. Well, suppose we started off a week at $650
million, as we have been doing, and we got all the multipliers correct
and all that and by the time we were through the two-week period, Ml
in fact was weak to the extent that borrowing dropped $50 million and
ended up at $600 million. Then the question comes up: What level of
borrowing do we start the next week with?
I'm saying, unless the
Committee says otherwise, we would start at $650 million again and
then if Ml is strong that makes up for that and we would be up to $700
million of borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To put it in perspective:
$50 million
would imply a $500 million dollar weakness in Ml from where we were,
roughly.
MR. PARTEE.
I guess I would have thought if we had let
borrowing drift down from $650 to $600 million because of a weakness
in Ml one week, that if Ml were then strong the next week, thus
offsetting the [previous weakness], we'd drift back to $650 million
from $600 million.
It seems we might get a progressive movement if we
always went back to where we thought we should have been.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's [an issue] we are raising. The
Committee can decide whether it wants to cumulate, which would be to
go up to $650 million [in this example] or stay at the $600 million as
the way to take account of M2 and M3 and everything else.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we had a week in
our perfect seasonal, went up by $5 billion--if
week of that sort--when we were thinking it was
billion, borrowing would go up by $400 million,
perfectly arranged.
MR. AXILROD.
we'd be better off.

If we took the full

which Ml, according to
you could imagine a
going to go up $1
all that being

100 percent; at 25 percent

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite understand this taking a 100
percent or 50 percent. You're not going to know what the figure is;
you don't know what to take 50 percent of.
You're right that there
MR. AXILROD. We have our estimates.
is always going to be the noise from the errors in the estimate.

-11-

12/19-20/83

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the statements
of Governor Gramley. I opposed moving to contemporaneous reserve
accounting on the grounds that it didn't make sense unless one
believed that Ml was a sensible target for policy.
But now that we've
made this investment, I think we ought to look upon it as a sunk cost
and as something that we will have in place in the event we ever
seriously want to go to pursuing Ml again. I don't think the fact
that we've made this investment should automatically push us into
changing the way we're currently running monetary policy. I agree
with Lyle:
I think it would have been a big mistake if we had had
this in place 6 months ago and had pursued a much more aggressively
easy policy, which we would have had to do.
I don't think we can
substitute this new system, in this context, for the good judgment we
have been using.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it is analytically correct
that we went out and bought a potato digger but we don't have to plant
the potatoes.
MR. PARTEE.

We can plant them; we don't have to water them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, it seems to me that CRR more than implies a
higher level of control of the aggregates and, whether we like it or
not, it's going to be with us on February 1st.
There has been an
enormous effort expended by us and by the commercial banks. And I
would hope that for all of this trial and tribulation and money we'd
be able to deliver something. It seems to me that all this does imply
a much greater emphasis on Ml than we have been giving it recently.
We have been through a period of significant adjustment; I think we
would be making a mistake if we did not use this as an opportunity to
move to reemphasize Ml.
I would in no way suggest that we ought to
put the system on automatic but I wouldn't lose the opportunity.
I'd
begin to reemphasize Ml as our principal aggregate.
I would plant the
potato.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You're going to plant a small field!

Mrs.

Teeters.
MS. TEETERS.
As you well know, I objected to CRR all the way
along and I associate myself with reservations about Ml as a major
target in policy and about its relevance to GNP. But I'm more
concerned that if we go to any degree of automaticity, we're going to
get increasing volatility in the interest rates.
Can you give us some
estimates, Steve?
If we go to 10, 20, 25, or 50 percent automaticity,
what degree of volatility will we reintroduce into the interest rate
structure?
MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Teeters, our best guess has
always been, that we get 20 to 25 basis points per 100.
It seems a
little less.
MS. TEETERS.

Per 100 of what?

MR. AXILROD. A hundred million dollars of borrowing. We
thought [a change of] something like $400 to $500 million in borrowing
would result in a one percentage point [change in interest rates].

-12-

12/19-20/83

Now, we've gone through $400 to $500 million of borrowing with
virtually no movement in the funds rate in the process of which we've
declared that there were shifts in the demand for borrowing, shifts in
the demand for excess reserves. And making those judgments has tended
in some sense to moderate these movements, or the banks have just not
cared. We haven't gotten those kinds of movements. So, I would not
really want to swear on a stack of Bibles that a $500 million
borrowing change will give you 1 percentage point. But I would say
that with a $50 million change in borrowing within a week one is not
going to discern the effects relative to the noise. It has to
accumulate to begin to move the funds rate in some sort of trend way.
MS. TEETERS. Well, what are you referring to as "noise"?
was interpreting that as being volatility in the interest rates.

I

MR. AXILROD. I meant the variation [at the end of a
statement period.] Mr. Sternlight aims at a nonborrowed reserve path
constructed from some borrowing assumption and some knowledge of the
demand for excess reserves. The noise that I meant was what happens
to it on the last day of the statement week when the factors affecting
reserves other than his actions vary by $2 billion, say, or when
required reserves relative to expectations change by a lot.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

For reasons other than a change in Ml.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, and changes that we hadn't allowed for; we
were estimating but we missed. And that will either add to that $2
billion or subtract from it; they could be offsetting. To the degree
that it adds, there is going to be a result in the relation in free
reserves or nonborrowed--they are the same--that is different from
what we were aiming at. That's a kind of noise in the system, I would
say. The additional noise is how banks decide to manage their
reserves over a two-week period. If they suddenly get it into their
heads that the funds rate is going down when it isn't, they are going
to get themselves into a deep hole and at the end of the statement
week they are going to have to borrow a lot. Over a 14-day period
they might have to borrow, instead of $3 billion on the [last] day, $6
or $7 billion. That will put a lot more pressure on the funds rate
than they have been used to. So, over a two-week period there is a
little more capacity for noise, depending on how banks manage their
reserves and what [rate] expectations they have for one reason or
another.
MR. ROBERTS.
SPEAKER(?).

Even banks learn!
Over time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

More slowly than most other people!

MS. TEETERS. Well, I think one of the great costs of the
period from '79 to '82 was the high volatility of rates--not only the
short-term rates but the long-term rates. What I'm really concerned
about is that I simply don't want to get back into a situation in
which that sort of volatility reoccurs.
MR. AXILROD. I didn't mean that as "noise".
seems to me to be the product of the controls of--

I meant what

12/19-20/83

-13-

MS. TEETERS. But the more automaticity we build into the
system, the greater the volatility is going to be.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're almost bound to get more volatility
in the very short run, whatever we build into this. I think--we'll
see--that just [the nature of] this system is going to give us more
very short-run volatility.
MR. AXILROD.

Probably.

MS. TEETERS. But one of the things that was most damaging
was that the short-term volatility got translated into the long-term
market.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably happened over a longer period
of time--volatility over a month, two months. I'm not sure. That's
an open question. But I think within a two-week period we're going to
get more.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MS. TEETERS.

Unless we offset it.

Unless we offset it.

MR. BLACK. We should get more variation in the federal funds
rate concomitant with that. If we hit our target on a more regular
basis, I wonder if we'd really have that much volatility in other
short-term rates. I can see very easily that we would in the federal
funds rate. And I'm not sure it follows in longer-term rates.
MR. GRAMLEY. That was the argument that was used in October
'79: You don't have to worry much because most of the variation would
be in the funds rate, a little in the short-term market rates, but the
long rates would hardly react--particularly after the markets have an
opportunity to adjust. And that just didn't happen at all.
MR. BLACK.
am talking about.

But we didn't hit our targets as regularly as I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm one of those who
never really understood completely how CRR was going to give us more
precision with respect to the monetary aggregates. But that's water
over the dam, as other people have said, and I think we have to go
forward with the program. But I think there's going to be an awful
lot of confusion out there right up until February 1st, particularly
among the smaller and medium-size banks. That confusion is going to
reign supreme for some weeks after we introduce this system. So, I
don't think we ought to go in any way to any automaticity at this
point. I would much prefer to see us go slowly. Automaticity has a
certain amount of logical appeal, but I think the timing is wrong in
terms of the implementation of CRR. The other point that I really
would like to make--and perhaps this also has been said--is that I
don't think we ought to be looking at the question of CRR's
relationship to Ml. The question ought to be asked the other way
around. The threshold question it seems to me is: What target does
the Committee really want to focus on? We ought not to be pushed into
one or the other because of a technical accounting system. And I

12/19-20/83

-14-

happen to think at this point in my membership on this Committee that
M1 is a pretty good target and one that has a pretty good relationship
to GNP. Others have argued that around the table before. But it's a
question that we now have an opportunity to look at in great depth and
I think we ought to seize the opportunity before CRR becomes effective
to zero in on what we really want to target on.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I guess I'll resist the temptation of asking,
Mr. Chairman, why we decided to go back to CRR in view of all of this.
But passing beyond that, first I'd like to associate myself with the
view that Ed Boehne expressed so well:
Just because we have CRR
doesn't mean we necessarily should revert to Ml as the primary
intermediate target. However, I consider it personally a rather
fortunate piece of timing in that I'm convinced--as some others are
around the table, though many are not--that we are in the process of
witnessing a new behavior of Ml where it's going to be more reliable.
We're beyond that stage where velocity dropped in that unprecedented
manner in '82 or early '83 and, therefore, we now can begin to rely
more on Ml, as we used to do.
If that's the case, and it happens that
it has come along just at a time when we could have some automaticity
in Ml--not complete in my view--then some automaticity would not be
damaging; it probably would be desirable. I wouldn't want, as Si
Keehn said--I think it was you, Si--to go fully automatic. But I
think it's time we went partly that way. I come out, bottom line, in
much the same way as Si Keehn and Ted Roberts and Bob Black did.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I join those of our colleagues who
have been accepting the hypothesis that we will have more volatility
in short-term rates, perhaps spilling over into long-term rates, by a
closer adherence to M1 targeting, or by CRR. And if indeed there is
to be some degree of increased volatility as a result of our moving in
that direction, it seems to me that the risks in 1984 and in 1985
should be kept in mind and would mitigate against our moving in that
direction. I'm thinking, of course, of the international debt
situation, of the efficacy of business fixed investment as a
sustaining force in the expansion, of housing, and obviously of
commercial construction, which I think is going to be the next REIT
disaster and which is susceptible to the influence of [interest]
rates. It seems to me that there is some potential reward, but it's
rather a paper reward, of controlling M1 better. But how long is it
going to take us to learn what velocity is going to be and what trend
line is going to emerge--either the old one or a new one? How long is
it going to be before we can see what the relationship of this new one
is with regard to the economy?
I think we may, as a group, have a
more favorable look at M1 and at a more automatic procedure later. I
am sure that many in the markets will continue to feel, surmise,
believe in, or have faith in M1 and its close relationship with
economic activity. As long as that belief is out there, it's
something we have to deal with. But now with the unknowns with regard
to velocity and M1 and the risks to this economy by increasing the
volatility of interest rates, I simply think we should wait.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me draw several conclusions.
think it is logically or otherwise correct that simply because we

I

12/19-20/83

-15-

adopted contemporaneous reserve requirements, for better or for worse,
we don't have to arrange our policy from now until eternity to take
maximum advantage of that operationally. That's a separate decision
and logically comes first. Secondly, I do have the sense that there's
enough uncertainty about this [CRR] that we're not going to want to do
anything very radical in the very first months of its introduction.
There may be very little change. Thirdly, I think we really have to
say whether we're going to do anything very different or what we're
going to do because there will be [a lot of] confusion around. And if
this process begins on February 2nd, inevitably I guess we're going to
have to say something before then.
As a footnote, I want to be reminded that we may have to
advance the next meeting, anyway--which will be convenient for this
reason, I suppose--because I might have to testify before the Lincoln
Day recess in the Congress. If so, that doesn't give us enough time
[between] the meeting as it is now scheduled [and] the testimony. I
don't know that for certain at the moment, but we may have to get back
with you to see about a date roughly a week earlier [than now
If we do that, we can then decide precisely what we want
scheduled].
to say, although even then it will be getting kind of late, I suppose.
It might be that there will be a lot of questions. I would prepare at
least one version or maybe two or three versions of precisely what an
announcement might say as to how we're going to handle this at least
for some transitional period while we at least make sure that the
statistics come in in an orderly and predictable way.
Then, finally, I think the question is: What weight do we
want to put on the different aggregates, which is the natural subject
of the discussion at the next meeting in terms of setting targets;
we're going to have to discuss it anyway. People probably have
different opinions about whether we will want to make any major
changes, but it is a natural focus of the discussion. But even if we
put a lot of weight on Ml, I wouldn't be prepared to put full weight
on it for at least a brief transitional period to gin up an operating
[procedure] just because we have contemporaneous reserves, simply to
get the operating bugs out at the extreme.
MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you on that
entirely, but I think we've left unsaid here one point that is
important. And that is: In this interim high-risk period of 6 months
we've built very wide latitudes on reserve requirements and we've
essentially made the smaller banks immune to the process, which I
think reduces the risk. It doesn't eliminate it, but it certainly
reduces it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll see how it goes. I don't have
a good feel for it. On Ml itself, just to make one substantive point,
I have some feeling that it's getting a little better but I don't know
why. It has been way off on the low side, and seeing it come back
from that I guess makes everybody feel a lot more comfortable. But we
have one quarter of an exceptionally large rise in velocity now. So,
while I have a feeling that maybe it is going to be reacting a little
more normally, we surely can't prove it by any figure we've seen at
any particular point in the past quarter anyway.
MR. MORRIS.

I think Ml is a random walk.

-16-

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOEHNE.

Well, I'm not quite willing to say that.

I'm surprised to hear you say that, Frank!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'd hate to have to pick out today what
the trend is going to be over the next three years, even though I have
the feeling that it may be a little more reliable.
I'll know more
three years from now. Well, is there anything else to be said on this
subject?
We will see once we set the date of the next meeting, but we
may either have to circulate something to you in writing before then
or have a telephone call or something because I do have the suspicion
that people in the market and everybody else are going to ask what
this is going to do and how we are going to conduct ourselves. They
will ask whether we are going to do something radically different and
we ought to tell them.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I make one more observation?
On this automatic part, suppose we've agreed that Ml deserves a little
more emphasis than it now has; if it runs above target and
consequently required reserves are higher than the path, we can either
adjust the borrowing up automatically or we can do it on an ad hoc
basis. Since we've not been emphasizing Ml to any great degree, these
adjustments in the borrowed reserve targets have all been on an ad hoc
basis. There's no way the Committee can realistically participate in
those decisions. That has to be left up to you in consultation with
Steve and Peter or however you want to do it. And that is the point:
That is the only alternative to some kind of automatic adjustment
mechanism, if in fact we're going to pay any attention at all to Ml.
I think we ought to focus on that part of it.
I'm quite willing to
delegate that to you, but I'm not sure whether I'd be that willing to
delegate it to your successor, whoever he might be.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On this M1 issue, I don't know what the
figures look like, but I was looking at this so-called experimental
seasonal, for what it's worth, that we publish figures on.
The
monthly figures look quite different.
MR. AXILROD. We publish them weekly. Yes, [they look
different].
In terms of absolute variations, though, be aware that
the average absolute variation of the experimental, both monthly and
weekly, is just about equal to the average absolute variation of the
regular series.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

They look erratic in different ways.

That's the way I see it.

Very different

[timing].

MR. ROBERTS. We don't get growth in December on this
experimental [version].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, and it shows a sizable growth in
November, I think. That brings it to--

-17-

12/19-20/83

MR. AXILROD. And the weekly changes in the experimental
series are sometimes larger than in the regular series.
MR. ROBERTS. The seasonals wouldn't affect the reserve
requirements, would they?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because the target is set forth in
seasonally adjusted figures. We live in an eerie world of seasonal
adjustment, but when they are converted into-MR. ROBERTS.

They're real, but they're converted--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but they're converted from a target
that is seasonally adjusted.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask Steve about that point?
Steve, what do you think about the merits of the experimental
[seasonal] versus the regular one? We've done some work that suggests
that the seasonals are probably bad for the last part [of the year].
Hence, we didn't have as much of a burst in Ml earlier and we haven't
had as much of a slowdown since then. What one believes on that makes
a lot of difference, I think, in where one comes out.
MR. AXILROD. Well, my memory is that if you look at the two
series on a quarterly basis, the pattern doesn't look very different.
There are small differences, but not big ones. There is somewhat
slower growth, I think, in the experimental [series].
I'm not sure of
this in the second half, quarter-over-quarter. But month-to-month, if
you look at the second half, the growth rate in the experimental
series drops somewhere around July--I may be off by a month--and then
with the exception of one negative month where it's -0.5 percent, it
fluctuates between 3 and 7 percent. So, it tends to look as if it has
dropped down to a new 5 percent or so growth rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, it looks much more like a drop to a

plateau than--

MR. AXILROD. Whereas the other series looks like it was
going along strongly and suddenly it dropped to 2 or 3 percent for
four months. It gives a slightly different look to Ml. Up to that
point I had been getting prepared to recommend to the Board that we
drop the experimental series, mainly because it wasn't showing any
less volatility. I had the feeling, therefore, that it was just
proving that weekly and monthly seasonals are difficult to get at and
that Ml is an inherently volatile series. That's how I would
interpret Ml. But now it looks as if the experimental series has made
a comeback. It seems to me that it still has some value and I would
tend to recommend that it be continued, but certainly only
experimentally. It hasn't demonstrated--and we haven't found--a way
to make the weekly seasonal variation less.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I conclude from it is that,
as Steve is suggesting, weekly and monthly seasonals are very
treacherous and we shouldn't assume too much. But [the results] are
quite different, depending on which seasonal one uses.

-18-

12/19-20/83

MS. TEETERS. Well, that argues even more strongly against
any large degree of automaticity. If our current data are highly
volatile, we don't quite know where we are.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're back in that old dilemma:
If
we wait too long, we've waited too long; and if we react too quickly,
we've reacted too quickly.
MR. BLACK.

It's hard to argue with that one!

MR. AXILROD. As a technical point, Mr. Chairman, a two-week
reserve period has the advantage of averaging through a little, in
some sense; it has the disadvantage of delaying [us] ever so slightly.

subject?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else to be said on this
We will turn to Mr. Kichline.
MR. KICHLINE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We can have some Committee
discussion, which I would hope would focus as much as possible on what
risks, probabilities, or otherwise, people may see looking out 6 to 12
months ahead either on economic activity or on prices.
Mr. Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE.
I think if I were sitting where Jim is sitting,
I would probably come up with about the same forecast, but I suspect
that the economy is going to turn out to be a good bit stronger next
year than the standard forecast.
I think that what we have here is a
cumulative self-feeding momentum that will deliver a stronger economy
so that the total, in effect, is stronger than seemingly the
individual parts.
I've talked to a lot of people from a lot of
different industries in my District in recent weeks and I think terms
like euphoric and ebullient and buoyant are very descriptive [of their
views].
If I heard these kinds of reports from my good friend Bob
Boykin I would say:
"Well, that's Texas."
But when I hear them in
Pennsylvania and around the Third District, which has generally been
on the slow side, that tells me something about what is happening to
this self-feeding momentum and to the psychology. My board, which
generally has been on the bearish side--we have some industries that
have been hit fairly hard--in its meeting last week was concerned for
the first time in memory that perhaps things were moving along too
quickly to be sustainable.
Now, having said that on that side, I also think the risk of
more inflation is greater. I think that's definitely where the risks
are and also that we likely will get a stronger economy. Also, I find
a great sensitivity to interest rates out there--a view that [higher]
interest rates could shut this down fairly promptly. For what it's
worth, I have the sense that if interest rates went up 1 percentage
point or so, it probably would dash some of these expectations but not
a great deal; but if the increase were in the 1 to 2 point range, I
feel it really would have a major effect on this psychology. A good
many people I talked to think that if we had something in the
neighborhood of a 2 percentage point increase in rates, that could
reverse things fairly quickly. I'm not saying that that is scientific
fact or even that it is true; I'm simply giving you a sense of how
people view various kinds of increases in rates.

-19-

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
agree with that?

You're not going to tell us whether you

MR. BOEHNE. Well, getting ahead of ourselves, I think there
is room for a little snugging but it ought to be very cautious--just
enough to deflate the bubble a little but not all that much.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I didn't know I had put my hand up, but I'll
First, for the
I put my comments in two categories.
go ahead anyway.
past couple of days I have had in the Bank the CEOs--and strictly the
CEOs--of a good cross section of major industrial companies in the
Ninth District, including some of the really Blue Chip companies up in
the Minnesota area.
I have been getting from these people almost
astonishing reports of very pronounced stretch-outs in deliveries that
have materialized just in the past six months.
One of the big
computer manufacturers, for example, said that six months ago he could
pick up the phone and get anything he wanted just like that. Now, six
months later, he's looking at delivery delays of six months to a year
on things that were simply available with a phone call a few months
And this
ago. There were reports of very, very strong final sales.
seemed to be the case across the board, in everything from wood,
construction materials, soft goods, computers--you name it.
One of
the very substantial food companies indicated that their soft goods
operations--not the foods in some cases--were showing unit sales in
December up 40 percent from a year ago. There was a-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What company was that?

MR. CORRIGAN. It was
goods-that were up 40 percent in unit terms.
MR. PARTEE.

Some of their soft
and things like

Their sales to retailers?

MR. CORRIGAN. They own the retail outlets in some cases, so
it's a mix of both their own retail outlets and their supplies to
retailers.
I think it's fair to say that in one way or another every
one of these CEOs reported building price pressures. The good news is
that they all at least indicated that they were holding the line on
their wage cost [increases] for 1984--other than a bank, which
wouldn't surprise you. Other than a bank, every one of these roughly
twenty or so firms reported that their plans were for compensation in
1984 [to rise by] 4 to 5 percent or less. They also reported, again
almost without exception, very severely depleted inventories either in
their raw materials or, in the case of those in retailing, in items on
the shelves. Perhaps most disturbing of all to me:
There was a truly
universal expectation among these people that we would have sharply
higher inflation and interest rates by the end of 1984. Believe it or
not, some of these people even spoke in terms of a "buy now" attitude
creeping back into the picture for fear of the outlook toward the end
of 1984. That was my rather clear impression, with the exception of
the wage side, which would suggest that the risks for both the economy
and inflation are very much on the up side. There was deep concern,
even among the people in this group whom I know to be very close to
the current Administration, that the deficit situation is totally out
of control--that there is no prospect whatsoever for being able to

12/19-20/83

-20-

deal with it in the near term or the long term. Again, at least among
this group, there was a sense that it was just very, very [important]
that the Federal Reserve do what it could to hold the line.
Abstracting from those comments, I still obviously feel
personally that the risks are on the up side in the economy. We know
exports are a soft spot and there certainly is, I think, more
financial vulnerability out there than meets the eye. I don't think
that problem is behind us by any means. But the thing that gives me
the greatest cause for concern right now is that I can't quite figure
out for myself what really is happening with inflation. In the last
six months the rate of increase in the consumer price index has
doubled--more than doubled. It is now running at 5 percent or a
little better, and I can't see that there is any great influence of
special factors in there. Maybe Mr. Kichline knows something that I
don't know, but I can't find them. I don't think that the markets in
general have quite caught up with the fact that the consumer price
index now seems to be rising at a rate of 5 percent or a little more.
On the other side, we haven't seen any pickup in the deflator; and
certainly wholesale prices continue to look very good. One of the
things that I look at myself as a barometer of price pressures is the
spread between the rise in the GNP deflator and the behavior of unit
labor costs in the economy as a whole. Very seldom does that spread
exceed 2 percent and it's unprecedented for it to exceed 2 percent in
the early stages of the recovery. But we're looking at a spread of
something like 3-1/2 percent, which I would interpret as a great
desire on the part of businesses to make themselves whole from the
recession or to get themselves whole [before] the recession they think
is going to come in 1985.
The bottom line, from my perspective, is
that we may already be seeing a build-up in price pressures in the
economy that if carried forward in 1984 would be very, very
disturbing. That's about what I think, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the Board staff's
forecast, we would not have a whole lot of difference in views. In
If it's wrong, it's probably a bit wrong on the
terms of the risk:
down side; I think the economy is possibly a little stronger than the
staff has indicated. I'm hearing much of what Jerry is hearing; there
does seem to be a real concern about the possibility of inflation
reaccelerating if the pressures are not already there. Looking at it
from our part of the country, it still is a bit of a mixed bag. We
are getting strength now from some of the areas that had been slow
coming back [from the recession]. Of course, housing has been one of
the strong factors [in the expansion] and that is levelling off. And
that is a good sign because I think we had gotten ourselves into an
overbuilt and risky situation in terms of the land boom. I know this
has been commented on before, but it is still is going on. The
newspaper has been running a series of articles on what is apparently
[Developers] built over 5,000
a real scandal involving condominiums.
condominiums in just one little area out by a lake but increased
[prices] 600 percent in one day through land clipping. They are
selling the condominiums at a rate of 42 units a month, so they have a
6- or 7-year supply. The small savings and loans around the state
have been drawn into this. They are very exposed; even the good
operators--or those who were supposed to be good--seem to be caught up
in it. The president of a title company told me--and he sees a lot of

12/19-20/83

-21-

these deals in north Dallas--that he bought a piece of property for
$17 million. He was going to close on it a week ago last Friday.
Before he closed, he sold it for $34 million and that transaction was
closed last Friday. I don't know what somebody sees in it that the
seller wasn't seeing!
On the energy side, drilling in particular is showing a
little strength. In the natural gas area, which has been quite a
problem, there is some feeling that the bubble is about to [burst] and
that maybe by late '84 that will have leveled out a bit. On the
agricultural side, by the time one puts together the pluses and
minuses it turns out to be a little better than was anticipated.
Again, though, it's pretty uneven if you look at our District as a
whole. Northern Louisiana and New Mexico are showing a little
improvement; it's still rather tough out there. On the unemployment
situation, we're below the national rate, but the state of Texas as a
whole has an unemployment rate of 7.4 percent while for Dallas/Fort
Worth it's 4-1/2 percent and going down. So, my bottom line would be
that there is some strength and that we are seeing some sectors
beginning to come back that are taking up the decline. In housing, we
are anticipating that the financial side will be a concern; of course,
our banks and other major institutions are not reporting very good
results for the fourth quarter and they are making rather substantial
loan loss provisions for 1984. There is a lot of concern that 1984 is
going to be a bit hard, primarily [because of concern] that the
turnaround in energy will not occur before the operators, the service
companies, and so forth are going to have to [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, you asked for comments with regard
to some of the downside risk aspects of the economy. Let me mention
two or three, beginning with the projections we have with regard to
commercial property development in the fixed investment sector.
President Boykin mentioned the speculation in land. I want to take
that one step further into the commercial property area where the socalled syndications-companies and others have sales of
$50 million, $100 million, $200 million at a time--have bid up the
prices of commercial property and brought on to submarket after
submarket a supply of this kind of space, which is having its effect
on the existing commercial properties in those submarkets. I believe
that the IRS review of so-called tax sheltered investments, if it
results in any kind of substantial change in the tax position of these
investors in the syndicates, particularly these privately offered
limited partnerships, could result in a very substantial contraction
of ownership of commercial property and development--the mortgages
thereon--in this country. And I think we're headed for a very
substantial setback there.
As far as housing is concerned, I have never seen in my
experience with mortgage portfolios over more years than I would like
to admit the poor quality that one sees in mortgage portfolios today-if we subject them to any kind of analysis. The builders who have
gotten people into these mortgage arrangements and who now have
withdrawn their subsidies--their so-called buydown arrangements--have
left a situation in which the value, if I may use that term, of
residential property is no longer rising despite what we see in
scattered statistics. And, therefore, the position of those

-22-

12/19-20/83

households as far as payors are
So, the losses that the private
taking continue to go [up]; the
portfolio has deteriorated; and
the future with regard to these

concerned is under severe pressure.
mortgage insurance companies are
quality of the residential mortgage
there are further losses out there in
situations.

In terms of inventory, I had the opportunity recently, as did
President Corrigan, to spend some time with business people--retailers
in several parts of the country. I take it, Jerry, that you were
talking about manufacturers in the big companies. But the information
I got at the retail level--here I'm shifting from comments on risk to
comments regarding inflation--is that particularly because of the
availability of overseas sources for the retailers, so far they have
not faced the kind of price pressures that you indicated in other
segments of the private sector. Quite the contrary, at this stage of
the recovery they find that they can get to sources [of supply] and
they don't have to maintain a heavy inventory and have no plans to
maintain a heavy inventory. So, once the Christmas selling season is
over, they will have some bare shelves. But some of them are willing
to trade off at the margin what they consider minor market share
losses for the rigid control of their inventory. On the plus side,
what I have picked up on these matters has been an emphasis on
productivity--the profitability, say, of the auto companies in the
Midwest. They are looking toward break-even points at much much lower
levels than before, in part because they have taken out of their
costs--as they express it--several billions of dollars.
So, it seems to me that we have a downside risk in the
mortgage market and in the thrift institutions. Savings banks are
still very deeply in the red on an operating basis, despite the
interesting kinds of ways that their accountants let them "report" and
"disclose" to the public. The savings and loan industry--maybe 40
percent of it--is still in the red on an operating basis. To add to
President Boehne's comments with regard to interest rates:
If
interest rates go up 100 to 150 basis points, that would move the
proportion of the thrift industry that is having operating losses to
something like 75 or 80 percent. Housing doesn't stabilize--all
generalizations are false including that one--it either goes up or
goes down. And my guess is that it's going to go down because of the
quality of mortgage paper and because we have now used up that backlog
in demand for housing that resulted from low levels of housing starts
previously. So, I think there are several downside areas in the
economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Boehne detects some
optimism in his District. I would say that in our District there is
euphoric ebullience everywhere. I'm not sure that that actually
reflects the reality of the situation but confidence levels are very,
very high, not only among business people generally but among our
directors at both the branch level and at the head office level.
Virtually every sector continues to strengthen; we're certainly in an
expansion phase of the business cycle in our part of the country and
apparently in the nation as a whole. In all of our important
industries employment and orders are up substantially. The retailers
had very, very vigorous sales over the Thanksgiving holiday and that
gave rise to great optimism regarding the Christmas season. And that

12/19-20/83

-23-

seems to be borne out by the tremendous traffic in and out of the
shopping malls in all of our major cities.
Interestingly, it's not
just people parking in the parking lots this year and going around and
looking; they are actually buying. My retail contacts tell me that
sales at this point are very, very good. Housing is quite good.
Business lending by the major banks in our area has improved
substantially; consumer lending has been good for some time and that's
remaining quite healthy.
There are a few trouble spots that we've
mentioned before, particularly in the agricultural sector and in the
export sector. There are parts of the District that are not doing as
well as others; but even representatives of those areas are very
encouraged by the improvements that they see.
The only places about
which I have real concern are the rural areas where unemployment
continues to be very high, and I don't know that that is going to
improve very much. The great concerns among people that I talk to are
twofold:
basically, interest rates and the deficit. And they go
together.
Coming to your question about what the concerns are looking
I
out six months, I would differ from Jim's forecast only in degree.
would think that growth in 1984, particularly in the first half, is
going to be somewhat stronger than the staff forecast. And going
along with that, I think inflation continues to be a risk that is out
there for the next 6 to 12 months, and my projection of interest rates
and of inflation would be somewhat higher than the staff's.
Let me
say one other thing in terms of inflation:
I think that higher
corporate profits are going to be translated at some stage over the
next few months into wage pressure.
Certainly some of the give-backs
from the unions are going to decrease and there probably will be some
pressure for actual increases in wages as a result of the good
performance of corporations over the next several months.
On the
other side of the inflation picture, we have had relatively slow
monetary growth and the wage picture and commodity prices are not all
So, I guess those factors temper my concern
that bad at the moment.
somewhat. But I come out on the bottom line feeling that we're going
to have a stronger economy in '84 than is projected by the staff and
that we're going to run the risk of higher inflation than is being
projected.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, since you asked us to address
ourselves to uncertainties, I see some very critical ones in the wage
area, the dollar area, oil, and developing countries. But even though
most of these happen to be risks that fall on the down side, they are
not of a kind that one can guard against by leaning toward the up
side.
So, I think that the principal risk is really of more inflation
than we anticipate.
I agree with Bob Forrestal that these profits are
almost bound to convert themselves into wage increases, particularly
later in the year--September, I think--when we get to the UAW
contract. With productivity gains diminishing quite abruptly early
this year, capacity utilization diminishing at a surprising rate, and
unemployment diminishing at a surprising and a very gratifying rate,
all that points in the direction of upward pressure. Now, the other
side is what may or may not happen to the dollar. If the dollar
should go down abruptly, our exports will rise with a considerable
lag. Our interest rates will rise very rapidly--not necessarily
because the Fed does something about it but because capital imports

12/19-20/83

-24-

can be seen in advance to be diminishing and the benefit of keeping
interest rates down will disappear--and that could produce a
considerable downward bias [in the dollar].
The LDC situation,
[though] much improved, is still with us.
It is still a major
uncertainty. The oil situation I mentioned because people who watch
what is happening in the Persian Gulf seem to think that the danger of
a closing of the straits [unintelligible] is greater than it has been
in the past. That would [result in] an increase in prices and a
reduction in economic activity--the same [sort of effect] as [that
from] the other oil shocks. That [potential] situation has a very
[low] probability but very high risk if it were to occur. On balance,
if you add these up, we have a number of risks on the dollar side; we
can't really guard against them by leaning in the other direction.
And the danger of wage increases and price increases is one that we
can take into account and should guard against now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, as I've reported for the last year or so,
the Middle West has been very slow to join this particular party. But
I do think there has been a significant improvement over the last few
weeks or months, and at this point we really are on board.
On the
consumer side, all the current reports we get for retail sales are
very, very strong, and double-digit increases are fairly common. Just
wandering around stores, as I have done the last week or so, one can
see that the traffic is very, very high. Even in the industrial
sector there is an improvement; most of the basic sectors in the
Middle West are doing better. They still are at comparatively low
levels; compared to, say, 1978 or 1979, they are operating at 40 to 50
percent of what they used to think was a good level. But still, that
is an improvement from what they were experiencing just a year ago.
So, I think on the industrial side, there is improvement also.
With regard to the risks, I think they are the same ones that
have been pointed out.
Interest rates are high. I think people are
amazed that we've had as good a recovery as we have had so far at this
particular rate level.
That suggests in their minds, and mine as
well, that if there were any significant increase in rates, it would
have the impact of shutting this [recovery] down somewhat.
On the
inflation side, I think there is a high level of suspicion that the
stated rate of inflation somewhat understates what people think is a
more practical rate of inflation. On the price side, most of the
people I've talked with are sitting on the price button ready to go as
soon as they can get increases across.
The operating ratios are low
enough that they can't pull it off; but as these ratios begin to creep
up, I think they are going to try to push price increases forward as
fast as they can. On the wage side, most of the people I've talked to
suggest that they are still able to get 6 percent settlements by and
large but they are having to work very hard to accomplish that. And
as has been pointed out, there is an expectation that as profits begin
to improve in a very significant way, that will form a pretty
difficult environment in which to continue to pull off these very
But as I add up these risks, I still think the
tough settlements.
fundamentals are in place for a continuation of recovery. The risks,
[as] we look at them, are not significant enough to have a major
impact on what I think is going to be a pretty good 1984--not very
different from what the staff forecast suggests.

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

-25-

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, most of what I wanted to say has
already been said in one way or another--especially by Governor
Wallich. However, my assessment of the downside risks is not quite
the same as his. I'm not quite as guarded in my outlook. It seems to
me that activity is likely to continue strong over the next year,
particularly in the first half of the year, and to decelerate somewhat
in the second half but still expand at an acceptable rate with
unemployment continuing to fall. So, I don't see business activity
falling off to unacceptable levels over the period of the next year.
I'm a little more optimistic on the inflation outlook than I think
most people have expressed. I don't share the same worry with respect
to the wage outlook. I think the wage picture is probably still one
of moderation. It's hard to see that profits are going to continue to
expand at such a rate as to weaken the resistance to higher wages and
improve really significantly the bargaining position of labor. So, I
would expect continued moderation in wage increases. The energy
picture looks pretty good and the outlook is for moderate--not
runaway--increases in food prices. So, if there are going to be any
strong inflationary pressures, it's hard for me to see where they are
going to come from. So, I see the inflation outlook as reasonably
favorable--pretty much as the staff has forecast. Along with the
vulnerabilities listed by Governor Wallich, I would simply emphasize,
as others have pointed out, that the major vulnerability is higher
interest rates than we now expect--that is, higher than in the
forecast. A number of people have pointed to that, and I think there
is possibly a real danger of interest rates being substantially higher
than they are now forecast. The reasons for that, obviously, are the
deficit, the increase in private credit demands, and the falling off
of capital inflows. All of these possibilities would operate toward
putting upward pressure on interest rates. And if that happens, I
think the economy will be very vulnerable and possibly in danger of
some damage from that development. I don't, however, expect rates to
increase substantially, although I recognize that as a possibility
that could affect the forecast, as I pointed out. On balance, I would
say that the probability is about 50 percent on being able to maintain
current levels of interest rates; and if we're able to do that, I
think [the economy] will be in good shape.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might ask Mr. Kichline to comment on the
point Mr. Corrigan made earlier, which is the inverse of this profits
point. Is it true that labor costs are going up much less--or
historically very little--compared to prices at this stage? You don't
have to address it now unless you want to. We'll turn to Governor
Partee.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you asked for a different hypothesis on
what is going on. A surprise this afternoon is the amount of
ebullience reported in Minnesota, which I would think would be in a
cold deep freeze, and in Pennsylvania, which has not been a boisterous
state over the years. My only comment in response to that would be
that businessmen are inclined to look at their performance compared
with a year ago; that still is the way that 90 percent of the
businessmen look at their activity. We have now completed a year of
recovery and, therefore, the November-to-November increases are as
large as any they've seen--in fact the largest they've seen for the
whole period of the recovery. And they probably are the largest they

-26-

12/19-20/83

are going to see anytime in the expansion; [the increases] will go
down from here rather than up. So, I'm wondering whether we're not
picking up a degree of false optimism in the business community and
whether in fact it doesn't lay us open to the possibility that high
expectations will be frustrated in the months to come. I see that at
least as a possibility.
Now, as I look at the projection, the greatest problem I have
with it--I've had it before--is that the saving rate is too low. I
think it ought to be higher; I would expect it to be higher given
income performance, given incentives to save that we have in the
economy now, and given the general notion of maintaining some kind of
reasonable ratio of financial saving stocks to total income. The way
we would get the saving rate higher is either by having higher income
or lower expenditures than are being forecast by the staff.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Or use the Federal Reserve numbers?

MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't even understand what is involved
in that argument since we haven't been briefed on it, so I can't do
that. We could have higher income to the extent that there is more
demand in the economy outside the consumer sector, principally perhaps
inventory demand. That's a possibility; we could have more inventory
demand and more income generation as a result of that and, therefore,
higher savings can result from higher income than is being projected.
On the other hand, we could have lower income if productivity gains in
the short run are going to be considerably stronger than the staff has
projected, which certainly seems possible, or if the wage rate
environment stays placid. There are a lot of indications that it is
pretty placid and, therefore, it seems to me that is possible. Now,
if we have a reduction in consumer spending relative to income in the
months ahead and if businessmen are expecting very good gains--gains
that are too large for them really to anticipate getting--they will be
disappointed in the months ahead. That would provide a basis for an
even smaller rise in business activity than is being forecast by the

staff and that's consistent with the Ml numbers. Therefore, slow
growth in Ml--to bring in the monetarists in the crowd--is consistent
with this last hypothesis.

MR. BOEHNE.

Do you believe it, Chuck?

MR. PARTEE.

I don't know.

MR. RICE.

Isn't that what you want?

MR. PARTEE. No. I think that the staff projection would be
an almost ideal outcome, if we could get the staff projection.
MR. RICE.

What about 1 percent less growth?

MR. PARTEE. I don't think so. I wouldn't want 3.3 percent
rather than 4.3 percent growth for the next year. I think something
on the order of 4 percent is fine. I would like to have maybe a
little more real growth and a little less inflation than in the staff
projection, but I think it's a very good projection. I think we
probably would find that we can't live with a number a good deal lower
than that for very long, particularly in the environment we'll have
If I were asked
next year. But I think it is a very good [outcome].

-27-

12/19-20/83

to state what my objective is for the economy in the next year, I
would not be far off the staff projection. Anyway, I was trying to
You asked for
make a case for a smaller rise [in business activity].
something far out; there is a far-out scenario.
But is your assessment of the situation that
MS. TEETERS.
growth would be lower than the staff projection?
MR. PARTEE.
Yes, that it would be lower because a rise in
the saving rate would cut consumption, and consumption would have a
feedback effect on business attitudes--considering that they're overly
optimistic now.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The staff already has factored in a
much smaller rise in consumption--by $33 billion dollars, I think.
MR. PARTEE.

I know, but their saving rate continues very

low.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm on the opposite side of Chuck. I
think there are a couple of areas in which the staff forecast is
likely to be a bit low on the real side next year. One of them is
I can't demonstrate any evidence of this
business fixed investment.
other than a gut feeling, I guess. The staff forecast is well above
what the surveys of intentions to spend are indicating, but those
surveys have been practically useless in terms of the trend of
business fixed investment in recent years. Given the kind of
confidence we hear about and given cash flows, I think we're going to
see more investment next year than the staff has forecast. The second
I have heard over and over again the story that
area is inventories.
Jerry Corrigan is telling us--that inventory/sales ratios are so
blooming low now that delivery times are lengthening--and I think
we're going to see some price reaction to that early on in 1984. The
staff forecast, incidentally, has a build-up of inventories and
inventory investment to what might be called a normative relationship
That means, in effect, however,
with GNP of around 1 percent of GNP.
that the inventory/sales ratio shows no improvement whatsoever; it
stays at its third-quarter 1983 level, which I think is the lowest
inventory/sales ratio ever in terms of GNP. My guess is that if final
sales continue to be fairly strong--and I think they are likely to be
--that we're going to see some efforts to build up inventory more than
Secondarily, I worry about-the staff has indicated.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make sure that's correct; I
just want to have it confirmed. You have $35 billion a quarter--or
more than that--on average. That would be no increase in the
inventory/sales ratio?
MR. KICHLINE. In 1972 dollars the inventory/sales ratio was
So, in real
around 3.03 or 3.04 and it stays flat throughout 1984.
terms it is unchanged.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

What am I looking at--unreal inventories?

You're looking at book [values].

-28-

12/19-20/83

MR. GRAMLEY. The other area I worry about is that the labor
force may well continue to show the kind of very slow growth we've
seen during the course of 1983.
In the staff forecast, growth of the
labor force doubles in 1984 so we get less progress in reducing
unemployment than I think may take place. If it turns out that we get
more real growth and a greater drop in unemployment relative to the
growth rate, then I think the prospects are for a worsening of price
inflation as the year progresses--more than what the staff is
forecasting. I don't think the risks are for huge overruns on either
side; one percent more in real growth and maybe 1-1/2 percent or so on
the price side is the most I can see. But if we were to get that kind
of situation, then by the last half of the year we would be looking at
a rate of price inflation between 6 and 7 percent and we would be
going into 1985 with a much higher level of resource utilization and
with the near certainty that, unless something slows it down, the rate
of inflation would worsen. And that's what I think we need to focus
on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, as I listen to the discussion around the
table, I come to the conclusion that how 1984 turns out is right smack
in our laps, [given] the sensitivity of the economy to interest rates
--the current levels and changes in interest rates. If they begin
moving upward and if that gets translated to the mortgage markets, we
may as well shut that one down. So, our decisions about where
interest rates should be and their movements during the year are going
to be the crucial factor in determining whether we achieve this
forecast or not. I agree with Chuck that this forecast would be the
ideal outcome. And if we could achieve it, we could say that we
actually were conducting monetary policy in a way that created a
situation [that maximized the prospects] of a return to relatively
full employment. But I do emphasize that I think the economy is now
so sensitive to interest rates--particularly starting from the level
that they are--that a move of 100 basis points would completely turn
around the forecast in practically every sector. There is also built
into the forecast a 10 percent decline in the international value of
the dollar, which does have direct price implications for next year
also. So, the whole combination of this, I think, turns on the
decisions that are made by the FOMC over the next three months.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'm out of names.

Mr. Roberts.

In my
MR. ROBERTS. Just a very brief comment, Mr. Chairman:
experience with businessmen, they always extrapolate the present and
[unintelligible]; for example, it causes them to underestimate
inventory/sales ratios because they always assume that sales are going
to continue as [they see] them now. I'll talk tomorrow about lead
effects that we ought to be considering here. I'm not that optimistic
about the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

Maybe you ought to tell us more.

Why aren't you optimistic?

MR. ROBERTS. Well, I just wanted to introduce the idea that
the liquidity flows through the economy, as I'm sure everybody around
this table knows, operate with differential lags. I've been concerned

12/19-20/83

-29-

all year about inflation later this year and in 1985, which I think is
going to happen. I was not concerned about the fragility of the
economy and that is because of the flow of liquidity through the
economy. We've had a real constraint for some time on Ml, whether you
look at it as 13 percent in the first half and 5 percent in the second
half, or whether you look at it as 4 or 5 months with no growth. I
think that by the second or third quarter of next year we're going to
see some restraint in the economy, with an output effect flowing
through on a near-term basis and then an inflation effect late next
year.
It's the worst of all possible worlds.
I would anticipate that
we will have real growth in the 3-1/2 percent area next year and that
we still will have troublesome inflation late in the year.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I guess we come out somewhat
differently. The New York Fed staff's forecast is for stronger growth
So much of this is "iffy" that I
than in Mr. Kichline's forecast.
won't bother going into the components and how they arrive at their
forecast; they arrive at it, incidentally, with a much higher
productivity guess.
I'm particularly impressed, unfortunately, by the
increased talk I hear in the financial markets about rising
inflationary expectations. And I hear a lot of it.
So, from that
point of view, there's a fairly clear implication for some snugging
up, possibly. On the other hand, though, the thing that bothers me is
that the exchange rate is getting to be a looming menace in a
difference sense. The higher it keeps going the more precipitously
it's going to drop when expectations regarding the exchange rate turn
around. It's going to drop at a time when we're nearer capacity
utilization and it will have a much bigger inflationary impact.
I'm
not even talking about the developing countries burden.
I think it's
a real time bomb.
So, I am in a quandary as to where these conflicting analyses
would lead one.
If one were looking just at the domestic scene, I
think it would be important to affect the psychology and curb somewhat
these rising inflationary expectations.
I don't think that a quarter
or a half percentage point is going to bring that much of a change in
housing and the real economy that it is going to slow down the
momentum that much, but I think it would have a very salutary
psychological effect. However, I don't know whether it would push the
exchange rate up even further.
It would be my guess that it would and
I just don't know if we can afford to be that asymmetric in our
monetary policy in regard to exchange rates. When they are falling
precipitously, we are all willing to tighten monetary policy; when
they are rising into the stratosphere, we're not prepared to
liberalize monetary policy--for reasons I understand, of course, and
with which I sympathize to a large degree.
I don't know how to cut
this dilemma. The easy way out would be to say:
Let's wait a few
more weeks until what is happening becomes clear. But Ted Robert's
scenario--even though we don't believe that it's the most likely one-certainly is still in the realm of possibility.
I don't think there
would be any chance of a recession, but there could be some slackening
of growth. At the present time we think there is enough momentum that
growth probably will be coming in higher than the 4.3 percent; we're
thinking more in terms of 5 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

12/19-20/83

-30-

MR. GUFFEY. With regard to economic activity in the Tenth
District, I think we've joined the national recovery certainly, with
the exception of two major sectors:
agriculture and energy. And both
of those will take much longer to work out.
The agricultural
situation will depend largely, I think, upon some drop of the dollar-if and when that ever occurs--to encourage exports; and energy
everybody knows about. But by and large I think the view of
businessmen and market makers in our part of the country is not
euphoric but it is very strong as to the outlook six months or so
hence.
In talking to those individuals, they are almost consumed with
the federal budget deficit problem and the fact that the Federal
Reserve is really the only player on the field and that inflationary
expectations are just under the surface--whether they come from
corporations and businesses taking the opportunity to try to increase
their prices and hopefully make them stick or from wage pressures.
[The view is] that inflationary expectations could take hold and be a
reality, particularly in the markets, unless the Federal Reserve is
very visible.
In general terms, we would expect the staff forecast to be
the best of all worlds if it could be achieved. But our best
expectations are that growth will be somewhat faster in the first half
of the year and then slow down toward the latter part of the year.
With regard to inflation, our projection would be higher than the
staff's and as a result--this may be ahead of the discussion--I
probably would join those who say a little snugging up now would serve
us well in the future.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Kichline.

MR. KICHLINE.
On Mr. Corrigan's point, we don't have a chart
here. We have all sorts of numbers but he has the chart.
We do have
very clearly, though, a situation where we assume that unit labor
costs in 1983 are rising about 1 percent and our deflator forecast is
something like a 4-1/4 percent increase.
So, it's a very wide spread.
It shows up in corporate profits, and corporate profits in this cycle
--for the first four quarters of the recovery, assuming our fourthquarter forecast is correct--have risen more than in any other postwar
cycle. They are close to the increase in 1975, but are substantially
above the cyclical performance for the first year of a recovery. Two
comments with regard to that spread-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
in profits is stronger?
MR. KICHLINE.

If I may just interrupt you:

The increase

Correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
GNP or corporate product?

How about the relationship of profits to

MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's up because the profit share and
notional margins have been rising. We think it will be at the highest
level at the end of this year since 1977-78--a six-year high. So, it
has done very well as a share or absolutely. Two particular comments:
First, going back to the staff's inflation presentation, we believe
that corporations essentially price off some notion of unit labor cost
and a markup over that. In effect, what they're doing is looking at
some notion of trend growth in productivity; and trend growth in

12/19-20/83

-31-

productivity, we think, is better than they may be using. So, it is
showing up here in terms of attempts to price fairly aggressively and
they're getting more profits than they might otherwise think. My
second point is a technical comment:
In measuring the GNP deflator,
as you know, import prices are subtracted out in the short run. In
the first half of this year import prices actually declined and were
about unchanged in the third quarter, so that for much of this year we
think that substraction process has artificially raised the GNP
deflator because the benefits of those import prices measured in
consumption, investment, or whatever, come along with a lag. So, our
story is that this has been an unusual year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But then the consumer price index should
be lower but it's not; it's higher.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's higher than the deflator but there
are different weights and other things going on. Obviously, service
prices, for example, are very important. We suspect that 1984 will be
a year that returns much more to normal in the sense that our forecast
has unit labor costs and the deflator rising about the same amount, so
that the gap we're seeing now we think will evaporate.
MS. TEETERS. Jim, a technical question
increase in profits we are talking about and the
and the probable effects that this could have on
course of the year:
If corporations end up with
doesn't that take some of the pressure off price

about this large
increase in the share
wage demands over the
higher profits,
increases also?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, if we go back to the notion that some
sense of normalcy is restored, which I think is happening here-profits have been very weak for the last 3 or 4 years--and if indeed
productivity is improving, I think it all depends ultimately on the
context of the market situation that we have. In our forecast,
markets generally will not be so tight as to allow corporations to
pass aggressively through whatever price increases they might want.
There is restraint both domestically and from the import side. So, I
think on profits you're right. Ultimately, how it works out will
depend in part on how this economy evolves in 1984.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are profits in the manufacturing
sector alone? You can cover that tomorrow.
MR. KICHLINE.

Okay, in detail.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, when you consider the automobile
industry alone, it's going to make $5 billion this year. I suspect
the profits in manufacturing are up too--just as sharply, in terms of
increases in profits, as the rest of the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably are up pretty sharply, but I
don't know where they are in absolute levels.
Well, I think we might as well quit for the evening, if
nobody else has anything to say on this subject, and turn [tomorrow]
to a preliminary discussion of the 1984 ranges. I don't find myself
as excited about this forecast and its idealized aspects as some other
people do here. My ideal forecast always has a declining inflation
rate. Thinking back to our discussion last month, we didn't draw much

12/19-20/83

-32-

of a conclusion. This is the time to come to a conclusion, I suppose,
in terms of inflation strategies as well as other objectives of our
long-term forecast. We'll put that on the table bright and early
tomorrow. Nine o'clock is bright and early.
[Meeting recessed]

-33-

12/19-20/83

December 20,

1983--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can begin with a discussion of the 1984
There was some discussion in the Congress about requiring
ranges.
ranges for 1985, or two years ahead, and we might want to consider
what we might say about 1985, at least in a qualitative way, when we
present the 1984 ranges.
Obviously, we don't have to decide this now
or even be that precise about 1984 now. But if anybody has strikingly
different feelings than are encompassed in the preliminary ones--or a
radically different way of looking at things--this would be the
I think the Bluebook paragraph or
appropriate time to bring it up.
two about this was a good discussion of the various considerations
that have to be brought to bear.
It does fit in with our inflation
discussion last time about what we think our responsibilities are and
what the practical possibilities are for dealing with inflation over a
longer time-frame because these kinds of things are reflected in the
long-term targets.
I don't know whether you have anything to add, Mr.
Axilrod, to your comments in the Bluebook.
MR. AXILROD.
I don't have much, Mr. Chairman. I could very
briefly point out what we were trying to do there. As you mentioned,
in the first instance we were trying to discuss the tentative ranges
in terms of their consistency with regard to inflation objectives.
Obviously, the 1984 tentative ranges are consistent with further
progress in reducing inflation assuming, as is clear there, that the
Committee is looking toward lower rates of inflation than the 5
percent that is currently projected for 1984.
And that, of course,
would have particular relevance for anything the Committee might want
to say, qualitatively or not, for 1985.
On some more technical points with regard to the ranges:
For
1984, the Ml range of 4 to 8 percent is a reduction, of course, from
the range for the second half of 1983 and we think it implies, given
the 9 percent nominal GNP, a velocity increase on the order of 2
percent without any interest rate rise--somewhat lower than the trend
for the postwar period years, which is around 3 percent or so but it
has occurred in a period of rising short-term rates. Now, the
velocity of Ml, as everyone knows, is going to be very uncertain and
probably will be very different if there are significant interest rate
movements up or down from the levels projected. But given this
projection of very little interest rate change, we think an Ml
increase around the middle--or more likely in the upper part--of the 4
to 8 percent would be the likely outcome, consistent with the
projected nominal GNP.
I ought to point out two other things:
As noted in the
Bluebook, the [tentative 1984] M3 range was decreased to 6 to 9
percent. The problem may be that it would squeeze M3 down pretty much
if a considerable part of the credit flows continue to go through
financial institutions. We had two reasons for thinking it would be
possible to get M3 growth at 9 percent or below. One had to do with
the continuing efforts by banks to raise funds abroad through
Eurodollars and not domestically through CDs, which would tend to hold
down M3 growth, particularly if foreigners put their money in dollars
abroad. With regard to M2, I would also point out that a 1/2 point
reduction in the range from 7 to 10 percent to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent
might not be considered an effective reduction since the 7 to 10
percent range included 1/2 to 1 percentage point of further shifts

12/19-20/83

-34-

related to the money market deposit accounts. And so far as we could
judge, the amount of shifting in that 7 to 10 percent probably was on
the order of 1/2 to 1 percent, but those estimates are always very
difficult to make. Thus, a reduction of 1/2 point to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2
percent is not, in a sense, an effective reduction. Counterbalancing
that, of course, is what we observe to be a normal reduction in
velocity growth of M2 in the second year of a recovery, which would
for any given nominal GNP require somewhat higher M2 than might
otherwise occur. I think those are all the preliminary comments I
would have.
MR. WALLICH. Could I ask you a question, Steve? When we set
these targets tentatively in July, I think all of the aggregates were
at the tops of their ranges. That is still the case for M2 and M3,
more or less, but Ml has dropped to almost the bottom of its range.
So, in effect, we've had a base drift of about 3 percentage points,
haven't we?
If we took this not just as a monitoring range but as a
target, and if we wanted to arrive at the same level of Ml at the end
of the target period, the end of the fourth quarter of 1984, we would
really have to go not to 4 to 8 percent but 7 to 11 percent. I say
that not because I intend to propose this, but just to indicate how
base drift seems to change, if I'm not mistaken, what one thinks is
the right thing to do.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. I have not made that calculation; I was
planning to make it for the Committee at the February meeting when we
knew the actual outcome.
MR. WALLICH.

But something of that kind is the case, isn't

it?
MR. AXILROD. Yes. If the center of the 5 to 9 percent range
were where you wanted to start from, I'm not sure what the rate of
growth would be. We can calculate it while we're waiting here, but it
would be a higher rate of growth than from where you are now.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we've been fairly consistent
in ignoring those kinds of considerations.
MR. PARTEE.

That's been done and they did [unintelligible].

MR. WALLICH. Yes, then we drifted up; we're drifting down.
I think the down is money in the bank, so to speak. And we shouldn't
let go--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that would only be if you
attributed some special importance to 7 percent or whatever it is. I
think what we said at the time was that we would be perfectly happy
with low growth if velocity were high and we'd be perfectly happy with
high growth if velocity were low.
MR. WALLICH. Well, it doesn't change the calculations, does
it, because velocity may still change? We can't expect that the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It changes the arithmetic, but I don't
think there's any great significance to 7 percent. Mr. Morris.

12/19-20/83

-35-

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of problems with
this, as you might surmise. It seems to me that the only range that
we can have much confidence is going to be predictably related to a 9
percent nominal GNP growth is the range for credit.
I've been arguing
for a couple of years now that the changed character of M1 means that
its relationship to the nominal GNP is not predictable. And it seems
to me that I have two years of pretty good evidence on my side.
To
assume, as apparently is being done here, that we will get a more or
less normal return to historical Ml velocity--I hope that turns out to
be the case if that range is adopted--is an act of faith rather than
an assumption with any scientific basis.
I think the ranges for M2
and M3 are even worse, because the history of the last 25 years shows
that in the second year of expansion on the average M2 and M3 velocity
declined by 2-1/2 percent.
Therefore, if one wanted to have the range
wide enough to finance a 9 percent nominal GNP growth, the upper limit
ought to be 11-1/2 percent.
I'm not persuaded that the staff has made
a very strong case to the effect that M2 and M3 velocity are going to
be so much different in '84 than in the past.
Also, this year being
an election year, I would hope that we could adopt targets that we
wouldn't have to be changing just before the election. We abandoned
the M1 target in mid-1982 and we rebased our Ml target in mid-1983.
To do it in mid-1984 might generate the implication that the Federal
Reserve was changing course for political reasons.
So, I think it's
more important this year than in most years that we have some
reasonable degree of confidence that the targets we're setting are
compatible with our nominal GNP objective.
I don't think we can have
that confidence for these ranges for Ml, M2, and M3.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

You'd like to see them all higher?

MR. MORRIS.
I don't know. I don't know where to set a range
for Ml or what base [period] to use for it.
I would rather eliminate
Ml as a target. As for taking the position to call it something else
--say, a monitoring range--to my observation the market doesn't seem
to notice the difference between a monitoring range and a target.
I
think the Ml numbers there are probably sounder than the numbers for
M2 and M3.
I just am not persuaded that the performance of M2 and M3
is going to be that dramatically different from all previous second
years of expansion in the last 25 years.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have evidence on the second year of
expansion for the previous 25 years, Mr. Axilrod?
MR. AXILROD. I don't have the rates of growth at hand; I
have the velocities at hand.
They are almost impossible to analyze,
of course, because of ceiling rates and all that. In the second year
of expansion velocities of M2 were negative. That is, there were
drops in velocity on the order of 3 percent after the first quarter of
'61 in the second year of that expansion, 1 percent in the early '70s,
and about 3-1/4 percent after the '75 trough. And 1980 is irrelevant,
of course. Before the '60s, in the '50s, there were increases in
velocity of about 1 percent. And those were all decelerations so to
speak from the first year; some of the decelerations turned into
negative velocity. We have assumed also a deceleration in velocity of
M2.
So, it's not inconsistent with this kind of cyclical experience.
But we have the velocity continuing to be positive, which I think is
probably also reasonable given the changed institutional
circumstances.
It also happens to be generally consistent with what

12/19-20/83

-36-

we can make out of our models; both the Ml and M2 changes are
generally consistent with our new Ml demand equation and the estimates
that come out of our model for time and savings deposits.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

I want to respond to your comment
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
that we might want to say something qualitative about 1985.
Even
though I know that we don't want to imply an automatic quid pro quo,
which would be a tighter fiscal policy and easier monetary policy, it
does seem to me that we have an obligation to spell out the overall
terms [unintelligible] of the economic profile of 1985--if we decide
to go that far--and that we ought to do it by starting out with
different assumptions:
meaningful action to reduce the budget deficit
and the absence of that.
It seems to me that we have an obligation
not simply to preach this but to show our best view of what
differences there would be in the economy, even though I know it's not
clear beyond 1985.
MR. BALLES.
Tony, could you speak up a little louder please?
Some of us can't hear you down here.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm sorry. I was just saying that if
the Chairman is going to spell out qualitative views in regard to
1985, we ought to describe the scenario in general terms if there is
meaningful action to reduce the budget deficit and if there is not.
With regard to the monetary aggregates, it seems to me that at the
very minimum we should raise the M3 range 1/2 point to make it equal
to the M2 range.
I think it's a little restrictive for the same
reasons that Steve has described. And it looks strange; I don't think
it makes any sense to have it lower than the M2 range.
In general,
even though I'm sympathetic to what Frank says, I don't see that
tactically at this point we can afford to drop everything but the
credit target. I think that would be interpreted in some quarters as
being politically motivated.
I'm [not] quite as cynical as I was a
few months ago as to the markets reacting differently to a monitoring
range as against a target range for Ml.
I have the sense that the
markets are being somewhat less knee-jerk in their reaction to the
So, it seems to me it would be appropriate to
weekly Ml figure.
continue with our present structure of the three target ranges--for
credit, M2, and M3--and a monitoring range for Ml.
That's all I have
at the moment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. With regard to saying something about 1985, I
think that is a good context in which to talk about our views on the
I'd at least
reduction of total spending over a period of years.
start out with Frank on that, but I think nominal GNP has to be
reduced over a period of some years. And if we're talking in the
context of 1985, then I think one can distinguish it from being an
annual target. And that really is our strategy:
a gradual reduction
of total spending in the economy. Then, from that I would go on and
diverge from Frank and say that money is important because it gets us
there and that the rate of growth of money would be gradually reduced
over time in order to accomplish this total spending strategy. In
that respect, I think what is in the Bluebook is reasonable. I would
go much along the line that already has been put forth, and that is

12/19-20/83

-37-

that reducing the money supply is important over time and where we
come within the target ranges depends on what happens to velocity. We
have some ideas about that but we don't know ahead of time. In some
sense that kind of communication deals with what we need to say to the
markets, which is how we're going to react next year to surprises. We
should be very open to saying that there are these uncertainties and
that when we get surprises this is the basic structure within which we
will look at those surprises.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think we really have two
questions that we have to address today. The first, of course, is
which aggregate or aggregates we're going to emphasize. And the
second is what the numerical ranges for those targets ought to be over
the coming year. As I suspect most of you would think, I strongly
favor returning to Ml or increasing the emphasis on it. I'd make it
the primary target. It seems reasonable to me to suppose that, given
the sharp increase in the velocity of Ml in the fourth quarter, the
probability is much greater that the traditional relationship between
Ml and GNP may be resuming. In addition, I think one has to judge Ml
against the alternatives. And it seems to me that the case for M2 and
M3 and almost anything else I can think of is really not as good as it
is for Ml, despite the imperfections that Ml obviously has had in the
past. If the Committee does agree to increase the emphasis on Ml,
then I think we ought to consider lowering the 8 percent top that we
tentatively set for next year. If we approach the target from the
standpoint that the Bluebook does in paragraph 12--the paragraph Steve
was mentioning a while ago--an 8 percent growth at the top, given the
projection of nominal GNP of 9.1 percent from the fourth quarter of
this year to the fourth quarter of next year, would imply a rise in
velocity of only 1 percent. That is not a figure to which I would
attach a very high degree of probability given the recent resumption
in velocity [growth] of Ml and also the probable absence of any
further major changes in the regulatory area. More fundamentally, 8
percent seems to me just not really consistent for any long period of
time with our stated objective of dealing over the long run with
inflationary problems. So, what I'd really like to do is to knock a
couple of points off that. That's probably not going to be acceptable
to this group, in which case I would argue that we ought to put the
top maybe at 7 percent, or if we want to be a little devious say 4 to
8 percent but that we're just going to use the [lower] half of the
range. But I don't like that [latter] approach, really.
So far as M2 and M3 are concerned, I could accept keeping the
preliminary ranges where they were set in July, although as Steve
pointed out a minute ago and as the Bluebook mentioned, that doesn't
really represent any reduction in the rate of growth in M2 for 1984.
So, I think 6 to 9 percent would be a preferable figure and would give
a stronger signal to the market of our anti-inflationary resolve.
They will look at that and will be aware that if we stick to our
tentative 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent range, we really haven't made any
effort because of the way the base was set. So far as M3 is
concerned, if there are these technical reasons for raising that
range, which seem plausible to me, then I wouldn't mind having it at
6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. For 1985, clearly, the purpose ought to be to
cut whatever ranges we adopt still further, in keeping with our often
stated objective of working down the rate of growth in the aggregates

12/19-20/83

-38-

over the long run.
So far as figures are concerned, I think we have
to wait until we decide what we want for 1984 before we try to put any
[specific] numbers on that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. As for the 1984 targets, I see no reason to
change what we did in July. As far as the Ml target is concerned, we
already have an implied reduction of 3 percent in those targets
through the base drift, as I said before.
I see 4 to 8 percent as
meaning 6 percent on average; that implies a velocity gain of 3
percent and nominal GNP of 9 percent, and that seems to me about
right.
I would like to restore Ml partly but not fully yet and I
would like to maintain the wider range, given the uncertainty. I have
nothing to say on M2, M3, and credit.
As regards 1985 and the possibility of some sort of
reciprocity between fiscal and monetary policy, I think there's an
element of realism here, as Tony says. Analytically, if we raise the
rate of growth of money it would just lead to higher prices in the
long run. But it's also true that if the budget is tightened and
money remains on course, the drop in interest rates is not going to be
sufficient to overcome the reduction in demand.
So, what we ought to
have is a temporary acceleration, if one could do that, of the
I am quite skeptical of that degree of fine-tuning. And
aggregates.
I really would prefer, tactically and strategically, to say that our
collaboration comes from allowing this interest rate drop to take
place that a reduction in the budget deficit is bringing about,
recognizing that there's some risk on the down side that the interest
rate drop may not be enough to keep GNP on track. Looking further,
[beyond] 1985, I think we should aim at ultimate price stability.
I
think we're all aware that there are high costs.
It's not very likely
It's much more likely to
that we will achieve that on a steady trend.
happen as a result of another recession before which there will be
some acceleration of inflation that will then lead to a sharper drop
in prices, hopefully to the neighborhood of stability. But we can't
plan on that, so we have to plan on some kind of downward trend in the
aggregates to achieve reasonable price stability.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would agree that in some
ways the key question before us now is 1985 rather than 1984. We
could get lucky and get through 1984 in reasonably good shape, but I
think the prospects of being able to keep the economy growing on a
noninflationary--whatever that means--way in 1985 at this juncture
will be very, very [low] for all the reasons that have been mentioned
before:
the deficit, the likely build-up in business external
financing certainly by that time, and at least in my judgment a clear
risk that the inflation rate itself will have broken through the 5
percent or higher threshold by the end of 1984.
In that setting I do
think that if we were lucky, we could squeeze through 1984 with
something that might look like the Greenbook forecast. But unlike
I
others, I would not be particularly sanguine about that result.
certainly don't consider it optimal by any stretch of the imagination;
indeed, I guess I would argue that if we really want to try to insure
the continuation of a pattern of a growing economy in 1985, the best
thing we could do to produce that result might be to introduce a

12/19-20/83

-39-

little more restraint in 1984. I'm under no illusions about the
extent to which any of this can be done, or fine-tuned, but that would
be the direction of my thinking.
More specifically, in the context of the tentative 1984
targets, I am inclined to the view that the upper end of the Ml range
is too high. As best I can understand the credit aggregate, I think
the upper end of that is too high as well. I don't have any
particular views on M2 or M3, although I certainly would not be
allergic to the symmetry in M2 and M3 that I think Mr. Solomon
suggested. There is another question that is laced in and out of all
of these, and that's whether we want to do anything in terms of moving
in the direction of suggesting through your oratory at least--perhaps
a little more directly than we have in the past--that our primary,
though by no means exclusive, objectives are more in the areas of
price and financial stability. I don't know if you're game for that
right now but if we can begin to nudge ourselves in that direction
without going overboard, I think it could serve the purpose of this
Committee and the economy very well.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, we did have a good discussion at
the last FOMC meeting about certain relationships and certain theories
of inflation and inflation's forces and factors. It seems to me that
that discussion is relevant to an outreaching for 1985 and to some
extent to our considerations for 1984. There is some validity to the
notion that by 1985 the changes in Ml [will be behind us], however
uncertain its velocity and however difficult it is to anticipate the
results of contemporaneous reserve requirement accounting, and that
what we do in the balance of this year and in 1984 will have a bearing
on the conditions and activity in 1985.
I would, therefore, not
forget Ml regardless of the uncertainties that I mentioned, but I
believe they are such that we should not yet move Ml up in importance
in the exposition of our policies and how we are going about
[implementing] them. It seems to me that the market is focusing
somewhat more on free reserves and on borrowing levels than previously
and that the almost obsession with Ml has diminished somewhat; I think
that's probably salutary. Perhaps that means the market has a better
understanding of what we're really trying to do. So, I wouldn't
forget Ml; I would keep it among the targets, certainly, but I believe
the uncertainties are such that we need a wide range for 1984 and,
therefore, the 4 to 8 percent is acceptable.
With regard to your question on 1985, I would join those who
support your presentation of perhaps a bit stronger language regarding
our reluctance to fund total expenditures, a part of which is the 40
percent that is [spending by] the federal government. But I'd like to
pick up those additional tens of billions that are off-budget
financing and look at the situation as one in which the financing is
much more than 40 percent and getting up to the 50 percent or better
level. So, I would caution that our 1985 targeting of the aggregates
and our policies, framed in view of Ml changes and credit changes, are
not likely to be such as to fund the levels of spending that private
demand and public demand unreined would imply. It seems to me that we
are in a position of increasing that warning. I would also support
some language indicating that, when we know what the actual growth in

12/19-20/83

-40-

the aggregates was in 1984, our policy would most likely be to reduce
the targets for 1985 from the actuals of 1984.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Do you mean lock ourselves in on that

one?
MR. MARTIN.
I would have language indicating that, given the
total spending that seems likely to occur in the absence of remedial
action on fiscal policy, we would find it difficult in the public
interest to fund all of that spending and that our targets would most
likely take the form of [lower figures than the actuals in 1984].
I
wouldn't use any numbers, Tony.
How do we know what the actual 1984
performance is going to be?
I was reviewing last year's Bluebook--no
offense intended--and I don't know how in the world we can set numbers
for 1985 when the 1984 actual is likely to be way off the expected.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too think that 1985 is going
to be a critical period, and I think it is important that we give the
markets some qualitative description of our intentions for 1985.
That
means that 1984 targeting is going to be all the more important
because of the carryover from that year into 1985.
But I hope, as I
think Governor Martin was just saying, that we will resist any
Congressional or other pressures to quantify the targets for 1985.
Our strategy for both years should be, as has been stated before, an
objective of having a steady and gradual reduction of the rate of
The long-term plan, it seems to me, is to
money growth over time.
keep inflation in check and to achieve price stability in the long
run, and that objective is equally applicable to 1985 as to 1984.
With respect to the 1984 targets themselves, I guess it depends on
whether we look at the rate of growth in money that we have had from
1982 until recently or whether we look at business expansion. Either
way, as I said yesterday, I believe the rate of growth in the economy
is going to be stronger than many people think and, therefore, the
danger of recession in the latter part of '84 is perhaps not as strong
in my mind as in others.
I also remember the discussion of inflation
at the last meeting, and I'm concerned about that. The other thing
that I would say in a general sense is that I believe the markets are
going to be looking at what we do for both years--certainly for '84-and our credibility is going to be very much looked at over the next
several months as we announce these targets for '84.
Specifically, on the numbers themselves, I would agree that
M1 should be elevated to a more prominent position in our thinking. I
don't get very hung up on whether it's a monitoring range or a target
I
but I think we ought to look at it more carefully than we have.
would drop that top number, as others have said; 7-1/2 percent seems
to be an appropriate number. The other two aggregate ranges seem okay
to me. And I agree with Mr. Solomon that having some symmetry between
M2 and M3 makes some sense, so I would agree with the tentative '84
numbers [for the M2 range] in the Bluebook--6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent-But, again, I would move that
but I'd use the same numbers for M3.
top of the M1 range down from 8 percent to something in the 7 to 7-1/2
percent area.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Teeters.

12/19-20/83

-41-

Let me
MS. TEETERS.
Well, I agree with [Governor Martin].
take the 1985 issue. First of all, I really don't think we can
forecast. As I look back over the past 5 years, we've missed turning
points and almost everything that has happened--well, not everything
that has happened because I think that we have to forecast and the
staff has done a good job.
But to lock ourselves into something that
is as far off as two years, with all the variety that can go on, I
think is a mistake. This year we have changed targets and we've
accommodated to changes in the economy as they have occurred, as
changes in the various aggregates have come along, and as our forecast
has changed.
I must say that from my point of view the markets
responded [well] to what was a very reasonable shift in policy. We've
kept them informed about what we were doing. And rigidly setting
targets, particularly out two years, when we have a changing economy
doesn't make much sense to me at all.
If you remember the exercises
of 4 or 5 years ago when we ran the econometric model [to evaluate]
probabilities, we found that we are pretty good at forecasting the
next quarter or the next two quarters.
We begin to lose that and
become less certain three quarters out and even more uncertain four
quarters out; and by the time we get to a year-and-a-half or two years
out, the econometric models give us almost random numbers.
We might
as well do what the Administration does for their 5-year projections,
which is to take an annual rate of growth, just string it out, and put
in a hopeful inflation number, because those forecasts for 2, 3, 4,
and 5 years out don't have any reality to them. So, to lock ourselves
in now to something for 1985 doesn't make any sense.
I think we can
talk about it.
We can talk a great deal about the fiscal policy
problem and what that implies for monetary policy, but I don't think
we have to lock ourselves in.
As for the 1984 targets, [many of] you seem to assume that
we're going to be all right in 1984.
I think there are a lot of
hazards out there. We still don't know what Ml is doing. I think we
need a wide range on it; I'm not terribly satisfied with 4 to 8
percent, but I certainly wouldn't lower it and I wouldn't narrow it.
As for M3, that aggregate always grows at a rate close to 9-1/2
percent, so it is ridiculous to try to do something else with it.
It
seems to me that we might as well face the reality and put those
numbers up to 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent and know that it's going to be at
the top of the range and may be a bit over it.
I think we have
troubles ahead. I hope that they will be met with as much flexibility
I would stay with
and as much openness as we've done this past year.
these targets but raise the M3 numbers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I would join with those who see trouble ahead,
but I don't think 1985 is going to be the critical year; I think 1984
is.
If we were to get through 1984 with an outcome on the price side
no worse than what the staff is forecasting, then we would be in
reasonably good shape going into 1985.
But, as I said yesterday, I
think the risks are all on the up side.
I think we're probably going
to see somewhat stronger growth and more pickup in the inflation rate.
And if we let that genie get out of the bottle in 1984, it is going to
be awfully hard to put the cork back on in 1985.
I can live with
these targets or I could live with a somewhat lower range for both Ml
and M2.
But I want to remind the Committee how far these are from the
kinds of ranges one would have to adopt ultimately if one were going

-42-

12/19-20/83

to get price stability. If, for example, we interpret price stability
as being something like 1 to 2 percent--the rate of increase we saw in
the early 1960s--that allows 2-1/2 to 3 percent for potential growth
of real GNP.
Hack off 1-1/2 percent for a trend increase in velocity
not related to interest rates and we are talking about 2-1/2 to 3-1/2
percent for growth of Ml and maybe 1 percentage point more or so for
growth of M2.
So, we're a long, long way from where we're going to
have to be if we're really serious about getting the inflation rate
down. And if we're not serious about getting the inflation rate down,
we ought to decide that and adopt a course of policy in accordance
with that view--for next year, I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Are you serious?

Over the long run, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

For 1984?

MR. GRAMLEY. Oh no, not for 1984.
I think we have to be
pragmatic. We have an inherited inflation rate so what we have to
strive for is to do no worse than see a tiny bit of acceleration of
inflation along the lines the staff is forecasting, and then see if we
But if we let inflation get
can do a little better in 1985.
considerably worse in 1984, then in 1985 it's going to get worse
still.
For reasons I talked about yesterday, I think that M2 ought
to be our principal target. The relationship between Ml and GNP may
tend to reestablish itself on a more stable basis than we've seen
recently, but I'd like to wait for that to happen. As far as targets
for '85 are concerned, I would not be inclined to put out any numbers.
I would like to see us make qualitative statements to the effect that
we will attempt over time to bring down the rate of growth of money
for reasons having to do with bringing down the rate of inflation, not
as an end product in itself. But I think we ought to put out some
warnings that we're serious about this business. And if we're not, we
ought to tell the public that also.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
What would you expect to happen in
the real economy in '85 if we made a significant cut in the money
target for '85 and the Congress had not or was not taking any action
on the fiscal side?
I'm not necessarily disagreeing with you. It's
not a provocative question; I'm just asking what your honest guess is.
Would we have a recession in '85?
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have never believed that one can find
macroeconomic reasons for thinking that fiscal stimulus and monetary
restraint are enough to push the economy into recession. Fiscal
stimulus unleashes economic expansion; monetary restraint holds it
back. And it's the balance between the two that determines whether or
I
not the economy grows and whether we have more inflation or less.
think the main problems are on the micro side. They have to do with
the damage high real interest rates create in the international area,
to the thrifts, to the rate of business investment, and that sort of
thing. I wouldn't be inclined necessarily to say that a continuation
of current fiscal policy--that is, the current services projection of
the growing deficit--together with more monetary restraint would push

-43-

12/19-20/83

us off the cliff into recession.
damage.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It sure as heck would create a lot

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think we are having a lot of discussion
about a world that we would like to see rather than the world that
we're actually in.
The idea of gradual reductions in money [growth]
over time that will bring down inflation neatly and avoid recession is
a world we wish we were in.
In reality we bring inflation down
through recessions.
That's where progress has come in the past and I
If we're talking
suspect that's where it will come in the future.
about further reductions in inflation over the next several years,
then I think we're talking about a recession. It's not that we like
recession, but it seems to me that the two go hand in hand. Having
said that, I think we still have to be somewhat idealistic and put out
the message of lower growth in the aggregates, but I don't think we
really ought to kid ourselves. As far as the strategy in 1984 is
concerned, I think we ought to continue to look at a number of
variables and be cautious of any particular one.
I think Ml is still
largely unpredictable and has an unpredictable link with GNP.
Some
case can be made that it may not be as unpredictable as it was in
1983, but I don't see any evidence that would [warrant] elevating it
I think there is some case for
to the premier status it once had.
giving it somewhat more equal status but I would prefer to keep it in
a monitoring status, largely for tactical reasons.
There has been
some weaning of the market from this variable. I don't think it's as
much of a shrine as it once was and that is helpful in this judgmental
So, I would keep M2 and M3 as
world that we have for monetary policy.
the targets and M1 as a monitoring range.
As far as the specific numbers, I don't have a real quarrel
with the specifications that we set in July, although I think Nancy is
quite right that M3 grows at 9-1/2 percent whether we like it or not
and we simply ought to realize that and at least have 9-1/2 percent be
within the range. As far as Ml goes, I think a real issue is how much
M1 is like the old M2.
To the extent that it is more like the old M2,
then I think higher growth rates are more acceptable, so that a range
I think we do have an M1 today
of 4 to 8 percent does not disturb me.
that looks more like the old M2 with its implications for velocity.
Now, I like the idea that has been put forth by several people for
1985--that we ought not talk about just one kind of outlook--because I
don't think a [forecast] for 1985 by this group or any other group is
worth very much. I think it would be a very good vehicle for
underscoring the importance of doing something about the deficit or
not doing something about the deficit and I would take that as its
main objective. To have at least a couple of outcomes--one in which
we get some help from the fiscal side and one in which we don't--I
think could serve a positive purpose.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS.
Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 1985 or any
longer-term period, I would be very cautious about expressing specific
mathematical ranges unless we were required to do that by the
I would rather see us have a qualitative objective, which
Congress.
is to reduce inflation steadily until we've eliminated it eventually
over whatever period that might encompass.

12/19-20/83

-44-

As for 1984, I think the 4 to 8 percent range, in view of
what is developing on Ml, is probably too wide. I would be inclined
to say 4 to 7 percent, except that for whatever reasons our directed
growth of Ml has tended to be to the lower end of the range rather
than otherwise. So, because of that tendency, I would be inclined to
say 5 to 8 percent, raising the bottom figure. My reason is that I'm
concerned about the recent slowdown that we've had in Ml, as I said
yesterday, whether measured as 13 percent in the first half and 5
percent in the second half or measured as 4 to 5 months, essentially,
of no growth. In terms of the leads here, I think we have a probable
slowdown in the economy in the second and third quarters already built
in; and because of the surge in money late last year and earlier this
year, I think we have an increase in inflation built in late next year
or early in 1985. And I don't want us to be like the businessmen I
refer to who extrapolate the present and fight the ebullience of the
economy right now. I would rather see us get Ml growing again at a
moderate pace. Alternative B, which essentially suggests about a 6
percent [MI growth] pattern, is acceptable to me; it may be slightly
on the high side, but I think unless we get that going we will have a
cost in terms of real output in 1984 and we should not be sanguine
about 1984. I would like to see us accept the fact that the
aberration in velocity caused by a recession, lower inflation, and
lower interest rates on these new deposit accounts may now be ending.
We see a sharp rise in velocity here in the fourth quarter. I think
we should get onto a trend line assumption of velocity, since it
clearly can't be predicted in the short run, and build our money
growth rates around that. If you accept that as on the order of 3
percent, then the 6 percent accommodates the 9 percent nominal GNP.
So, I would like to see us remove Ml from the so-called monitoring
range [status] since it really is the one variable that we can control
most directly. I'd place it at least equal with the other aggregates
and preferably give it primary status. More importantly, I'd like to
see us do something to get it growing again. We have a forecast of 8
percent in December but we've had forecasts of increases for month
after month that haven't materialized. I note that we have been
decreasing reserves in November and December and it seems to me that's
an expected result of that type of policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I can't remember the exact words we used when we
announced the preliminary targets for 1984 but I have a hunch that the
words we used suggested that the reduction in the ranges was
consistent with our long-term program to reduce the level of price
inflation, and at this point I really don't see that we have a basis
for changing them [again].
To make a significant downward reduction
in the ranges would imply a higher level of restraint than we would
want to have in mind. To increase them by any magnitude would
indicate a very fundamental shift in policy, which I think would be a
big mistake. So, I would be inclined to go with the ranges as we have
announced them. For the reasons that Steve has suggested and that
Governor Teeters has suggested, I would be inclined perhaps to reverse
the ranges for M2 and M3.
But I would at this point place a much
higher reliance on Ml.
I think we should put more emphasis on Ml and
that particularly relates to the conversation we had with regard to
CRR yesterday. In light of the timing involved, we are getting to a
point where CRR is going to come into place pretty rapidly, and

12/19-20/83

-45-

perhaps we should begin to [increase the focus on Ml]
when we talk about the intermeeting targets.

as soon as today

Regarding 1985, I think it's far too early to be specific
about what we would suggest by way of ranges for the year but I think
we want to continue to emphasize the long-range program we have in
mind.
I certainly wouldn't give Congress any reason not to deal with
the fiscal problem and I would not in any way suggest that if they
don't deal with it, we will have to back off on our objective for
1985.
I would say that we have every intention of continuing the
program and that we will continue to reduce the ranges, but I wouldn't
be specific with regard to amounts this far in advance of the year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I join those who would
not want to make quantitative announcements as to 1985.
But I also
would like to see us maybe quantify the time that we're looking
forward to moving toward price stability; I'm talking about a 5- or 6year program with a gradual reduction over that period of time, yet
accommodating what may be happening in the real economy. It seems to
me that we have since 1971 or 1972 continued to say that we are moving
toward price stability by reducing the money supply gradually over
time. But there has never been a program set forth by this group that
I know of in which people could look and find a result at the end or
light at the end of the tunnel.
If we were talking in terms of a
rather specific program in the sense of an horizon over which to reach
price stability--whatever that may be, whether it's 1 or 2 percent or
zero--then it seems to me that we could work into that kind of public
discussion what the likely outcome would be if nothing is done about
the budget deficit. At this point to quantify targets for money
growth for 1985 seems to me to be far in advance of anything we could
predict. But in a longer-term picture it's [quite] reasonable to
assume that there will be less money growth in '85 than '84 by some
amount.
With regard to the 1984 ranges proposed in the Bluebook that
were set tentatively in July, I have no problem with the Ml range of 4
to 8 percent.
As a matter of fact, I take a little comfort from that
4 percentage point spread in the range. As for M2 and M3, I would
probably opt to drop M2 to the same range of 6 to 9 percent [shown for
M3] in the Bluebook. My reason for that, as has been stated around
the table before, is that it is inconsistent to have an M2 range
that's greater than the M3 range. And it's very difficult to explain
that M3 is lower than M2 simply because we hope to fund some of the
credit needs through Eurodollars, which also implies a continuing
strength in the dollar and assumes further that European countries and
other developed nations would continue to be operating at a very low
rate of economic growth. That is a picture that I think we can avoid,
whether it be true or not, simply by making the M2 and M3 ranges
consistent with each other. And I would opt to have them at 6 to 9
percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE.
I'm fairly optimistic. As I said yesterday, I
think 1984 will be okay as a year. I don't really think that it's
going to be as vigorous as Lyle, for example, has suggested.
I also

12/19-20/83

-46-

don't think it's going to be as weak as I suggested it could be
yesterday-MR. MARTIN.

Christmas is over already?

--in the particular configuration that I was
MR. PARTEE.
I'm not greatly concerned about 9 percent as a nominal
working out.
GNP number fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. I think it's one we can
So far as I can see, the figures that the staff has given us
key on.
are pretty consistent with about a 9 percent GNP number. So, I think
the target growth rates as specified for 1984 are in the ballpark.
But we ought to do this in terms of what we think would produce or
would be consistent with about a 9 percent GNP growth.
Regardless of what happens next year, though, I really do
think 1985 is going to be more of a problem. It will be the third
And that's a
year of a recovery--if the recovery lasts all year.
recovery that is getting pretty old; it's getting to the time when the
inflationary pressures get greater. It certainly is going to be a
time when pressures in credit markets ought to grow because of the
increasing private demand. And I would agree with Lyle that the role
of the deficit in that really is to affect credit market conditions
more than it is to affect the economy as a whole, which has pluses and
minuses from fiscal policy but may in the short run at least be about
offsetting. So, if we see the year of 1985 developing as one in which
we may have credit-crunch type conditions--and that is generally now
being forecast in the market--do we want to say that we're going to
reduce our growth rates for the aggregates because we have some
concept of a long-run non-inflationary environment, and thus ensure
I doubt that we want to
that there will be a credit crunch in 1985?
say that.
So, I would avoid a specific number for 1985 for that
reason, because we do want to give as much encouragement as possible
to the hope that there might be some fiscal action before 1985 is
over. Again, it seems extremely unlikely that there will be any big
fiscal move taking effect in the first part of '85; it might take
When we don't know what
effect in the spring or the summer of '85.
the timing would be, even if there is any fiscal policy action--except
that it seems unlikely that it would be at the very beginning of the
year--that makes it extremely difficult to state any kind of policy
tradeoff. So, I wouldn't specify anything for '85.
I think Ml has done quite a lot better than some people
around the table give it credit for. But in this period it's
certainly true that it doesn't look [consistent with] the GNP number,
but that's because it doesn't have the stability characteristics that
M2 or M3 or total credit have and that make them glide along at a more
normative number that isn't too far, usually, from the GNP number.
But I think that the performance of Ml has not been that bad and has
been more indicative of what is going to happen in the economy than
I was going
anything that M2 has shown over the last couple of years.
to say, Nancy, that M2 is 9 percent every year, good or bad, but you
So, I can't say that
already said M3 is 9-1/2 percent regardless.
except that it seems to me also true. M2, by the way, I think

shouldn't show the decline in velocity characteristic of earlier
periods when we've had disintermediation because, after all, 80 to 90
percent of the total is now interest sensitive. And I think the
[depository] institutions will be very competitive in the rates they
offer as credit demands increase. They certainly will try to keep the

12/19-20/83

-47-

flows coming in and, therefore, I think we could expect that M2 will
show even more stability than it has shown in the past as the
institutions operate on M2 as they have operated on M3 in the past-and that is to be a source of funding. So, I would give more status
to Ml.
I would adopt the staff's proposals, which I guess are pretty
much the same as we had set in a preliminary way last July. And I
would be quiet about specific numbers for 1985.
One other point:
I want to agree with Ed Boehne in that I
don't think we can expect to make progress every year on the rate of
inflation anyhow. I think we have to look at it as a full cycle
process. And if we can keep the inflation rate from accelerating much
beyond 5 percent, or certainly keep it from accelerating beyond 6
percent in the course of this cycle, then we can go down to zero in
the next recession. And we'll have a much better posture for having a
much less inflationary cycle the next time around.
But I don't think
it's reasonable to say we have a 4-1/2 percent inflation forecast for
next year and in 1985 we'll bring it down to 4 percent and in 1986 to
3-1/2 percent and in 1987 to 3 percent. We just can't do that.
The
dynamics of the economy won't permit it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I think the concept of price
stability should be the overriding objective. And having said that, I
think whatever words we use for 1985 obviously should reflect that.
I
But it does seem to me
also would not want to use specific numbers.
that the targeting for 1984 comes at a very critical juncture,
certainly in terms of credibility. We have said that we will bring
inflation down through a gradual reduction in the growth rate of
money. In order to solidify that position and make it believable, I
would be inclined to bring the Ml range down more in line with what
Bob Black was suggesting, possibly to 3 to 7 percent.
I think that
would be a very clear signal that we do remain committed.
I happen to
be willing to put more emphasis on Ml, and I think it is more
believable, and thus that it would be positive to do that.
I think
that [range] would also be consistent with enough [Ml growth] for the
9 percent nominal GNP growth. On the M2 range, I would be inclined to
shade it down to 6 to 9 percent since the 6-1/2 and 9-1/2 percent
doesn't represent any real reduction. And on M3, I would probably go
back to the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent because its growth just always is
9-1/2 percent.
It seems to me that would give a better picture. But
I would argue very strongly for shading down the Ml target for 1984.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I agree with almost everything
Governor Teeters said.
I'm just not able to look much beyond 1984
and, therefore, I'm unable to say anything specific about 1985.
I
would just like to be able to say in general terms that we hope that
things develop in 1984 in such a way that we can continue to move in
the direction of price stability in 1985.
As for 1984, I think that our tentative target ranges are
realistic--that is, they are consistent with the staff forecast and
with what I expect to happen, with the exception mentioned by Nancy
that the M3 range could and should be raised in order to avoid the
possibility of squeezing. So, with the exception of that minor change

12/19-20/83

-48-

of raising the M3 range by 1/2 percentage point, I think these ranges
are good, satisfactory, and realistic.
I think we should reiterate in
very strong terms our commitment to long-run price stability. And I
think it's important that we demonstrate that commitment by the
targets that we select, which we've done in this case. We've reduced
the ranges for 2 out of 3 and if we can continue to do that, the
inflationary expectations will be affected in a manner that would be
positive from my point of view. So, I'm satisfied with the target
ranges presented except for M3.
And incidentally, I'm also encouraged
by the recent behavior of M1 velocity. But I'm not yet ready to
resurrect M1 to full target status.
I would like to watch it for a
while longer. Perhaps in July we might consider that restoration.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Sometimes, Mr. Chairman, it helps to get outside
of one's own group and kick around these kinds of problems with a few
knowledgeable outsiders, which we did at our Bank earlier this month
at a conference on monetary targeting and velocity. That was held in
view of the major, unprecedented decline in velocity in '82.
I'm just
going to give a few highlights that I think may be of interest to this
group. A number of people who are in the room were at that conference
or participated in it, including Steve, who was our lead-off speaker,
and Frank, who chaired the panel.
I made some remarks and we had some
professors making remarks and so forth. One of the things that I
found particularly interesting about that meeting was a comment by an
official of the Bank of Japan who looked at what was happening in
monetary targeting across a number of countries in different parts of
the world. Very briefly, he concluded that in those countries where
regulations--especially on deposit interest rates--have been binding,
the financial innovations [aimed at] getting around those regulations
had a really major distorting effect on the various monetary
aggregates used in those countries. On the other hand, he set forth a
class of countries that had deregulated in the face of rising
inflation and interest rates and found that there had been much less
distortion in the monetary aggregates in those countries. I found
that cross-country analysis really quite interesting because it seemed
to me to be consistent with the U.S. experience.
In particular, in
our own country we look back at 1974 and 1975 when there was a great
deal of financial innovation, if you remember, [to get] around the
regulatory ceilings on interest rates.
Ml was badly distorted. There
is no doubt that that was about the time that I became a proponent of
M2, but of the M2 of that day. But in this more recent period of 1982
and 1983 when, as you know, we had considerable deregulation and it
was proceeding quite rapidly, it's our view in San Francisco at least
that Ml was quite little distorted on balance. The big distortions,
to our surprise in a way because we expected the opposite, came in M2
and in M3.
Another thing, as far as I'm concerned, that came out of that
conference was something of a compromise point of view, I guess, on
what did happen to Ml during that period in 1982 when its velocity was
dropping by an unprecedented amount. When everything is said and done
there really have been two basic explanations here and among the
academics as to what was going on. Perhaps this is a bit
oversimplified, but one explanation is that it was a business cycle
phenomenon--the build-up of precautionary balances and that sort
thing, which in turn caused velocity to decline. The alternative

12/19-20/83

-49-

view, which we lean toward in San Francisco, is that the big drop in
velocity was a direct response to the major decline in the rate of
inflation and hence the major decline that occurred in market interest
rates in the latter half of 1982--that that in effect caused the
opportunity cost of holding money to drop sharply and led to not a
shift in the demand for money but an increase along a given demand
function in the amount of money that people wanted to hold in relation
to income. Well, whichever one of those explanations might eventually
win men's minds or whichever of those explanations is true, the real
point, as I thought about the conference and its aftermath, is that
the phenomena to which they were referring are over.
That is, the
recession is over; we're coming out of it.
We don't expect another
big drop in inflation and interest rates, as much as I would like to
see that--something that could cause velocity to drop.
I don't see a
decrease in the amount of money demanded on the horizon either.
But
that reinforces my belief that we're well on the way toward [returning
to] the more normal behavior of Ml that we had historically.
In view of that background, I come out bottom line in much
the same way that Messrs. Black, Roberts, Keehn, and Partee have here.
I would restore Ml to more importance, perhaps even primary
importance. I have to say that I'm getting a little nervous about our
credibility being undermined in the academic community and among
serious students of money and monetary policy by our continuing
officially to set M2 and M3 targets because they know as well as we do
what some have already mentioned around the table here:
that M2 and
M3 go on like Old Man River at about the same rates of growth almost
irrespective of whether the economy is in a strong upswing or whether
it is in fact in the middle of a recession.
I'm not against having
some extra targets we're almost bound to hit.
The best thing I can
say about M2 and M3 in terms of keeping them as targets is that
they're almost impossible to miss. I guess that's not without some
merit compared to a target that jumps around. But, frankly, I
wouldn't give very much weight to them.
I think the more we continue
to do so the more we're going to undermine our credibility out there
where it counts, or at least in some areas where it counts.
Specifically, I would go in the direction that was implied in
the Bluebook that perhaps it's time to reduce the spread of the M1
range from the 4 points that we now have. You all recall that many
years ago a spread of 2 points was par for the course.
I don't think
we need to jump down that far that fast, but I would urge
consideration of reducing that spread to 3 points. At this time I
don't believe we're trying to make final decisions, Mr. Chairman, but
certainly I would not at this moment want to see that 3-point spread
centered any higher than 6 percent and might even favor aiming at a 5
percent midpoint.
If we're going to have a 6 percent midpoint, which
is about the most I would go for, we could consider a range of 4-1/2
to 7-1/2 percent, if we were willing to adopt only a 3-point range
rather than a 4-point range.
It's not without precedent that we have
ranges that have a fraction of a half.
We did that just a couple of
years back, so that wouldn't be a particularly troublesome innovation.
In terms of M2 and M3, I guess I really don't care.
I could take what
is in the Bluebook or some of the modifications that [have been
suggested] here because I don't think they mean much. They don't
indicate what is going to happen in the economy; we have very little
control over them.
So, for all the reasons that I've talked about
today and that others have talked about, and in light of the paper I

-50-

12/19-20/83

circulated to you a couple of months back, I think the time has come

to restore M1 to at least equal weight, if not more.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Nobody has suggested we go on the gold

standard!
MR. BALLES.

Not yet.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible] not happy with all these

Ms.
MR. WALLICH.
that way.
policy?

We might consider targeting the exchange rate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but in practice we don't vote
What would you do right now? Would you ease monetary

MR. WALLICH.
not a good idea.
MR. MARTIN.

One would have to ease, and that is why it's
On the gold standard we would have to ease,

Henry.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You don't want to defend this proposition?

MR. WALLICH. No, the theoretical point is that the exchange
rate should carry some weight along with total credit. I'm not saying
that we should do what the Canadians do now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's working pretty well, isn't it?

MR. WALLICH. It works pretty well. It would at the present
exchange rates; we wouldn't want to stabilize those.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Why don't we turn to Mr. Cross?

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any comments or questions?

MR. BOEHNE. This isn't just addressed to Sam, but maybe also
to Henry or Tony. Do we know of other experiences, say in the post
World War II period, where a major currency has gone in the opposite
direction that the current account would say it ought to go for such a
prolonged period and by such a large amount?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No. I don't know of any this large.
But there certainly are lags; these things don't correspond exactly.
And it's really the reversal in direction that is usually most picked
In
up by the markets when they are looking at some [unintelligible].
1978 when the dollar was sinking one reason we felt that we could
probably undertake a major intervention that would stick--and we did
it in November '78--was because the current account deficit was no
longer increasing and indeed was beginning to shrink in response to
the more competitive dollar that we had in the year-and-a-half before
that. So, I don't know of any such situation; in fact, there's no
question about it. These numbers are so huge now that there's nothing
comparable. The largest current account deficit that we ran in the

-51-

12/19-20/83

late '70s was in the neighborhood of $15 billion. We're looking next
year at a deficit of probably $80 billion. And there is no other
industrialized country that has run a deficit of more than $15 to $18
billion.
MR. BOEHNE.
It's as if we're skating on a frozen lake and we
just keep skating and we know we're going to get to the point where
the ice isn't very thick out there.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's a sustainable
situation in the long run. One can make an argument that it's not a
time bomb--that when the dollar comes off it will come off gradually
and moderately.
I don't believe that.
I believe that the longer it
goes up and stays up, the faster it will come down when expectations
change.
What I don't have any feeling for is the comment that I
frequently hear--and I think Henry said this--that when the inflow of
dollars stops because of the change in expectations about the exchange
rate, that is going to have a very major upward effect on our interest
rates.
I'm not sure that that's so.
I don't know what the interest
rate effect of that will be because it is sometimes argued that the
banks can bring enough back in the Eurodollar market that we wouldn't
get that much of a movement in interest rates.
I don't know whether
Paul has a view on that. We may end up with just a very big impact on
the exchange rate and a very minor impact on interest rates from the
cessation of the inflow of foreign funds. What do you think, Paul?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think it's a danger.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The interest rates?

On both sides.

MR. WALLICH.
Is the result the cessation of capital imports?
Capital imports can't cease overnight, of course, because our exports
aren't going to go up overnight and imports aren't going to go down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No.

MR. WALLICH.
So in that sense while we unwind this $80 to
$100 billion current account deficit we will have upward pressure on
interest rates all the time but not the full pressures at the
beginning of the process.
MS. TEETERS.
I might also add that the Europeans have the
attitude that the dollar is going to drop sharply at some point. They
are as much confused as we are as to why it hasn't dropped [already].
But their real concern is that they perceive that [drop] as a sharp
appreciation of the D-mark. They are very upset about the
implications of a sharply appreciating D-mark in the European Monetary
System because there is no way to foretell what the relationships of
the other currencies to an appreciated D-mark would be.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At a minimum it probably will force
much more rapid devaluations of the weaker currencies in the EMS.
And
it might even make it almost intolerable, depending on the Italian and
French policies.
It certainly will mean much more strain on the EMS.

-52-

12/19-20/83

MR. TRUMAN. The answer to President Boehne's original
question is that there certainly are other examples. We have the
Japanese at the moment. They have had a very strong current account
and a relatively weak [currency]--at least relative to the dollar
experience. We've had the British experience. I'm not sure exactly
which way the British current account [is going now], but certainly in
the early Thatcher days sterling was very strong and the current
account was pretty good because of oil. But it was a period when the
currency was moving in an unsustainable direction in the absence of
[unintelligible] of the current account. It subsequently has
reversed.
MR. ROBERTS.
It was fascinating to read in the paper this
morning that the OPEC countries have a $31 billion deficit.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Everybody has deficits.

MR. ROBERTS.
But the OPEC world, remember, was going to end
with a $100 billion surplus.
MR. WALLICH. The sum of the deficits is $100 billion in
excess of the sum of the surpluses.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any other questions or comments?

I have one other question about intervention.
MS. TEETERS.
What makes you decide when to intervene? What is the trigger?
Is it
a certain degree of movement in the rates, or what, that triggers
this?
MR. CROSS. No. We keep getting asked this question over and
over. What happens actually is that, of course, we are monitoring
[the market] all the time. When we see a situation where it looks as
if rates could be moving too rapidly or are very volatile--kind of
gaping, with one transaction here and then the next buy or sell order
moving out of the range entirely--or just generally unsettled
conditions in the market, then we talk to our colleagues at the Board
and our colleagues at the Treasury. And usually at very, very high
levels in the Treasury Department there's a decision as to whether
they feel that it is or is not a disorderly market. Certainly, one of
the factors that goes into their thinking is the attitude of some of
the other monetary authorities. On the occasion when we intervened in
December [our action] followed some intervention by the Bundesbank-indeed some intervention where the Bundesbank had come in at the end
of their day and intervened in a way that was going to affect the DM
in our market. They had called us up to tell us about it and to see
if we had any concerns about it and we decided, again after
But we
consultations, that it would be appropriate for us to go in.
intervened in a modest way. These have all been very modest
transactions; $50 million worth of DM, at a time when the market is as
big and as active as it is, is not going to reshape the world.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, there is a Machiavellian
You can argue
theory which, of course, nobody here subscribes to:
that intervention in this penny ante amount is simply a way of
discrediting intervention as a policy.

-53-

12/19-20/83

MR. CROSS.
It shows some evidence of being willing to
participate but in a very modest way. And I don't think anybody
thinks that these amounts have any great impact.
It can temporarily
settle a situation if we do enough of it.
MR. WALLICH.
York directly?

How often did the Bundesbank operate in New

MR. CROSS.
On one occasion. This was a very unusual
situation in which the dollar was moving at a very, very rapid rate
just at the time our market was opening, and they did intervene on
that occasion in the amount of about $500 million. Subsequently, they
have intervened in the market through the New York Fed, with us acting
as agent.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. CROSS.

How often did they do that, more or less?
Once or twice--not often.

MR. RICE. Do we have any problem with their coming into the
New York market and operating there?
MR. CROSS.
Well, we like to know what other central banks
are doing in our market.
MR. RICE.

So long as we know.

MR. CROSS.
For a number of the central banks--the Japanese,
the Swiss--when they do, which is very rare, we act on their behalf.
And that to me is the best way to handle it.
Then we can do the
operation for them and know what is happening and handle it.
And the
Germans did operate that way subsequent to this one occasion when they
acted directly; they were trying to make a big splash and to show the
world that they were out there selling all these dollars.
MR. RICE.
MR. CROSS.

We prefer to have them do it through us?
I do.

MR. WALLICH. Peter, could I ask you:
Is it right to say
that that $50 million peanuts was sterilized automatically the same
day or the next day?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Probably for the reserve effect it would be
a couple of days later; it was folded into all the other reserve
factors that we take account of.
MR. WALLICH. But you wouldn't have done anything on that
day, I suppose, if you hadn't been planning to do something anyway?
MR. STERNLIGHT. No. There wouldn't have been an immediate
reserve impact anyway.
But we would have acted as soon as we had the
information and folded it into all the other reserve factors.
MR. CROSS.

We settled two days later anyhow.

MR. GUFFEY.
I'm told that the Russians have been very active
in foreign exchange markets, acquiring dollars.
I'd just like to ask

12/19-20/83

-54-

Sam how much of the rise in the dollar value vis-a-vis the mark, for
example, can be attributed to those apparently rather substantial
activities by the Russians?
MR. CROSS.
Well, it's very hard to say.
Certainly, they
have been active, particularly in the past couple of weeks, in buying
dollars. For what reason, I don't know. We have been trying to keep
a log of what we hear and find out about their activities to see if we
can figure out what their approach is.
But in the past couple of
weeks they have been buying very heavily in the dollar. And, as I
mentioned, the Bundesbank has done really quite a large amount of
dollar sales--over $1-1/2 billion. The Russians have been buying a
very large chunk of this on the other side, we think. One thought is
that they have some big year-end dollar needs, just as many others
have big year-end dollar needs. But I don't really have a good
explanation as to why they're doing it. They seem to be buying a lot
of dollars and selling some sterling, for example. Earlier this year
they were operating on different sides of the market. We're trying to
get a better assessment of their approach, but right now we really
don't know what their purpose is in buying dollars. But they have
been buying them heavily in Europe, in New York, and in the Far East.
MR. KEEHN. Paul, are you going to cover later the current
status of the various external financing packages of Brazil, etc.?

meeting

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I thought maybe we could do that after the
[at lunch].
Meanwhile, we have to ratify these transactions.
MS. TEETERS.

I move that we ratify the transactions.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Second.

Without objection.

Mr. Sternlight.

That concludes
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. STERNLIGHT.
my report on operations, Mr. Chairman. I do have a recommendation
about leeway for the next period. Specifically, I think it would be
advisable to retain the $5 billion intermeeting leeway for changes in
outright holdings that was adopted at the last meeting. The
difference is that this time the enlargement would be needed to cope
with seasonal declines in currency and deposit levels. Also, if the
intermeeting period extends into early February, we would come up to
that final phase-down step of reserve requirement ratios for member
banks coming out of the Monetary Control Act. That's all I have, Mr.
Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Comments or questions?

In view of great

silence, we can ratify the transactions.
MR. PARTEE.

So moved.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.
SPEAKER(?).

Without objection.

So moved.
Second.

The leeway question?

-55-

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Without objection.

Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, my briefing will focus on M1--not
because I want to overstress it, but because Ml is the aggregate
recently showing the most variable behavior relative to norms, so to
speak. That's what is perhaps most in need of analysis, particularly
since in the recent past its variations over a period of months have
often provided good signals to follow.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. BLACK. Could I ask just one brief question, Mr.
Chairman?
On your experimental weekly Ml seasonal, Steve, do you have
a figure for December?
I gather it would be not too far off from-MR. AXILROD. Yes, for December [in] the regular series we
have 2.3 percent, a drop from 6.7 percent in November.
That compares
with our projection of 8.1 percent.
So, there is a big difference in
seasonals in November and December.
MR. BLACK.

Only 2.3 percent in December?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's about a 5-1/2 or 6 point difference.
There's a very big seasonal. The seasonals, month-to-month, are very
different, as you can see in the series.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, we might as well have a doughnut.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if anybody else wants to
direct any questions to Mr. Axilrod.
MR. CORRIGAN.
I just have one, Steve.
Is it a reasonable
proposition to you and Peter to say that where you think you are now
in the borrowings is $650 million?
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's the objective, yes.
in above and some weeks below.

Some weeks come

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a pretty erratic intermeeting
period in terms of where the borrowing and the net borrowed reserves
came out.
The average is not too bad over six weeks or so; it is not
too good [in relation to the intended level] in between.
We have already had quite a lot of discussion--by implication
but not in precise terms--of where we should go in the short run.
I
might say:
The housing starts figures came out this morning. Just to
get that on the table, Mr. Kichline, can you describe those?
MR. KICHLINE.
Yes.
In November, housing starts rose 100,000
to 1-3/4 quarter million units, annual rate, from an upward revised
level in October. Both single-family and multifamily starts rose in
all regions in the country, mostly in the West. Permits also rose a
little and the permits for October were revised up a little as well.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, permits did not rise very much. I do
not know if this is terribly significant, but the flash GNP will be
coming out this afternoon--no, it won't be out until tomorrow. I do
not know what it is, but there is a suspicion in other places that it

12/19-20/83

-56-

may be a little higher than our staff has projected.
know for sure.
MS. TEETERS.

But I do not

It's not a very good number.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not even a very good number in my
opinion after it is no longer the flash. Unfortunately, it can be
inaccurate in both directions. But it will be a pretty strong memory.
I suspect we are getting a little seasonal pressure in the
markets. I think [whether or not] the reserve positions change, one
would expect seasonal pressures from the middle of December probably
through the end of the year. We [typically] have a very erratic--or
maybe [simply] erratic--money number early in December; nobody knows
quite what is going to happen through the first week or two of January
when we have often had very erratic numbers. This is well reflected
in the quite different signals that our two seasonal adjustment
techniques provide. In trying to sort all of this out, and just to
give you something to aim at: Given the strength of economic
activity--until there's a little more evidence that it is going the
other way, if we ever get it--given the nervousness of the
inflationary expectations, and given that the latest money supply
figures look a little higher anyway, I don't find myself in any mood
to ease. I am talking about a very short time perspective of several
weeks. Whether one would want to tighten up slightly is debatable, I
suppose. Part of my problem with tightening is that in announcing it,
as we inevitably would have to do sooner or later, [the announcement]
may exaggerate whatever one's intention was, unless one had a pretty
strong intention. I find myself in a position where I think that
maybe what we can say is that we will maintain the existing degree of
restraint at least for the time being and if things turn out to be on
the ebullient side, economically and with the aggregates, we could
make a small tightening move in coming weeks or wait for a little more
evidence. That is the way I would tend to write the directive--in a
sort of one-sided way.
MS. TEETERS. Well, the end of the year is going to place
some upward pressure in the market area anyway, isn't it?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it will be more
than what we have, but I would think that if we maintain this for the
next week or 10-day period maybe, it might remain under some pressure
both because of seasonal pressures and because the Treasury is doing a
lot of financing between Christmas and New Year's Day. Then I think
that seasonal [pressure] would be over.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
two [longer].

I think the pressures may linger a day or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe into the first couple days in
January--so, maybe [for the next] two weeks.
MR. ROBERTS. Paul, when you say you wouldn't ease, do you
mean in terms of our current borrowing standard? You're not talking
in terms, say, of looking at 2 percent money growth in the fourth
quarter?

12/19-20/83

-57-

I am talking about the borrowing
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
assumption. And I am talking about, I presume, without being
absolutely precise--we can discuss it--measuring the prospects for any
tightening subsequently so far as the aggregates are concerned against
the standard of something like "B."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
policy and snugging up.

This is halfway between existing

MR. ROBERTS.
I think "B" is a liberalization of major
magnitude, if we can get it done, as against what we have been doing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't focused closely on those
figures.
I was thinking of something in that area, but we may want to
lower or round some of those to whole percents.
These figures for M2
and M3 are pretty close, I guess, to the staff's December projection;
they don't involve any particular change in trend from what we have
been having for M2 or M3.
M1 would obviously be a little higher, but
probably lower than--well, who knows what the December figure will be!
MR. GUFFEY.
For purposes of this discussion, I would agree
to adopting the "B" alternative as it appears in the Bluebook.
In
view of the discussion and the feeling about the potential for some
reemergence of price pressures, I would opt to snug up marginally or
have some nuance or whatever it may be of [snugging].
Rather than
take a $650 million borrowing level, I'd go maybe to $750 million,
which implies about 1/4 percent more [on the funds rate] than what we
have been shooting at in the past. If I understand what has been said
around the table, particularly from Peter, the pressures that are
coming on because of technical matters at year-end might move us to a
funds rate of 9-1/2 percent or a bit above. I am really suggesting
that with a $750 million borrowing level we essentially would validate
that level after the technical pressures subside and end up with
something over 9-1/2 percent and certainly not greater than 9-3/4
percent.
It would, in my view, present a picture that the Federal
Reserve has some concerns about the strength of the economy and the
potential for a reemergence of price pressures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have just one comment on that.
I don't
think we can aim at the federal funds rate as closely as one quarter
of 1 percentage point.
We take our chances on that a bit.
MR. FORRESTAL.
I came into the meeting feeling pretty
strongly that any easing of policy would be a mistake. I have not
heard anything in the last two days to change my mind on that score.
By the same token, I don't think that any substantial tightening of
policy is appropriate. The decision in my mind is whether we have a
slight tightening of policy, something implied by "B" or "B-," I
suppose one could say. What those numbers are, I am not quite sure.
A $700 or $750 million borrowing level probably would be a degree of
snugging rather than a tightening. I think there is a lot of merit in
what you said about waiting to see what develops in the next week or
so.
So, I am happy with "B" or something slightly less than "B,"
moving a bit toward "C."
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we did not have these Ml
numbers and were looking just at the real economy and what is going
on, I think we would have moved long ago toward a posture of more

12/19-20/83

-58-

restraint than we have now. I can understand people's concern about
Ml, but I think we have to recall that what we are looking at is a
stock, not a supply; it is an intersection of demand and supply. We
have to try to figure out where the weakness is coming from. One
could well argue that it was coming from restraint on supply if we
were seeing either a significant slowdown in the growth of nominal GNP
or a rise in interest rates or both. None of those things is
happening. Indeed, when the staff runs its model and tries to figure
what money growth is taking place in the fourth quarter, consistent
with the old relationships that we used to have between Ml and GNP
based on the old standard Ml demand function and the econometric
model, the answer is 8.3 percent. And I dare say that if we were
looking at 8.3 percent growth of Ml in this quarter, given the history
of very large growth for the last two years and the continuing
tendency for the economy to far outrun our expectations, we would be
moving toward restraint. I don't see any strong reason for waiting.
I think we ought to begin moving now toward a tighter posture. I
I might go
would opt, therefore, for something between "B" and "C."
even a little further than Roger--up to an $850 million borrowing
level. I wouldn't want to see the fed funds rate go over 10 percent,
but I wouldn't mind at all if it stayed in the 9-1/2 to 10 percent
range.
MR. KEEHN. For the reasons that you outlined at the outset,
I would be very much in favor of alternative B. Having said that, I
would be in favor of modifying the directive, as I have suggested a
couple of times so far, to indicate greater emphasis on Ml. Also, it
does occur to me that this [directive] will be coming out probably in
late January or early February after we have embarked on a major
operating change, and I think we ought to reflect that now. So,
again, I'd change the directive. I'd leave the borrowing level at
about $650 million, but I would change the fed funds range to 7 to 11
percent--not to indicate any policy change but simply to give us more
room in which to operate, because I have a hunch that the funds rate,
at least for the next few weeks, will rise pretty close to that 10
percent ceiling.
MR. WALLICH. I would go to $750 million on borrowing and I'd
be quite satisfied with 8 percent growth of M2 and M3. And if that
leads to 6 percent on M1, that would seem to me in line with the
ranges that we are about to set, possibly. On the funds rate, I do
not particularly want to see it higher, except marginally. But I
think we have to have a little more room on the up side, if it's not
going to be totally confining. So, I would say 6-1/2 to 10-1/2
percent.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I have observed that the
unemployment rate, with the most recent data we have and the staff
projections through 1984, brings us to a position well above the socalled natural rate of unemployment that we reviewed at the last FOMC
meeting. Also, in contrast to some of my colleagues, I observe very,
very little evidence of a reigniting of inflation. You cannot find it
in commodity prices, in gold, or in the usual indices. If you accept
the staff forecast quarter-by-quarter of the real GNP, it comes down
nicely. One would wonder, as has been observed here previously, what
better configuration of a moderation in economic expansion one would
seek in contrast to what has been projected here. It seems to me that
alternative B, which is essentially the status quo with a $650 million

12/19-20/83

-59-

borrowing level, not $750 million, and with growth of the aggregates
as indicated is consonant with an expansion period that is almost
textbook. I would join my colleague Governor Rice in the hope that we
could restore Ml to the pantheon on Olympus in July, having the ex
post expertise that we all will acquire so readily in looking backward
over [the intervening] period of time. I don't think this is a time
to signal to a nervous market that we see inflation coming back when
only the Wall Street gossip would join us in that expectation.
MR. BOEHNE.
Well, I don't want to overstate what I'm about
to say, but it seems to me that we have to rely to some extent on what
we think is going to happen down the road, simply because of the lags
involved. We can be wrong, however, about the future we see.
Therefore, to some extent we have to ask ourselves which mistake is
As I look out into 1984, it seems to me
easier to undo if we make it.
that it would be easier to undo a little too much restraint now.
In
other words, it would be easier to ease later in the year than it
I think the risks in
would be to tighten because we waited too long.
the domestic economy are on the side of more growth than we expect,
more inflation than we expect, and more accommodation on the part of
So, for no other reason than just to curb a rather
monetary policy.
buoyant psychology out there, I think some very modest move toward
tightening would be appropriate between now and the next meeting. The
order of magnitude I would come down for is something like a "B-,"
with $750 million or so on borrowing. I think that such a modest move
would get lost in the year-end churning that we're going through, so
it seems to me that some time in January would be the appropriate time
for the tightening to emerge.
MS. TEETERS.
I think we need a period of continuous
stability. My perception of the economy is that, yes, it has
recovered in the typical fashion, but the recovery could be very
I think we can afford to
easily upset with rising interest rates.
I would add to my concerns that any
wait to see what is going on.
upward movement in the interest rate is going to make the exchange
rate worse.
I agree with Tony that the more it goes up the harder
it's going to fall--it's going to be rather precipitous--and that that
So, I would
would increase our problems of adjustment during 1984.
simply take alternative B, the $650 million on borrowing, and the 6 to
10 percent funds rate range; I'd keep a fairly moderate stance at this
point and let the year-end pressure do its thing but then come back
out of it in the 9-1/2 percent range [on fed funds].
And we can
I would also point
readjust; the [next] meeting is not that far away.
out to you that if we tighten now, the policy record from this meeting
will be released probably on the day that the Chairman testifies.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Mr. Chairman, in terms of the strength of the
economy, I think one could make an argument for some snugging up at
this point in time.
I think the evidence in housing is that that
I don't
sector has adapted pretty well to the current level of rates.
think there is room in the economy, given the strength of the capital
goods sector, for any substantial revival in the strength of housing.
But at the same time I could accept alternative B as written or some
snugging up; I don't feel a strong conviction as to which one is
right.

-60-

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I think it's premature to tighten today. I
agree with Pres and Nancy that the economy still has quite a lot of
room in it--that we don't really have any signs of inflation except in

the hype that the market is putting on the question. And it would be
wrong to move in response to that. If we were closer to full
utilization, we would have a little less tolerance to a mistake on the

up side.

I thought Ed Boehne was going to conclude that since our

forecast is reasonable we shouldn't change policy.

But he surprised

me by saying that since the forecast is reasonable we ought to tighten
up. I guess I don't agree with that unless unusual strength develops
in the period ahead.

That is, we can't really stand more surprises on

the up side of our expectations; we could stand some surprises on the
moderately lower side.

So, I think your original proposal is a quite

good one. I don't see why we ought to bias the result by starting out
with a higher borrowed reserve figure than we have currently. I think
we ought to put it in at $650 million or thereabouts and then if, in
fact, things strengthen quite a bit in the weeks to come, we ought to
let the borrowing run up with the strengthening that occurs. I would
feel a good deal more willing to see some snugging if we could get
some strength from Ml. We haven't had it--except for last week--and I
guess if we did get now a rather meaningful expansion in Ml, that
would be another signal that perhaps the economy was stronger and thus
we ought to snug. So, I would do just as you suggested in the
beginning, Paul, but with $650 million--I don't know that you spoke to
the borrowing number--as the beginning borrowing number.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just add a point that I forgot to
mention earlier. In terms of emphasis on the various aggregates, I
too would put a little more emphasis on Ml--not restoring it to its
former grandeur but nevertheless putting a little more emphasis on it.
Having said that, I would also add that I'm not sanguine that the
market has learned its lesson. The relatively dispassionate reaction
to Ml that we've seen over the past few months is nothing more than a
reflection of the fact that Ml isn't anywhere near the top of the
target; that is, people are more tolerant of its behavior.
As far as policy goes now, I am in the camp that says the
bell has rung and recess is over and it's back to school. I've been
there for some time. I do, therefore, favor a modest move now. I
view something along the lines of what Roger said as satisfactory; but
pending developments in the intermeeting period, I probably would be
willing to go as far as Governor Gramley suggested. There are risks
in that, certainly. I think the most pronounced ones are on the
international side, with the exchange rate and the implications for
the financing costs of developing countries. That is the single thing
that gives me the most pause for concern and caution. As I said
yesterday, I think we're by no means out of the woods in terms of
domestic financial problems in a context of rising interest rates,
which is one of the reasons I'd rather try to do a little something
now in hopes of not having to do more later. Certainly, there are
some political risks, particularly in a context in which M1 doesn't
seem to be growing at a very robust rate based on our own numbers.
But, again, I feel rather strongly that the risks on the other side
are greater at this juncture; in my view at least, the economy and

12/19-20/83

-61-

I also
inflation may be more of a problem than others see it to be.
If we do something of a
agree with the thrust of Ed Boehne's remarks.
modest nature now, it's pretty easy to reverse it if indeed events
warrant that. On the other hand, if we don't do something now, I
believe it becomes harder to do it later and I also believe we run the
So, I do my
risk that we will have to do more later rather than less.
own balancing of these risks and I must say that I come out on the
side of moving up now, say, to $750 million or maybe a bit more. And
for the intermeeting period as a whole, pending developments, I
probably would be willing to go further--certainly not above 10
percent on the federal funds rate, but if we had to go to 10 percent,
I'd go to 10 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. At the risk of being accused of looking at the
hole rather than the doughnut, I would quickly like to repeat
something I said last month--Chuck is smiling--that these
[unintelligible] looking figures on the macroeconomic statistics are
not capturing all of reality. My deputy chairman came back from a
recent meeting of the Conference of Chairman and Deputies and
according to his tabulations there were 6 to 9 Districts that reported
distinctly spotty trends in the economy. Yes, indeed, a lot of things
are going well. But a lot of things aren't going well, and they're
concentrated in areas such as agriculture, export industries, and so
on.
So, on a broader basis, my own reading of the economy is that
there is not really much risk of a major significant reacceleration of
inflation. Therefore, I would come out similar to the way that
I think it
Governors Martin and Teeters and Partee have come out.
I would be in favor of alternative B and
would be premature to snug.
would like to see that borrowing assumption no higher than $650
million. The hoped for turnaround in M1 is still a forecast, not a
fact.
And if it proved unfortunately not to be an accurate forecast,
I would begin to get a little more worried than I was last month.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say you would like to see the
borrowing above $650 million?
MR. BALLES(?).
No.
I said I would not like to see it any
higher than $650 million as the initial figure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think there's a difference, even
though it's a nuance, between "B," retaining existing policy, and your
proposal, Mr. Chairman. Since I indicated yesterday that I was torn
between retaining existing policy and a very slight snugging up, I
think your approach tries to bridge that. You said you would maintain
at least the existing degree of restraint and you would have more
restraint depending on the continued strength of economic recovery and
you would drop out the section on lesser restraint so that the
Basically, that poises us to do
directive is somewhat asymmetric.
some snugging but it doesn't actually do the snugging. We would stick
with the $650 million for the time being but if we see continuing
strength in the economic recovery, and particularly if that's
I
reinforced by money numbers, then we would do the snugging up.
don't know--we wouldn't need a conference call then, would we, at that
point?
Based on that directive, that would permit some snugging up.

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the other way.

-62-

We'd need one, I think, if we wanted to go

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Right.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.
I would align myself with those--I think Jerry
Corrigan said it very well and others--who would start moving against
[inflation] now with a $750 million initial borrowing assumption.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would support your original
proposition whereby we hold our position where we are now and could
apply more restraint if it seems necessary. So, I would support
alternative B, borrowing at $650 million, and a funds rate roughly
where it is now.
MR. ROBERTS.
Mr. Chairman, although I'm concerned about the
fact that we haven't been able to get M1 growing, I would be willing
to accept the staff forecast for December and the 6 percent growth in
the first quarter implied in alternative B and would accept your
proposal of not increasing restraint at this time. Along with Mr.
Balles, I would prefer that we make it very clear that if we don't get
that expansion in Ml, we will look to lesser restraint promptly
because I think another full quarter of this would put us in a
dangerous position where we may be looking at a decline in output by
midyear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I also think your proposal is a good one, perhaps
coming from my view that forecasting is a very tricky business,
compounded by the District I come from. Although we've certainly seen
improvement, we're one of those very spotty Districts. And even in
the firms where we have seen improvement, I would say the attitude is
characterized not as any kind of euphoria but as concern about the
future. Perhaps coming from my view that Ml does continue to tell us
something, I would not like to see snugging up occur at this time.
I
guess I feel that the danger of inflation in the future may well be
reflected in an early way in some of the collective bargaining
agreements, and because we have a very difficult [collective
bargaining] calendar next year we need to watch [these developments]
very carefully to see if more snugging is required at that point.
For
all those reasons--the state of recovery and the future of the
recovery, what Ml is telling us, and the fact that I think we haven't
yet seen the collective bargaining process start leading us into a
very dangerous area--I favor the proposal you made, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been waiting in hopes that
someone would say all I wanted to say, and Ted Roberts came very
close. No economist is going to agree 100 percent with anybody, so I
would come out right where he did except I'd rather use 5-1/2 percent
than 6 percent on a quarterly average basis [for Ml].
I would stress
mainly that if we don't get this growth in Ml in December, we really

12/19-20/83

-63-

ought to have a conference call and take a look at it because if that
happens, I believe the slowdown might be more real than I now think it
is and that maybe we ought to move a little against it.
So, I would
really go with your original position.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to clarify my original
position in the light of all these comments and see whether we can get
closer.
I am partly influenced by the fact that it's just Ml that is
very low and if we write into a directive that we want to increase
restraint and have to reverse that very shortly because Ml falls out
of bed, it would look peculiar and would be difficult to explain.
I
must confess that I have that a little in my mind. These seasonal
pressures are convenient in the sense that we're getting a little more
seasonal restraint for a couple of weeks.
I think the split we have
in the Committee is between [waiting or not waiting]--not necessarily
waiting until we see [the outcome of] collective bargaining agreements
or that kind of thing, which would take some months.
But if we really
get a confirmation of strength in Ml, particularly by early January-let's say December comes out more or less as projected and we get
another Ml bulge at the beginning of January, so that January growth
is beginning to look high and we aren't getting any economic news to
suggest anything less than the ebullience we [currently] see--I'd
begin moving in a modest way as early as that.
I'm talking [about
moving] maybe in the first week or second week in January.
MR. ROBERTS.

"Bulge" being growth over 6 percent, say?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would have to be projected for
January, but I mean if Ml got off to a [high] start in January. Right
now I would say that we should try to make sure we don't get below the
$650 million [in borrowing], which means obviously that we would err
on the side of more tightness.
Borrowing might be more likely to come
out above than below $650 million, but we would not be aiming above
that level.
Well, let me look at these [specifications].
I would not
mind myself knocking the halves off of the alternative B growth rates,
or [making them] a little less, if that makes people happier. Let me
come back to the federal funds rate later.
Specifically, what I would
put in the directive is a first sentence that reads:
"The Committee
seeks in the short run to maintain at least the existing degree of
reserve restraint."
This would be explained more [fully] in the
policy record part. We could move up M1 if you want to.
On the Ml
sentence, [leave out the reference to] the relatively slow growth in
October and just move up that whole sentence on Ml and the credit
That's a very subtle
aggregate to follow the sentence on M2 and M3.
change; I don't think anybody will notice it.
They haven't even
gotten it yet that it has been moved down.
Then I'd make the next
sentence read something like:
"Somewhat greater restraint would be
acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly within the
context of continuing strength of economic activity."
I'd leave out
anything about the down side; if something happened and we really
wanted to ease--if Ml came in very low, for instance--we'd have to
have a meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Suppose we get the continuing
strength or ebullience in the economic recovery but we don't get M1
growth, would you still do a little snugging?

12/19-20/83

-64-

MR. MARTIN. And the same lack of any [new]
evidence of inflation.

statistical

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what we're likely to get in
the next two or three weeks.
MR. KICHLINE.
GNP flash].

We should get the CPI tomorrow as well [as the

MS. TEETERS. And the first Friday in January we get the
unemployment rate. That's about it, isn't it?
MR. WALLICH.
MR. MARTIN.

If you wait until you see it, you've missed it.
Do you want to be too soon or too late?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you exclude food and energy from the
PPI, it was still a rate of only 3 percent. And capital goods was, I
think, a pretty good figure all around.
MR. MARTIN. And OPEC is having a terrible time trying to
hold the cartel together.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of the business news that we will get,
part of it we'll get tomorrow. But we're now looking at just the
first week of January and obviously I can't answer-MR. KICHLINE. We do get the employment surveys on January 6,
which is the first Friday.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose they came in strong. Suppose we
got a further decline in unemployment and a sizable increase in Ml;
that certainly would be a factor on the snugging side. Now, if the
[un]employment rate retreated .2 or .3, which I suppose it could just
because it was down so sharply the previous two months, we'd weigh
that in the balance a little on the other side. If the consumer price
index is high, I don't have to tell you on which side of the balance
I'd throw that.
MR. PARTEE. It's rather hard to think that we'll get much
news except for unemployment. Obviously, there's going to be
continuing strength in the economy. The question is:
Is it going to
be surprising strength?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be in somewhat of a dilemma, I
suppose, if the employment numbers came in very strong and Ml came in
weak. Then what do we do?
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think what you do is lean in the
direction of the way the economy is going. I think all the evidence
is pointing in the direction of an economy that continues to
outperform our expectations. I don't know what the flash GNP is going
to show, but the housing starts figure this morning alone is going to
add several tenths to real GNP growth in the fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't be surprised if the GNP growth
in the fourth quarter came in around 7 percent. That's my favorite

-65-

12/19-20/83

statistic.
If it comes out 7 percent, it will be the most rapid three
quarters of economic growth that we've had in the postwar period.
MR. MARTIN. If it comes out 6-1/4 percent, as forecast, it
won't be the most rapid?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be just in that ballpark.
you would say it's about as fast as we've ever had.

Then

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If it comes out at 7 percent,
inflationary expectations will increase another notch, even though the
actual hard data won't show [more inflation].
MR. CORRIGAN.
On this point about prices:
If you go back
and look at the 6-month period ending in April, the rise in the
consumer price index with or without food and energy--any way you
slice it--is something like 2 percent.
In the six months ending in
November, any way you slice it, it's 5 percent or more.
Now, I admit
that the wholesale price index isn't showing the same thing, but the
consumer price index is what gets into social security, other
pensions, cost of living adjustments, wage expectations, and the whole
ball of wax.
I find it very, very difficult to accept the notion that
there is no evidence that price increases have started to go up.
There is a doubling of the rate of increase-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think there's any question:
Prices have gone up [faster] from the midst of the recession and its
aftermath.
MR. CORRIGAN. But if the consumer price index is giving the
right reading, we're already at 5 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
right reading.
MR. CORRIGAN.

The question is whether it's giving the

I don't know if it is, either.

MR. GRAMLEY. Prices always move with a lag and they always
are glacial in their performance unless something spectacular happens
on fronts like food or energy.
The underlying factor driving
inflation is wages, and wages are well known to be very sticky; they
move glacially. What we do now is going to affect wage bargaining
throughout 1984 and 1985.
That is what we have to worry about. And
as the economy continues to get stronger-MR. ROBERTS.
I think that is worrying about fighting the
last war. The inflation that we're going to experience here comes
from things that have happened in the past.
If we have a very
sluggish Ml series, just because contemporaneously the consumer price
index is registering a change that reflects past conditions it would
be a mistake to react to that, I think.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you're talking only about the
last four months of sluggish M1 growth.
I don't understand.
MR. ROBERTS. No.
I'm saying that the prices that will be
flowing through the economy are a function of past money growth--say,
in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year.

12/19-20/83

-66-

MR. GRAMLEY. If you look at what has happened to Ml over
longer periods, I suppose you'd look back at the past four years--I
would at least--and say that Federal Reserve policy was heavily
responsible for the improvements on the inflation front that we have
been experiencing. And yet if you look at the figures, you will find
out that growth of money in the past four years was every bit as rapid
as it was in the previous four years. You have to explain prices
other than just by what has been happening to the money stock.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, the trend growth of money is about 8
percent. I don't know what period you would pick, but you would get a
pretty closely correlated price change over any longer period of time
with the growth of money.
MR. GRAMLEY.
showing recently.

I think that is not what the figures have been

MR. ROBERTS.
deviation.

You might pick out a cycle and have a

MR. GRAMLEY. I'm thinking of the period since the Federal
Reserve made its historic decision in the fourth quarter of 1979. The
growth rate of Ml since then is almost exactly the same as it was in
the previous years. The previous four years were a period of
substantial build-up of inflation and in these recent four years there
has been a substantial unwinding. You have to explain that on grounds
other than just Ml.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, one way to explain it is that the pattern
has been very erratic, which is continuing this year with 13 percent
growth in the first half and 5 percent in the second half.
MR. GRAMLEY.

We get inflation down with erratic patterns

too.
MR. ROBERTS. Well, it creates a different situation than
just, say, averaging a year. If you had one [half] at 20 percent and
one [half] at 0 and average that out, I don't think it's the same as
having a 9 percent year.
MR. BLACK. I have some figures here that I think support
both positions, depending on the period you take. In the four years
before 1979, 7 percent is the least squares rate of growth; since then
it's 6.8 percent. But the first part of that latter period--that
would be from '79 to about mid-'81--it was 5.1 percent. And since
then to the fourth quarter, it is 10.5 percent. So, that supports
your position. It also supports Lyle's.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. None of it sounds to me like it supports
why the inflation rate was 12 to 13 percent and now is 4 to 5 percent,
but that's beside the point. We need to make a decision here.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe the conclusion is that you need
an erratic enough policy to eventually bring about a recession that
brings down the inflation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have described the intentions here about
as clearly as I can. What I am proposing, as I understand it, is a

12/19-20/83

-67-

pretty quick finger on the trigger if things move in the one direction
and no finger on the trigger at all if things move in the other
direction. It doesn't mean we can't have a meeting. What we're
talking about is that this snugging up, if that is the right term,
might well come about early in January. The range of what we're
talking about [on borrowings] is $750 to $800 million, depending upon
just how the numbers look.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd be reluctant, though, to raise
the federal funds range for the same reason, even though I know we're
getting near the higher end of it.
But it seems to me that we're not
going to hit the higher end and I think it would give the wrong
signal.
I think we can continue using the [current] range as long as
we retain a money market directive and the markets know it has very
little relevance. When we had a more automatic feedback reaction from
money supply movements, then it was a reasonable constraint. But why
do we bother to continue to put the range in there?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll give you three alternatives,
none of which I feel strongly about:
either 6 to 10 percent or 7 to
11 percent or eliminate it.
MR. BLACK.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I'll support Mr. Roberts on that.
I think we need a range.

MR. MORRIS.
I think it could be eliminated if you tell the
market we're following a fundamentally different policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the problem in eliminating it right
at this point. Who wants to eliminate it?
Only two Committee
members. We won't eliminate it; that proposal has not attracted
sufficient support. A 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent range doesn't send me.
I think we could hit 10 percent.
It wouldn't bother me terribly if we
do; I don't think we'll hit 11 percent.
MS. TEETERS.

Ranges have never been confining.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
I don't think it's going to confine
I think we could hit 10 percent; if we hit
us all that much either.
it consistently over a period of time we probably would have a
consultation. But I don't think that in itself is going to affect
anything too much, so I think we're talking about cosmetics here.
MR. BOEHNE.
It seems to me that raising it could convey the
wrong impression.
I think the subtleties that we're talking about
here are just that--very subtle. And after all these months if it
were raised to 7 to 11 percent, I think it would overstate what is
likely to happen and it would also be released in February, which
might not be the most convenient time for it to be released.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't feel strongly about this.
There's
something to what you say.
The only argument I see on the other side
is that we're so close to the top of the 6 to 10 percent range, it
looks a little funny keeping it there.
MR. WALLICH. If we're going to raise the borrowing, even
though that number is not published, the text of the directive will

-68-

12/19-20/83

indicate that it is consistent to have some reaction in the funds
rate. It is peculiar to leave it unchanged when the rate is so close
to the top anyway.
MR. PARTEE. We're not going to raise borrowings--are we?-unless we decide to snug up, which is getting along into the period.
Then the funds rate may go up and then we'll change the range. That's
the order in which it ought to occur.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think changing the range would not send the
wrong signals; it would send the right signals.
I could live with 6
to 10 percent, but I prefer 7 to 11 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many prefer 7 to 11 percent? Four.
[Secretary's note: Messrs. Gramley, Keehn, Morris and Wallich.], How
many prefer 6 to 10 percent? Six or seven--an enormous difference.
Well, that suggests we leave it at 6 to 10 percent, but it's not a
life or death difference as far as I'm concerned.
MR. GUFFEY. Just a matter of clarification: When you make
the statement--I'm paraphrasing--that if things go in one direction
you have the finger on the trigger, are you talking about the
aggregates or are you talking about economic activity? Or do you have
to combine those two things before you pull the trigger?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to some extent you have to combine
them. But we're not going to get all that much news on the economy,
as we suggested. I think that if the aggregates, particularly Ml, are
running a little high and we haven't in all likelihood gotten adverse
economic news, the present sense continues.
MR. GUFFEY.
aggregates because--

So we are relying a little more heavily on the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just because of the timing. We could get
some very sour economic news. If suddenly everybody stops shopping
before Christmas and sales don't look so good-MR. GRAMLEY.

Because they've run out of money?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --and the unemployment rate goes up three
tenths of a percent and employment doesn't do much and the industrial
production figure for December goes up only two tenths of a percent,
all that would give me a little pause. But I don't expect that to
happen.
MR. PARTEE. It used to be that in Chicago department store
sales were negative the week after Christmas; returns exceeded sales.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Only in Chicago?

If that should be picked up by the newspapers--

negative sales--

MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, do you suggest taking out this
modifying phrase about lesser restraint in the context of a
significant shortfall of growth in the aggregates? It's in there now.

-69-

12/19-20/83

If we were to have December flat and January developing flat in money
growth, wouldn't you want to have that leeway?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we would have to do is have a
meeting. The proposal is to leave it out simply to indicate that
there is still some bias toward a little tightening rather than the
reverse.
MR. ROBERTS.

But if that happens, you would probably have a

meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
that's right.

Oh, if they were really flat, I think

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
or something like that?

Shouldn't we put in "Merry Christmas"

MR. MORRIS.
By the time they read it, it's too late.
should say "Happy Valentine's Day"!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have a merry Christmas!

We

The Committee in the short run seeks to

Well, what about the specifications for the aggregates?
We
can take straight alternative B or, as I said, I'd be just as happy to
knock off the halves. Or we could have something different.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't make any difference.

Very little.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
So why spend any time on it?
In
fact, the advantage of knocking off the halves is that it looks less
precise.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You get round numbers; that is precisely

right.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. PARTEE.

People who know what we're doing--

Do you want to knock off the halves?

I would.
Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, let me reformulate.
We have
alternative B without the halves and 6 to 10 percent [for the funds
rate range].
"The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain at
least the existing degree of reserve restraint."
We move up the
sentence on M1 and the aggregates to follow the other sentence.
MS. TEETERS.

Ml still goes after M2 and M3, doesn't it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
We can't make a major change in one
meeting! And somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable should
the aggregates expand more rapidly within the context of continuing
strength of economic recovery.
Got that?
And I am saying all the

-70-

12/19-20/83

other changes that I didn't mention there are as in this crossed out
[Bluebook draft version].
This wording "consistent with the targets"
Got it?
is crossed out.
I still think it's more
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
accurate to say "should the aggregates expand more rapidly and/or the
economic recovery continue at"--I don't know what word you would want
to use, Paul.
MR. PARTEE.

Accelerate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Because the way it reads now we're
kind of locked in depending on the aggregates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is correct technically,
but it makes it so fuzzy otherwise.
I think that's true of the way it
was last time.
MR. GRAMLEY. It might give a little more weight to the
recovery if we left the order of the sentence the way it is now:
"Depending on evidence about the continuing strength of economic
recovery...somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable should the
aggregates expand more rapidly."
SPEAKER(?)
MS. TEETERS.

That's correct.
I think that's right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
bit of flexibility there.

That's an acceptable way of getting a

I'm not sure it makes a lot of
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes.
difference to me.
It sounds like quite a few of you are just saying
that the whole thing would be the same, but we would just put a period
after "expand more rapidly."
MR. GRAMLEY.

Yes.

MS. TEETERS.

And leave out the lesser restraint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all right.
putting a period after "more rapidly."
Okay.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
Governor Gramley
President Guffey
President Keehn
Governor Martin
President Morris
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
President Roberts
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich
One dissent.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

All we're doing is

-71-

12/19-20/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
In the boilerplate we'll change the
sentence to say that housing starts gained in November, if that's
acceptable. I think we'll have to come back to you on the date of the
next meeting.
I'm not sure about my own calendar at this point, but
it will probably be Monday/Tuesday of the previous week, if you don't
have problems with that. What we need to know--let Mr. Bernard know-what days you have insurmountable problems on.
I suppose we can't go
beyond Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday of that previous week.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. BALLES.
Chairman.

January 30, 31 and February 1.
I'm having trouble hearing down here, Mr.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let Mr. Bernard know if you have any
insuperable problems on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday of that week;
that's January 30-31 and February 1. Those seem to be the likely
days, if we have to change [the meeting dates].
[We can't do it] the
week of the 12th since I'd have to testify on the 9th or the 10th.
MR. BOEHNE. You put a high probability on it being that last
couple of days in January?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, but I'm not sure.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
compressing the period?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

Is there some advantage to

That's what I'm trying to do.

The problem would be--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Do you need more than one week?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably not, that's why the logical day
to do it may be on February 1st if I'm testifying on the 8th. We
could do it as late as February 2nd, so consider that date too.
Consider January 30th and 31st and February 1st and 2nd.
The
sandwiches are not quite there. We [will end this meeting and] take
up this question of the foreign lending program and just dispose of
that now if you want to.
END OF MEETING

