Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 23, 1983

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 23, 1983, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roberts
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan, and Mrs. Horn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Balles, Black, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco, Richmond, and Atlanta respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Eisenmenger, Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel,
Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

8/23/83

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of-Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Keran, Koch, Mullineaux, Parthemos,
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Dallas, Cleveland, San Francisco, Atlanta,
Philadelphia, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Burger, and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, and New York, respectively
Ms. Clarkin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 23, 1983
[Secretary's note:
The Committee members convened on the afternoon of
August 22, 1983 in a session not considered part of the formal FOMC
meeting. In that session, the group held an exploratory discussion of
issues relating to the way the Committee conducts its business. The
transcript of the discussion is included in the Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Mr. Cross, proceed.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What remaining foreign currency
balances does the Treasury have now after paying off the Carter bonds?
MR. CROSS.

It's about $3-1/2 billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. CROSS.

That's all?

Yes.

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, that's right.
The total for all currencies
is $3 billion at current rates and $4 billion at historical rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do you have a question?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I have a general comment to
make. I think there are two types of intervention:
One is [based on]
the modest, narrow concept of countering disorderly markets; the other
is when one wants to lean against stronger trends. And the second
really should be done not only in concert with other key central banks
but in a package approach in which other actions--not just
intervention--are taken. I think what was done fell between those two
schools. Now, it still had a useful purpose.
I wouldn't agree with
some of the public comment that it was a complete failure.
It had the
politically useful--and I use the word politically in the very
broadest sense of the term--function of demonstrating that the United
States was willing to meet its Williamsburg Summit commitments of
cooperation. And it certainly checked for a few days the very strong
upward trend that seemed to be out of all proportion to the upward
movement in U.S. [interest] rates. It's quite clear that it didn't
leave a good taste in people's mouths, although some people in the
market thought it was a useful thing to do.
On balance, I think the
general consensus was that it didn't turn out to be very effective.
Secondly, I think there was some irritation on the part of European
central banks that on the key night, a Thursday night, we did not
follow through and do any intervention in the Far East--we had no
authority to do that--when there was a very major movement. And this
followed a day on which the Bundesbank on its own had asked the
central banks of many small European countries to join in on the
intervention. And, therefore, it left a rather bad taste in their
mouths and they later came out with this statement that Sam referred
to, and I think that just about finished the possibility of any really
effective concerted intervention. I only make these comments to give
you my perspective--a report card, so to speak, of this particular
incident.
I don't know whether Paul agrees or not.

8/23/83

MS. TEETERS.
I didn't realize we didn't have the authority
to intervene in the Far East.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're kept on a very close leash.
When I first became Undersecretary of the Treasury and we had the need
to intervene, Arthur Burns also would keep the New York Fed on a very
close leash. That went on for a week or two.
He would say that [the
Desk] had $25 million and when they used it up they had to come back.
And then there would be a consultation with the Treasury.
I was
following it very closely and I felt policy with that close a leash
didn't make any sense.
So, I said to Arthur Burns that if we were
serious about it, we had to give the New York Desk more room; and he
agreed finally. The Desk ended up having a very substantial amount of
discretion, including in the Far East, and also with not too small a
dollar amount.
Frequently there was not a dollar limit as such. Just
the process of consultation alone [is cumbersome].
If we need to
intervene and are getting close to the end of the money authorization
for the day--[which might be] $25, $50, or $75 million depending on
the market--by the time we get through to the Treasury and the
Treasury consults with the Chairman and then they get back to us, at a
minimum that will be 20 minutes; sometimes it can be an hour or two.
So, I personally feel that if it's a serious concerted intervention,
we have to give a little more discretion to the Desk.
I don't think
that view is very popular, certainly not in this Treasury.
John?
MR. BALLES.
I saw at least one press report that indicated
the initial intervention by the Treasury was unilateral and did not
involve coordination with any foreign central bank. I was just going
to ask, Tony, if it's a fair question:
Is that true or not?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

No, I don't think that's true.

MR. CROSS. The first day that we intervened, which occurred
rather late in the afternoon, it was intervention by the United States
[only] but we had talked with the other central banks about what we
intended to do. Then, subsequently, we were acting more or less in
concert.
MR. BALLES.
MR. CROSS.

Well, as usual, the press got things screwed up.
Yes, I saw some reports that were wrong.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, what was a little unusual was
In hindsight,
that the Treasury went out and made an announcement.
I'm not so sure that was a great idea. Normally that isn't the way we
would do it unless we were planning a very major effort, which we used
to do by activating swap lines, taking a monetary policy measure--what
I call a package approach. Then when we make an announcement, we get
They announced it,
more credibility. Anyway, that's a minor point.
or simply after a couple of days answered questions.
Did I hear that the historical cost
MR. ROBERTS.
Question:
of the currencies we own [is $4 billion and] the current value is $3
Does that mean an unrealized loss of a billion dollars on
billion?
currencies?
MR. TRUMAN.

No, those are the Treasury's losses.

8/23/83

MR. ROBERTS.

I mean for the United States.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.
But on the other hand, Ted, we
had made an enormous amount of money in our intervention. Just on the
Carter bonds alone--selling those, which is done to get foreign
currency--not only was there a large interest rate savings but there
was also a big profit.
MR. ROBERTS.
Stabilization Fund?

Where does all that flow through--the Exchange

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, and the Exchange Stabilization
Fund when I was there was in the red.
By the time I left it was in
the black because of the profits that we had made, even though not all
of the profits went into the Stabilization Fund.
Some of them ended
up in the general account.

Tony?

MR. PARTEE. We have some book losses, though, don't we,
That's my impression.

MR. TRUMAN. The Federal Reserve has about $830 million in
But
unrealized losses at the moment, if you want to call it that.
unrealized losses of the Treasury are about $900 million.
MR. FORD. So that I understand, I'm trying to summarize for
myself what you said just now. Would it be fair to say that you're
saying either do it whole hog or don't do it?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think in a case of countering
disorderly markets, in the very narrow sense of that term, we can do
that on modest basis.
That involves more a quasi-continuing presence
from time-to-time in the market without making a big deal out of it.
The second type is concerted intervention or leaning against the wind,
which was a situation that was posed to us because in the larger sense
of the term one can argue that this was a very disorderly movement.
The abruptness and the size of the market movement in response to a
relatively modest uptick in U.S. interest rates was out of proportion.
Yes, I feel that we shouldn't do that kind of major, concerted
intervention unless there's a package approach and we really mean it
and don't keep such a close hold on the Desk. That's my own view.
MR. PARTEE.

But you would still sterilize it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Oh, yes.

MS. TEETERS.
Tony, what do you consider a major
intervention?
This totaled $3.7 billion over those few weeks.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. CROSS.

billion.

Our share of the intervention was $250 million.

MS. TEETERS.
But the total intervention was just over $3.7
That looks big to me and just not on the proper scale.
MR. CROSS.

billion.

Our share was $300 odd million.

Intervention by the Europeans and others was $2.4

8/23/83

MR. RICE.

What was the total in 1978?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
all central banks.

I can't give you a gross figure for

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The United States alone did billions.

MR. PARTEE.

Of course, the dollar was weak.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We started off without foreign
currencies so we had to activate the swaps, and I suppose we got in
Sometimes we have to stick with
hock by about as much as $8 billion.
intervention. It's not an easy, simple, black and white thing. For
example, when we announced that big dollar rescue package on
November 1, [1978], even though we had a whole package of measures and
even though there was worldwide consultation and even though the
dollar turned around very sharply on the first day, we had to make it
stick and make the markets believe we meant business and that [what we
were doing] was credible. To give time for the fundamental
improvement in our balance of payments to become more and more
apparent, we had to stick with substantial intervention all through
November and December. On January 2 the markets turned around on
their own and then there was such an inflow that we were able to repay
our swaps and over the year to begin accumulating foreign currencies
because the dollar was rising too fast. That was a situation where we
had very effective concerted tactics and yet still needed
intervention. Sometimes I hear the argument that [if] it is an
effective concerted package which involves domestic monetary policy,
then intervention isn't needed at all. That was a case where we did
need it.
[We need to]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

ratify the transactions.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will ratify the
transactions. Mr. Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Statement--see

Questions?]

MR. BALLES. Yes, I have one, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to get
Peter's perspective on the new wrinkle added--or should I say
reintroduced--at last month's meeting of the Committee, which was to
pay attention not just to borrowing but to excess reserves as well.
In other words, we were going back to a free reserve or net borrowed
reserve concept if I understood that correctly. Just from your
perspective, how if at all does that new wrinkle affect your ability
to carry out the Committee's instructions or goals?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it worked satisfactorily in
this period.
I don't know that it will always be that satisfactory.
It depends on the behavior of excess reserves, which tended not to be
as high this last period. They averaged a little over $400 million,
and we were pretty much programming them in our path-building at the
If we
One week we moved that up to $400 million.
$350 million level.

8/23/83

were to get weeks when there was a much stronger demand for excess
reserves, it could be more troublesome to operate on that basis. But
it has not been a significant problem.
MR. BALLES. The reason I raised that question, Mr. Chairman,
is that if you go back and look at the history of the relationship of
excess reserves to the economy, it appears to me at least to be
trendless and erratic.
I would have to judge that any sustained move
to instruct the Desk to follow free reserve or net borrowed reserve
targets would be counterproductive, and I would advise against it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what the basis for that
is.
I don't know whether one would get any better results following
borrowings alone; I would suspect not.
MR. BALLES. Pay your money and take your choice, I guess.
Personally, I'd have more faith in just following the borrowing.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I think there has been some rise [in excess
reserves] this year; it abated a bit in just the last month or so.
We
essentially have somewhat higher levels of excess this year than
earlier; and I tend to relate that to some of our Reserve Bank
operational reviews of overdrafts and things like that, which I think
have made some bankers want to hold higher levels of excess reserves.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On another matter, in view of the
experience we've had in the last few weeks in the way the markets
absorbed this large U.S. Treasury borrowing:
You said earlier that
there had been some econometric analysis indicating that if there were
substantial reductions in the deficit, interest rates might be, say, a
couple points lower.
Was that analysis done on the basis of current
conditions in the economy or was that analysis based upon a more
robust economy or higher utilization of capacity?
MR. KICHLINE. It was done taking the quarterly econometric
model and keyed off what was the equivalent of the staff's forecast-the one that we had prepared in July--and then taking a $50 billion
expenditure cut. We also did it with a $50 billion tax increase.
Essentially the starting point, the initial conditions, would be the
July staff forecast.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, common sense would tell me that
if a year from now the economy were functioning at a much higher level
of utilization of capacity and you did the same econometric analysis-and at that time we got a major move to reduce the budgetary deficit-we would get an even bigger impact in terms of interest rate
reduction. Is that a sensible conclusion?
MR. KICHLINE.

I think, unfortunately, that's right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Why "unfortunately"?

MR. KICHLINE. One of the problems with these exercises is
that they are all dependent on the structure of the model one is
using. Use a different model and get a different answer. It also
depends on initial conditions.
In our model it's a non-linear
relationship so that we get a bigger bang for the buck as we get
closer to potential or full capacity utilization.

8/23/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Why is that?

MR. KICHLINE. It has to do with the non-linear demand for
money function, essentially. The elasticity of money varies over
time, and in that model as we get closer to capacity utilization,
short-term rates would be rising substantially. And if you take the
heat off in absolute terms--and this is done absolutely, the number of
basis points involved--short-term rates would drop more than they
would otherwise.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter may not agree with me, but what
the experience of the last few weeks--with this very large Treasury
borrowing in the markets--indicated to me at least is that the other
factors swamped, or were more important than, the size of the
borrowing in ultimately determining the level of interest rates in the
markets.
So, even though in the early stages of the borrowing there
were considerable interest rate pressures geared to the size of the
borrowing, the whole amount got digested very easily with interest
rates ultimately coming down somewhat because of other factors.
It
wasn't the size per se that caused that much of a problem in the
overall context of current conditions and perceptions about monetary
policy. I don't know if you would agree with that or not, Peter.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't entirely. I think the size was a
factor in the extent to which the market backed up.
It came down
again very fast, but I think it may be premature to say that the
market has really digested this; it may be regurgitated again, too.
MR. PARTEE. Of course, we're talking about a very large
financing. I guess it's true of the particular set of financing that
occurred, but my recollection of the statistics is that both the month
of July and the third quarter show substantially reduced federal
financing compared to the second quarter.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
about $50 billion, isn't it?

The third quarter is going to be

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is reduced, seasonally adjusted, from
the very high seasonally adjusted amount in the second quarter.
MR. PARTEE. It was $65 billion or something like that in the
second quarter. And as a matter of fact, total credit expansion in
July, for which the Bluebook reports a number, is down considerably.
MR. GRAMLEY. Generally speaking, $50 billion a quarter is
what we'll be looking at.

high;

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is because the second quarter was so
I think that's an illusion.

MR. PARTEE. Well, that may be because they also had all that
tax-exempt financing that went into governments.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No other questions? We'll ratify the
transactions. Without objection. Mr. Kichline.
MR. KICHLINE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

8/23/83

[The floor is] now open for questions and
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
comments and disagreements and alternative scenarios.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You seem to be assuming that next
year we will have a downward drift in long-term interest rates,
notwithstanding the improved economy, etc.
MR. KICHLINE.
That's right. The rates in the forecast are
in Appendix I of the Bluebook. We do have in there, for example, in
the mortgage area about a percentage point reduction in rates from the
fourth quarter of this year to the end of 1984. We have had this kind
of pattern for a while. We also have corporate bond rates drifting
down.
It comes out of our forecast; it's sort of an iterative
procedure. But our major view is that inflation will still be quite
mild and that indeed, with the slowing of nominal GNP growth that we
foresee, we could have a little drifting down of short rates and still
meet the Committee's targets and that the good inflation performance
over time ought to show through in some reduction in long rates.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. KICHLINE.

Now short rates are down too?
That's right.

MR. WALLICH. And this would be about a constant real rate,
given some decline in inflation?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have a decline in real rates implied
because inflation this year and next year is about the same.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. PARTEE.
question about it.
MR. KICHLINE.
it's an act of faith.

An act of faith?

Well, in large part.
[Unintelligible]

starting it; there's no

Maybe even when it's econometrically derived,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any forecast is an act of faith!

MR. GUFFEY.
I'd like to step back. You spoke of next year's
rates.
[In the Bluebook appendix] an increase in rates is shown in
the fourth quarter, which I assume is built into your Greenbook
forecast.
Can you comment on the background of that assumption?
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might note that a good part of
my briefing is devoted to these questions.
MR. GUFFEY.

I'll wait.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I have a healthy respect for the forecast
produced by the Board staff.
In light of yesterday's discussion, I
feel it necessary to "fess up," as it were:
We [in San Francisco] do
have a significantly different forecast, though not for this year,
where we come in very close to the [Board staff] forecast.
By the

8/23/83

time we get to 1984 there is a difference that I feel compelled to
comment on.
I'll try to explain very briefly why. On real GNP, the
Board staff reduced its forecast for the end of '83 to the end of '84
fractionally this time. They were at 4.2 percent in July and they're
at 4 percent in the latest revision; so, they're down fractionally.
We had already been higher than they were in our July forecast, which
was a 5.1 percent increase.
Our staff, rightly or wrongly, has now
upped that to a 5.8 percent real GNP gain fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter.
In trying to track down the differences--because what I
expect every time from my staff is some explanation or attempted
reconciliation of differences between their forecast and that of the
Board staff--it gets down to the basic methodology. The Board staff
has a model that's driven by M2 and we're old fashioned enough to be
back to using Ml.
The reason I feel compelled to comment on this is
that I have in front of me a chart that shows the relationship between
M2 and personal income going back quite a ways.
It tracked pretty
well up until 1978 when all these things began to happen to rates paid
on various components of the Ms.
Since that time any relationship
between M2 and income is just invisible.
In fact, they quite often go
in opposite directions. We have some faith that we're about to see a
restoration of normal velocity patterns in Ml.
MR. PARTEE.

Does Ml look better?

MR. BALLES.
Yes, except obviously for 1982, when it just
fell out of bed and was hopeless.
What we're expecting--and it's a
forecast not a fact--is that we're in the process of seeing the
restoration of the normal velocity trend in Ml which, if realized by
the fourth quarter as we forecast, would mean a considerably faster
growth of the economy going into 1984.
Our specific monetary
assumption is that for the balance of this year Ml will grow at the
upper end of its range and that as we move into 1984 it will grow in
I think your forecast, Jim,
the middle of the 4 to 8 percent range.
was based on M2 in the middle of the range both for the balance of
this year and next year.
So, it's simply the difference in
methodologies. All sorts of details, of course, would have to be
explored, but just in a gross sense that's why we come out with a
different forecast.
Since we have stronger real growth, we have less
unemployment. Time will tell which of these views is correct.
MR. CORRIGAN.

What does that forecast have for inflation?

MR. BALLES.
It's a little more than the Board staff has.
Specifically, they're expecting 4.3 percent this year, fourth quarter-

to-fourth quarter, versus our 5.1 percent; next year they're at 4.4
percent and we're at 5.2 percent.
SPEAKER(?).

What about the interest rates?

MR. BALLES.

We don't forecast interest rates.

We don't know

how.

MR. WALLICH. Do you assume that velocity will grow at the
same old rate hereafter or is it a reduced but stable rate?
MR. BALLES. We assume velocity will approximate its
I'm not sure--I
historical growth rate more than what we saw in 1982.
don't think anybody can be, Henry--that it's going to come back right

8/23/83

on or somewhere around the historical average, but it's certain to
bounce back and be reasonably similar to what it used to be--up 2 or 3
percent a year.
MR. FORD. I'm just looking at the trend for the last four
quarters:
Starting with the third quarter of 1982, Ml has grown by
6.1, 13, 14, and 12 percent and nominal GNP [growth] was well below it
for the first three of those four quarters. Then in the last quarter,
the second quarter of this year, velocity has finally made a comeback
and is now running ahead.
That reinforces in my thinking what John is
saying about the likelihood of a rebound toward more normal velocity.
What worries me was that we could really see this surge. M1 was
surging way ahead of nominal GNP and now all of a sudden nominal GNP
has zoomed ahead on a concurrent basis.
That obviously isn't the
right way to look at it, but that's the way a lot of people around
here have been talking about it for the last few quarters.
So, if you
want to continue talking in that vein, we should now be concerned
about the fact that the second-quarter nominal GNP went up by 13
percent when Ml went up by a little less.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the real economy, Jim:
What level of housing starts and what level of automobile sales are
you assuming for the fourth quarter?
MR. KICHLINE. Housing we have at 1.55 million units at an
annual rate; that would be down from our guess of 1.65 million units
for the current quarter, which entails some decline for August and
September.
So, we have a further drop of 100,000 units in the fourth
quarter.
For auto sales in the fourth quarter we're assuming 9-3/4
million units in total, of which domestic sales would be 7.4 million,
and that's about where they've been running in the first half of this
quarter to date. We have domestic auto sales at this higher level but
not rising further.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would guess, although it's nothing
other than gut instinct, that those levels are somewhat optimistic.
Housing transactions are beginning to fall.
And as the pent up demand
for automobiles begins to be satisfied to some degree, I have a
feeling that that's a very high level of automobile sales to be
projecting for the fourth quarter.
MR. MARTIN. I would join Tony only in the comment on
housing. I was convinced yesterday that the interest concessions have
been so narrow in automobile financing that their removal is not going
to be a material factor in the fourth quarter. But I would argue that
housing in the fourth quarter will be down more likely by 200,000 to
250,000 than 100,000 units. The cancellation rates in the escrows in
Dallas, Chicago, San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Atlanta
are such that the sales will not be completed. The rates are floating
up 150 and in some cases 200 basis points. Those sales are just not
going to be closed and that, of course, will back up into starts and
other housing figures.
So, as usual, I would indicate a deeper,
further degree of pessimism on the housing front.
MR. ROBERTS.
MR. MARTIN.

Are you referring to single-family primarily?
New single-family homes primarily.

8/23/83

-10-

MR. ROBERTS. Isn't there some increase in the multifamily
area that is partially offsetting that?
MR. MARTIN. Yes, but there, Ted, we have the condition of
high vacancy rates for apartments in the major markets in the Sunbelt
and a very low household formation rate in 1982. There is some
controversy about what the formation rate was last year; some people
say there wasn't any for the first time in twenty-five years or
something like that. I think that's a bit too pessimistic, but the
Board's staff indicated that it's several hundred thousand households.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is that because of the demographics
or because people aren't getting married, or what?
MR. MARTIN. The staff comment yesterday [at the Board
briefing referred to] the impact of the recession. I think it goes
beyond that. I think there are some changes. Some younger folks are
staying with Momma and Poppa a little longer and I think there's a
definite slowing in the rate of [household] formation.
MR. PARTEE.

They are spending their money on a new car.

MR. MARTIN. Or a new computer. Then there's a question, of
course, of the thrift industry problems, if any, at today's interest
rates. We had some work done here a while back--I'm not sure that Jim
would still underline that work--in which we second guessed the thrift
industry economists and it came down to this: A very rough figure of
100 basis points in weighted average costs for the thrifts means a
pre-tax impact of about $1 billion. If you remember the rise in rates
since June, which is the month in which we received those data from
the thrifts and translated that into a post-tax profitability, [it
means that] they don't have any [profit].
And, of course, for the
savings banks you get a figure that's in the red. But some of you in
your own Districts know that picture of the savings banks a lot better
than I do.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I thought John Balles was going to
make my speech for me. He started off pretty much the same way, but
we come out with less real growth next year than he did, though a tad
more than the Board staff is projecting. The main difference is that
as we looked at prices next year, we paid right much attention to the
behavior of money in recent months in addition to the effects, as the
Board staff suggested, of a great firming of labor markets, a
depreciation of the dollar, and the drought this year. And we believe
that's going to result in somewhat higher prices than the staff is
projecting. If I figured it right, they have the implicit deflator
[rising] about 4-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of '83 to the
fourth quarter of '84; we think [the increase] might be near 6
percent. That's really the significant difference between us and
John.
MR. PARTEE.

You have prices and he has real growth.

MR. BALLES.

I like mine better.

I
MR. BLACK. I hasten to add that I hope we [are wrong].
thought we were going to end up the same place but that's exactly the
difference.

-11-

8/23/83

MR. KEEHN. By way of a District report, I must say that
economic conditions in the Middle West are very significantly improved
and would be broadly consistent with the outline that Jim has given
The only point I'd make--and I think Jim used the
[for the nation].
phrase "capital goods are poised for recovery"--is that the people who
are running the major capital goods firms in the Middle West really
are becoming very, very discouraged by the outlook.
I'm now talking
about the heavy capital side:
foundry equipment, railroad equipment,
and heavy trucks. Though things may look a little better off a very
weak base, people on that side of life are becoming terribly
discouraged that 1983 is by now largely gone and the early part of
1984 is to a large extent gone as well.
Most of them say the earliest
they expect recovery is in late 1984.
So, they continue to be very
pessimistic.
Perhaps that's typical for this point in a recovery but,
as a consequence of all this, our outlook for 1984 would be modestly
lower than the Board staff's outlook.
MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I sense a somewhat different tone
developing at this meeting in regard to where the economy is going
than I detected at the last meeting. We have seen some signs of
slowing in retail sales, although it's hard to assess what one month's
numbers mean. Prospectively, in housing we've heard a lot
qualitatively about the slowdown in mortgage applications and so on.
Still in all, I think it's wise to recall that if anyone had forecast
6 months ago that we were going to be looking at a 9 percent real GNP
growth in the second quarter and 8 percent in the third, he would have
been considered slightly off his rocker.
[The expansion] has
developed much, much more strongly than nearly everybody had foreseen.
In my judgment, probably the best single analogy one can use for the
economy is that of the fly wheel:
What happened in this quarter is
going to happen in the next one.
My guess, if I had to make one,
would be that we're more likely to see somewhat faster growth than the
staff has forecast for 1984. And I think the big candidate for an
overrun is business investment.
It's something I cannot pin down
except to say that the increase in contracts and orders for plant and
equipment in the past two quarters has been very, very substantial,
but I have a hunch that more is developing in this area than what was
allowed for.
Still in all, if I had to put out a forecast, it wouldn't be
drastically different from what the staff has for next year.
It might
be a half point more or something like that, but certainly nothing
that would change in major ways the outlook for employment and for
prices. One of the things that we do need to think about and concern
ourselves with is what may be happening in the food area. The staff
has a 7 percent rise in food prices fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.
Unless we get some rain of substantial magnitude soon, it could be a
lot more than that. It would be worrisome if that got built into the
underlying inflation. It's awfully hard to keep that from happening.
I'm not quite sure what to do about it, but I worry about it.
MR. PARTEE.

Seed the clouds.

MR. MORRIS.
Some work I've done is supportive of your
feeling on the capital goods sector.
I've compared the current
expansion to the expansion of 1975-76 and in general the broad
measures show that we're tracking very closely to that expansion. One
sector that is different, even though the capital goods people in the

8/23/83

-12-

Middle West may not appreciate it at the moment, is that capital goods
orders are coming in much stronger than they did at the corresponding
phase of the 1975-76 expansion.
MR. RICE.

Isn't the composition different, though?

MR. KEEHN. It's a different segment of the capital goods
side.
I'm talking about machine tools, foundry equipment; I don't
think perhaps you are.
MR. MORRIS.

But doesn't that side hit the lag in any event?

MR. KEEHN. Perhaps so, but it has been lagging so long that
the guys are getting awfully discouraged.
For example, to give you
just one quick figure:
The delivery of railroad cars this year will
be 5,000 units.
It typically runs about 80,000 to 85,000 units and in
1980 it ran 120,000.
This year's figure will be lower than any year
since 1933 and I'm not sure the figures in 1933 were that good. This
provides the kind of environment in which people are thinking and
they've become very discouraged about it.
MR. PARTEE.

Is there some increase in orders?

MR. KEEHN. No, orders have been absolutely flat.
Now, there
are some reasons for that; nonetheless, it provides a very difficult
environment in which people are operating.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Union Pacific people tell me that
carloadings have not gone up as much as the rest of the economy and
normal relationships would indicate, although the published data don't
seem to make that very clear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While I was on the phone the other day I
was looking at Business Week, which has this business indicator
[measure] on the front page. They compared last month to two months
ago and last year, and they had a comparison with five or seven years
ago. They included the steel industry, which is running 40 percent
below the figures of five years ago.
Every other industry they
included was up 30 to 40 percent compared to whatever it was 5 or 7
years ago.
There's a tremendous contrast between what is going on in
steel, as reflected in that, and in the rest of the economy.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The barge business is also very, very
bad.
It has not picked up.
There seems to be less movement of coal,
heavy material, steel, and even of grain. But coming back to food
prices:
I thought we were sitting with such huge surpluses.
I'm not
quite sure I understand why there is such a big price impact.
MR. GRAMLEY. We are, in wheat. But the inventories of corn
and soybeans are going to be quite low. If the crop forecast is
reduced much further, I think we will get some liquidation of
livestock herds, hogs and cattle both, and then a very large run-up of
meat prices next year. That is the big risk.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
than corn that you think--

I see.

So, it's meat prices rather

8/23/83

-13-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
including the Russians.

Just the feeling that everybody buys,

MR. GUFFEY.
Just to follow up on that comment:
Our people
had [forecast] an increase in food prices in 1984 of about 5 to 6
percent until this drought really hit the corn and small grain crops;
now they've moved it up to 7 percent or a little over. And the reason
the rise is only that modest is the fact that in the early part of
1984 there will be a liquidation of red meat [animals], both hogs and
cattle. As a result there will be a depressed meat price and the
impact on food prices won't occur until later in 1984. So, the yearly
contribution to inflation [from the food] price increase will be
modest--in the 7 percent range.
But by the end of 1984 quite likely
we'll see food prices rising much more rapidly than 7 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
end of 1984.
SPEAKER(?).

Well, they'll get that new crop in by the

Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Then people will stop liquidating their meat
animals and that will really push meat prices up.
MR. GUFFEY. As somebody observed, the PIK program was ill
devised but what they also missed was Mother Nature being a
participant in it.
It essentially has been much more effective in
bringing down the excess stocks of corn and other crops that normally
would be harvested in the fall than anybody ever imagined.
MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I have a different forecast,
which I've had since February. I did have growth of 8-3/4 percent for
one quarter, but I think interest rates at these levels will calm down
the economy, bringing it to the levels we had previous to the last
run-up during the fall.
And my real [GNP] forecast for next year is
at the bottom of the FOMC [members' range].
I think [GNP growth] will
probably slow down to below 4 percent, fourth quarter-over-fourth
quarter, which will both reduce the inflation rate and increase
unemployment next year. We don't have a stable relationship on
velocity. It may return. Until it does, it seems to me that what is
more important is the level of rates and what that does to economic
performance.
So, I'm anticipating a much slower recovery, with all
the consequences that go with that slower rate of growth.
MR. ROBERTS.
Since that hasn't been true up to now--real
rates have not slowed the growth at all--why will it be true later in
the year?
MS. TEETERS.
I think there was a great deal of pent up
demand, particularly in the housing and automobile areas, that came
out in the early parts of the recovery. As that pent up demand is met
and as the rate [increases are felt]--obviously, [housing] is very
sensitive to a mortgage rate somewhere between 12-1/2 and 14 percent-we also are going to run out of people who qualify for mortgages at
this level or even at 12-1/2 percent as we move further into the
recovery. So, I think that we will see a moderation in housing demand
and that automobile demand probably will moderate also.
GM, as you
know, raised its prices about 2 percent today. Well, 2 percent, given
the level they're starting from, makes the real cost of owning an

-14-

8/23/83

automobile very high and rising.
that in a very economic way.

And I think people are responding to

MR. ROBERTS. We should keep in mind, though, that the
housing recovery started at a higher level of mortgage rates than
you're suggesting would be a problem.
MS. TEETERS. Well, it means that more people who could
qualify have been wiped out already.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did you really have an 8 percent
third-quarter projection back in February?
MS. TEETERS.

No, for the second quarter.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even when you were so worried about
interest rates back in February?
MS. TEETERS.
going to do.

Yes.

It was obvious what the inventories were

I sort of agree with Nancy but for different
MR. PARTEE.
reasons. And that is--though I realize Jim has put the saving rate
back [up] some--that I just think the projected saving rate is too
low. For the projection period it's around 4-1/2 percent as we go
through 1984.
I think that's an extraordinarily low rate. And it's
not consistent with all the incentives to save that the government has
provided with IRAs and deferred compensation. I'm not sure whether
the problem is that income is being understated--it could be--in the
forecast.
But that means stronger plant and equipment or something to
provide the income that will make for a higher saving rate.
Or maybe
consumption is too high. I realize that people, because of pent up
demand, can go in and use credit actively and draw down their
financial assets in order to take care of their needs; [but] as soon
as that's over, I should think that the saving rate would be around 6
percent.
Therefore, I would come in with a little lower forecast for
the year from the fourth quarter of '83 to the fourth quarter of '84-certainly lower than John Balles has, and lower I think than Lyle has.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much of the increased spending do
you attribute to the stock market and bonds?
MR. KICHLINE.
I can't answer explicitly in terms of a
number.
I don't know what the model has on that; I don't remember.
I
do think that part of what we saw in the second quarter was a wealth
effect, and that was important in the kind of forecast that we have.
It's hard to see stock prices zooming on up in the near term; that
So, I would use that wealth effect argument
market has cooled a bit.
as helping to explain the second quarter. And that [effect] is
weakening now, given what is happening in the market.
MR. MARTIN. Jim, in terms of wealth effects for middle
income consumers, their assets are tied up in a single-family
In city after city those people are
residence, which they can't sell.
sitting there with a number on paper or in their minds as to what the
So, I wonder how
equity in their home is and they can't realize it.
important the stock market is to the middle of the pyramid.

-15-

8/23/83

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter Fousek from New York has some
projections, which I forgot. I don't have any here. You can answer
it, can't you?
MR. FOUSEK(?).
[Unintelligible] impact of the total rise in
consumer spending, 30 percent is attributed to the stock market.
MR. FORD.

Nationwide?

The change from the second quarter of
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
1982 was a rise of some 57 percent in the stock market.
SPEAKER(?).

What was the 30 percent?

MR. FOUSEK.

Of the excess increase of the--

MR. FORD.

It seems high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

What's this excess increase?

Yes, what's this excess?

MR. FOUSEK. Well, all our past relationships would have
suggested about half-MR. MARTIN. And what was the offsetting decrease?
I don't
have our [forecast] here so I can't--.
There was a decrease in the
value of the equity of housing of $30 to $40 billion for households.
Is there an offset?
They have a perception of a decrease in their
wealth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Why?

That's not in this period, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They have a decrease in their rate of

return.
MR. MARTIN. They've had a decrease in the real value of
their housing and, therefore, their equity.
They're heavily borrowed.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
the second quarter of '83.
MR. MARTIN.

Not for the second quarter of

'82 to

I believe that's exactly--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Housing prices

[were]

firm.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I think the statistics show that household
wealth has gone up somewhere between 3/4 of a trillion and a trillion
dollars in the past year, taking the two things together. Now, the
distribution of this is another question. But certainly the household
wealth statistics have looked much, much better in the past year.
How
much of that one can really expect to influence consumption is hard to
say because it is rather narrowly distributed among a small--

8/23/83

-16-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You have to look at the volume of
refinancing of existing house mortgages to begin to get some kind of
clue as to whether it influences consumer spending or not.
MR. PARTEE.
interest rates.

And there you're talking about 14 percent

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had a number of different views
expressed here about the outlook. Out of curiosity, how many people
would have a forecast significantly higher than the staff forecast?
I
will define significantly higher as roughly 1/2 percent or more on the
rate of growth over the next 18 months.
[Secretary's note:
Messrs.
Balles, Black, Gramley, Ms. Horn, Mr. Morris, and perhaps a few
others.]
How many would have a significantly lower forecast?
[Secretary's note:
Messrs. Partee, Rice, and Ms. Teeters.]
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
more or less agree with it.

There are a couple of us left who

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's quite possible.
don't we turn to Mr. Axilrod.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. BOEHNE.
the old M1A?

Why

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Steve, what has been the pattern of growth for

MR. AXILROD. The quarterly figures, starting with the third
quarter of 1982 are:
2.4 percent; 7.8 percent; 5.6 percent--held down
by shifts, I think, but I don't know the exact amounts--and 6.7
percent. And it looks like Q3 1983 will be 6.9 percent.
MR. BOEHNE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
all the possible--

Any other questions?

Mr. Axilrod answered

What is your velocity
Steve, may I ask:
MR. BALLES.
forecast or expectation for Ml for the fourth quarter?
MR. AXILROD. It's around 2 percent or that order of
magnitude for current M1.
MR. BALLES.

The historical average was how much higher?

MR. AXILROD. Well, if you use Ml without NOW accounts, which
is what we used to have, the history is that in the fourth quarter of
a recovery, its growth is around 7 percent or something like that.
Take out [unintelligible] and it'll be lower--more like 6 to 7
percent.
MR. BALLES.
True, but is that a fair comparison?
kind of old M1 with--

That is

I don't
MR. AXILROD. No, that's what I was trying to say.
think it is.
I don't think you would then reason that the 2 percent
is too low.

-17-

8/23/83

MR. BALLES. What I'm trying to get is:
What would be the
comparable figure of the old Ml velocity given the new M1 content?
Would it be 3 percent or 2 percent or what?
MR. MORRIS.

We don't know.

MR. BALLES.
I'm just trying to smoke out, if we can, what
Steve meant by "velocity is recovering but it will remain low."
I
think those are the words you used.
MR. AXILROD. What I meant was, if you go back to history
when Ml had a different composition, the numbers in the fourth quarter
of a recovery run around 5 or 6 or 7 percent. What we have now, based
on our current estimates, is something on the order of 2 percent,
which will mean GNP doesn't pick up and Ml doesn't pick up with it.
If you use the old M1A, you'd have something like 4 or 5 percent,
which would be more in line with past cycles. It just says it's some
sort of a residual transaction element if this keeps up and old M1A is
moving like it used to.
One conclusion I drew from that is that the
new Ml does have this additional element, which is holding down its
velocity. So, one might not want to extrapolate from that to higher
nominal GNP a few quarters ahead. Velocity is behaving a little
differently; that could change.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD.
Since you asked yesterday for some comparisons:
I
don't know how many of the models you follow, but we do that all the
And I feel great listening to Steve and Jim and so on, if one
time.
can only believe all this.
The others that we track, such as
Townsend-Greenspan, DRI, and Harris--your alma mater is forecasting
even lower rates, as you must know--and Chase all are giving forecasts
very similar to what the staff has.
So, that kind of alternative
makes one feel better.
I think it would be beautiful if it comes
true, but-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

It could just be that everybody is

wrong.
MR. FORD.

That's what worries me.

MR. ROBERTS. But so far the consensus is better than the
individual forecasts; that's been the experience of this guy out in
Arizona.
MR. RICE. But isn't it true that the majority of outside
forecasters expect higher interest rates?
MR. FORD.

No.

MR. RICE.

Don't they expect higher long-term rates in 1984?

MR. FORD. Well, I just have the T-bill and the prime rates.
All four of those outsiders expect, by the second quarter of 1984, the
prime to be the same as it is this quarter on average and T-bill rates
to be maybe 1/2 percentage point or more lower. I don't know about
bond rates; I didn't get that.

-18-

8/23/83

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Axilrod?

Are there any other questions addressed to

MR. PARTEE. Did I understand, Steve, that you were
expressing the view that foreign demand for U.S. investments affects
U.S. interest rates rather than U.S. exchange rates?
MR. AXILROD. I think they are probably not unrelated.
I was
assuming that the large capital inflow we've had this time, without a
sharp depreciation in the dollar so far, reflected a willingness of
the foreigners to put their money here not [wholly] independent of
interest rates but more or less independent of interest rates--that
is, there is a wide range of interest rates that wouldn't have
mattered. But that willingness really meant that the exchange rate
stayed higher than it would otherwise be instead of depreciating.
That kept our prices from being higher than they would otherwise be
and it was the price effect in my mind that kept the interest rates
from being higher. It's somewhat like in the olden days of fixed
exchange rates when we could run big balance of payments deficits and
lose [foreign] exchange reserves and in some sense have bigger
domestic purchases without getting right away the inflationary impact
of the purchases. And in my head, subject to Ted's contradiction,
something like that has been going on-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
interest rates as well?
MR. AXILROD.

Why wouldn't it have a direct effect on

Well, yes.

One would think so.

MR. PARTEE. I'd understood this as a circularity question.
I'd really dismissed foreign demands ebbing and flowing as having an
effect on U.S. interest rates because of the circularity of flow.
MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit on what you--.
same results as Steve's--

You get the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't circularity when you're
running great big current account deficits.
MR. GRAMLEY.

If you think [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That may be caused by the exchange rate.

MR. TRUMAN. It's a question of how you break into the
circle. If you think the current account deficit to some extent has
been pushed by fiscal policy or an increase in aggregate demand in the
United States, then to the extent that you can open as opposed to not
being able to open up a current account deficit, in effect the saving
that comes in does damp the rise in interest rates that a given
impetus to domestic demands would give you in a closed economy
context. That's a slightly different way of putting the same point
that Steve was making, though you obviously know, Mr. Chairman, that
one has to say where one is going to start the circle.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
and have some doughnuts.

If there are no other questions, we'll go
[Coffee break]

8/23/83

-19-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had some differences of opinion
expressed about the business outlook. There are some indications of a
little slowing [in the recovery] from the pace to date. Differences
of opinion on the outlook seem to be rooted in [unintelligible].
There are some tentative signs of a little slowing in Ml; M2 and M3
are doing pretty well in terms of the objectives.
It doesn't
necessarily strike me as a time for pronounced moves, but I'm open to
comments.
MR. PARTEE.
SEVERAL.

Let's vote on alternative B and go home!

I'll second that.

MR. ROBERTS. Well, I'd like to suggest that alternative C
would be no change. We agreed last time that we wanted 7 percent
growth in Ml and alternative C would take us there.
I think the
economy is doing great and we shouldn't change what we're doing, which
is working. And I would recommend that we go to alternative C.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I don't think we have to argue
really about whether it's "B" or "C."
We maintain the same
operational paragraph and simply say we maintain the existing degree
of reserve restraint. And we assume [borrowing of] $700 to $900
million.
I guess that's the difference between us.
If we go all the
way down to alternative C, that assumes a borrowing range as high as
$1 to $1-1/4 billion, and then we would be pushing up the federal
funds rate to 9-3/4 percent plus, whereas if we stick with $700 to
$900 million, then it's about 9-1/2 percent.
MR. PARTEE. You're objecting to the Ml number, isn't that
right? You would rather have the old Ml range. That's all he's
talking about.
MR. MORRIS.
I would remind you, Ted, that we're not
targeting Ml; we're only monitoring it.
MR. ROBERTS.
It seems we could use our monitoring a little
more sensitively, though, which I'd appreciate.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The operational paragraph says 8-1/2
and 8 percent for M2 and M3 and it says 7 percent for Ml.
I don't see
that we have to change any language, but I feel very strongly that we
not go higher than $700 to $900 million on the initial borrowing.
MR. GUFFEY.

I would agree.

MR. ROBERTS. Well, I don't know what the right level is.
You remember the discussion the last time; we were so panicked over
going to $400 million and nothing dreadful seemed to have [happened]
in the market when we went to $900 million. In fact, the rates have
subsided here.
I'd let the borrowing go up if necessary to maintain
the path.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.

Well, the rates did go up a half point, Ted.
Including long-term rates.

8/23/83

-20-

MR. MORRIS.
Net, I don't think it's a half point except for
the prime rate and the funds rate; the bill rate went up 25 basis.
MR. WALLICH. This isn't the time, really, to make a change.
Two weeks ago, I must say, I would have thought we should tighten up a
little, but the data that have come in have made me think we'd better
wait--as Steve said in his final remarks, wait and be cautious.
It
looks almost too good to be true that we can get off this bulge of Ml
with no further increase in interest rates.
And, if true, it makes me
think that something is happening to M1 in that it fails to send us a
very useful message. But both from the point of view of the monetary
aggregates and the point of view of the economy, the right thing to me
seems to be to go with "B," leave things as they are, and hope that
[the forecast] as projected here is true.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's reinforced by the fact
that we're getting credit--I'm not sure we deserve it--in that there's
a widespread perception in the financial community that it was our
tightening that started correcting that bulge. Whether it's true or
not true, we're getting the credit for it.
MR. PARTEE.

We deserve anything we can get!

MR. GRAMLEY. I think Henry is probably right and that things
aren't really as nice as they seem, but I'd just like to relax and
enjoy it awhile.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether these views
that are expressed are the consensus, but I have a certain aversion to
making unnecessary changes in these targets in the middle of the
quarter. That appears to be an extreme fine-tuning. All we really
have to do, if this is the course we want to go, is say "The Committee
seeks in the short run to maintain the existing degree of reserve
restraint."
We'll discuss how that gets interpreted. Maybe we say
that the action is expected to be associated with growth in M2 and M3
at around 8 percent--that's about what we have--and leave in the 7
percent for Ml.
MESSRS. GUFFEY, FORD, and CORRIGAN.

Yes.

Let's go home.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to discuss just precisely
what we mean by the borrowing assumption. As Steve suggested, all
It
things considered, the $700 to $900 million might be appropriate.
is $100 million higher than we set before, but it encompasses the
range that we've actually had.
Is that because you
It's $100 million higher?
MR. PARTEE.
think that the demand for borrowing is a little higher?
MR. AXILROD. It has been running, generally, quite a lot
higher.
This week it's running over $1 billion; even taking out a
couple of what I think are special cases it would be running $800 to
It
$900 million. And the federal funds rate is at 9-1/2 percent.
seems that the demand for borrowing is running a little higher than we
thought.
MR. WALLICH.
than usual?

Would that be matched by higher excess reserves

8/23/83

-21-

MR. AXILROD. I was looking at the $350 million; I was not
necessarily assuming that, Governor Wallich.
I assumed that the range
would encompass some variation in excess reserves.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're still talking specifically
of excess reserves in the $350 to perhaps $400 million area when we
make that borrowing assumption.
MS. TEETERS. Well, they've been running $650 million in the
last two weeks on the chart.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

What--excess reserves?

No, the net borrowing ran about $650 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
to $550 million.

This would imply

[excess reserves of]

$350

MR. BOEHNE. What set of numbers would keep the funds rate
more or less around 9-1/2 percent?
MR. AXILROD.
I would say somewhere between $700 and $900
million on borrowing, but one can't be absolutely certain. Mr.
Sternlight?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I agree with that. And I agree with some
looseness of that relationship, because we seem to be getting
borrowing a little over $1 billion and yet the funds rate looks as if
it's going to average a little under 9-1/2 percent. When I look back
at some rough equations I tried to draw up, $700 to $900 million might
suggest to me 9-1/2 percent or a little higher on average, but it-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the funds rate is in the short run,
I suspect, is partly affected by whether the market thinks interest
rates are going to go up or down. If they think they're going up, the
funds rate will be higher; if they think they're going down, the funds
rate will be lower.
MR. BOEHNE.
Borrowing of $700 to $900 million seems like a
reasonable starting point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Also, we have a fairly long time before
the next meeting. I thought we ought to have some sort of a
consultation in between.
MR. BOEHNE.

It's October 4th, I think.

MR. PARTEE.

I think it's an ordinary six-week interval.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the question of the federal funds
rate range. We left it at 6 to 10 percent last time and I don't know
if there's any great reason to change it.
I think its only relevance
will be when it is published.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
discussion prematurely.

I'd leave it alone.

Well, I don't want to conclude the

8/23/83

-22-

SPEAKER(?).

That's a blessing!

MR. BALLES.
I'll start an argument here, just so that we can
have something to do between now and lunch time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have some other things we can talk
about, though. I don't want to encourage it unnecessarily.
MR. BALLES.
Based on the San Francisco money market model,
we do not share the view that Ml is in the process of slowing down.
Therefore, that leads me to wonder whether the 10 percent funds rate
is going to be enough to contain Ml anywhere near the path that we
have set for this quarter. We've already overshot as it is and I
would expect some further overshoot based on our analysis. That leads
me in the direction of at least "B-" if not all the way to "C."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But how can you get that significant
a move upward for it to go over 10 percent if we're running policy as
we are and interpreting it as maintaining the existing degree of
reserve restraint?
That's the operative sentence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
tighten up on this.
MR. PARTEE.
within their ranges.

Well, if the aggregates ran high, we could

But our main aggregates are M2 and M3, which are

I guess I'm quarreling about whether "existing
MR. BALLES.
degree of reserve restraint" is in fact what we need or whether we
need a bit more restraint.
MS. HORN.
It comes down in part to whether we trust
ourselves to deal with the problem you raise when it happens, doesn't
it, John?
MR. BALLES.
That's right. We have two choices:
We can put
our confidence in the forecast, which may be wrong, or wait to see
what happens, in which case it may be too late.
MR. PARTEE. Well, since you're the one who has that forecast
--Steve doesn't have the same forecast--it's putting our trust in your
forecast as against Steve's forecast.
MR. AXILROD.
that did run higher.

That was one of the two models I referred to

It
MR. GUFFEY. I would just change the focus a little.
isn't clear to me what establishment of a borrowing figure by this
We've been operating on nonborrowed reserves
Committee really means.
It appears to me that what we're doing is
or net borrowed reserves.
simply pegging the funds rate at some level and turning over to the
Desk and in a sense to you, Mr. Chairman, where that funds rate will
I guess I'm raising a question on the
rest on a week-to-week basis.
If we're following a
operational procedures that are being followed.
regime of merely pegging the funds rate, then establishing a borrowing
level isn't very meaningful because it all cues off of what Peter and
Steve believe will give us a 9-1/2 percent funds rate. And then it is

-23-

8/23/83

adjusted from there depending on, I guess, their judgment and the
Chairman's judgment.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Well, there is some variation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much weight you put on the funds rate
is in our minds when we make the decision. And we're obviously
constraining the funds rate in some sense but we're not aiming at a
particular funds rate.
The funds rate came out a little higher--a
quarter point maybe--than we anticipated at the last meeting.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, to illustrate the point, the fact is that
the funds rate ran up in the last two weeks; it then came back down,
to be sure.
It may have been affected by technical considerations of
the [Treasury] refunding and other things. But as a member of this
Committee, I have a very difficult time saying that $700 to $900
million is the right borrowing figure when it is meaningless after the
first day, if you will, after the paths are built.
I'd rather talk
about some appropriate funds rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
talk about or what you want
meaningless after the first
We could change it in light

Well, you can talk about what you want to
to aim at, but I don't think it's
day. We haven't basically changed that.
of all these factors mentioned here.

MR. GUFFEY. When borrowing ran at the $900 to $1 billion
level, we did not follow the regime of earlier days by adjusting the
nonborrowed reserve path.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But in planning the nonborrowed
reserve path you still have been using the assumption for everything
you've said, haven't you, Peter?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Irrespective of the fact that some
weeks borrowing comes in higher or lower.
MR. GUFFEY.
borrowing.

[Unintelligible]

and then you accommodate that

MR. ROBERTS. Well, it looks to me as if we've had a
constructive effect. The policy has resulted in a path that has
slowed the [growth of the] monetary base, which is getting reflected
here in a slowing in the stock of money.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's a larger question.
talking about a narrower question.
MR. GUFFEY.

He's

Yes, I am.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm not on the phone every day, but
my understanding--if I'm wrong, Steve or Peter ought to speak up--is
that they are following the Committee's guidance in calculating the
nonborrowed reserve path. They are not adjusting the nonborrowed
reserve path to the actual borrowing that happened to occur in a
particular week.

8/23/83

-24-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except that, as kind of a footnote, they
have had these weeks when [borrowing] came in very high early in the
week and the market may get pretty [unintelligible].
We get a lot of
excess reserves as a result. The Desk hasn't been driven to supply a
lot of money to get the borrowings way down to balance off what
happened in the first half of the week on some occasions.
MR. GUFFEY. But those weeks have followed one after the
other; that is my point. It's not just one week in isolation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, there were several weeks.

MR. STERNLIGHT. We got a lot of borrowing early in the week.
There was one week when we were just about explicitly making the kind
of adjustment that President Guffey referred to. We were prepared to
accommodate--to make some allowance for the high level of borrowing in
that week, as it closed out.
We were going to make an allowance for
high excess reserves as we were closing out the week but then it
turned out that the reserve factors caused a big miss that pretty much
offset the kind of allowance we thought we were making there.
MR. PARTEE.

Consider that confirmation!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that members of the
Committee, in varying degrees, have the level of the funds rate in
mind when they think about the borrowing level.
But we're not
strictly adjusting the operations so that we are aiming at a
particular federal funds rate.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, you try to hit a net borrowed reserve
figure that will give you a [particular] funds rate, though, if I
understand the way you've been operating most recently.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.
But that net borrowed reserve figure
comes out of the Committee's discussion on borrowing and-MR. PARTEE.
I guess, though, that I can understand Roger's
point. Another way to put it, precisely, is that you think $700 to
$900 million is closer to giving us a 9-1/2 percent funds rate than
$600 to $800 million was.
So, Roger's point is:
Well, why not just
specify a 9-1/2 percent funds rate and forget about the borrowing
number?
There's some logic to that, I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We can do that, but that's not what we are

doing.
MR. WALLICH. It is true that we don't operate on the
automatic system where a rise in money supply and, therefore, demand
for reserves automatically leads to a rise in the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That is correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why we changed the paragraph
to put emphasis on the degree of tightening--or maintaining or
loosening, even--of reserve restraint.
MR. WALLICH. I think that is what Roger is saying, if I
understand him correctly.

8/23/83

-25-

MR. GUFFEY.

That's correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It certainly limits the amount of
variability in the fed funds rate. There's no question about that.
But I think it's also correct to say that we're not pegging it.
We've
seen within a week a considerable movement in the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that clarification or lack thereof, I
guess where we are specifically is that we replace "increase slightly
further" with "maintain the existing degree of reserve restraint."
I
would just summarize that 8-1/2 and 8 percent by saying 8 percent [for
both M2 and M3] and take out the "respectively."
We leave in the 7
percent for M1 and I guess we're leaving in the 6 to 10 percent for
the federal funds range. And we are assuming a borrowing level of
$700 to $900 million, unless these other factors suggest that that
should be changed.
MR. GUFFEY.

And this implies a funds rate of around 9-1/2

percent?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's where they are guessing, that's

right.
MR. GUFFEY.

Or a little less.

[Laughter.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we vote?
something out. What is this about?
MR. BERNARD.

Somebody is pointing

The interest rate sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not true, is it?
Mr. Bernard is
looking at the last sentence of the boilerplate on interest rates.
"Interest rates rose appreciably through most of the intermeeting
period but recently market rates have retraced much of their rise."
We should just be putting in "all of their rise."
Is that correct?
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

MR. MARTIN.

Some, but not all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Much or most?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, "much" is the way it is now.

We'll make it "most."

It depends on what rates did in the last few

days.

sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That gives us two "mosts" in that
Say "through much of the"--

MR. AXILROD. I would say it is more than a large part,
Governor; in many cases they're within 5 basis points.
It really is
the bulk or something-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
it to

"much."

We'll

Where it says "most" up above we'll change

reverse the "most" and "much."

8/23/83

-26-

MR. MARTIN.

Give them something to work on, right!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
Governor Gramley
President Guffey
President Keehn
Governor Martin
President Morris
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
President Roberts
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich

I guess we'll vote.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All we have left is the confirmation of
the date for the next meeting, October 4. And we may have a
consultation before then.
END OF MEETING

