Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 31, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1987 at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary

Mrs Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

3/31/87

- 2 -

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of
Staff Director for Monetary and Financial Policy,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Hendricks and Powell, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and San Francisco,
respectively
Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,
Messrs. Scadding and Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston,
San Francisco, New York, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 31, 1987
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We have to elect officers first of all.

MR. JOHNSON. I would like to start this by nominating
Chairman Volcker to be Chairman and President Corrigan to be Vice
Chairman.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a second. Do we have any
objections?
If not, I won't commit any time. We have a list [of
I guess you want the names on the list. Will
proposed officers].
somebody read it?
MR. BERNARD.
Secretary and Staff Adviser, Donald Kohn
Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Rosemary Loney
General Counsel, Michael Bradfield
Deputy General Counsel, James Oltman
Economist, James Kichline
Economist, International, Edwin Truman
Associate Economists from the Board: David Lindsey,
Michael Prell, Charles Siegman, and Thomas Simpson.
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Peter Fousek, New York; Richard Lang, Philadelphia;
Arthur Rolnick, Minneapolis; Harvey Rosenblum,
Dallas; and Karl Scheld, Chicago.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do I have a motion to vote?

SPEAKER(?).

I so move.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I have objections?
We have the
Nomination or objection?
question of the New York Bank as agent.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.
MS. SEGER.

I move the New York Bank as agent.
Second.
Is there a choice on any of this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If you would like to suggest it, yes.
will take the burden of suggestion.
MS. SEGER.
heartland-MR. GUFFEY.

You

What if I recommend Kansas City, from the

Wonderful thought, Martha.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have two Managers, both of whom I think
are so able bodied and sitting here. Do we have a nomination?

3/31/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I am not sure you can back that up.

I so move.

MR. JOHNSON.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objection?
The Authorization for
Domestic Open Market Operations has been distributed to you. Do we
need to formally readopt this?
Do I have a motion?
MR. ANGELL.

I move it.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any objection?
Next are the
Foreign Currency Authorization, Foreign Currency Directive and
Procedural Instructions. Do you have a problem with these, Mr. Cross,
or what?
MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I do wish to recommend that
the Committee consider a change.
In the authorized balances, we have
an informal limit and a formal limit. The informal limit on marks is
presently $6 billion worth of marks. We are now at $5.8 billion worth
of marks and the simple accrual of interest earnings, if nothing else
happens over the rest of this year, would put us over that $6 billion.
The other-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That doesn't appear anyplace in this.

MR. CROSS.
That is an informal limit which does not appear
in the published record. However, the authorized balances which
[unintelligible] was $10 billion, including informal balances of the
DM at $6 billion, the yen at $3 billion, and other currencies at $1
billion. The System's overall open position, which is $10 billion, is
a matter of record. My proposal to increase the allowance for mark
balances from $6 billion to $7 billion would go along with a proposal
to increase the total from $10 billion to $11 billion for the
authorized balances of all currencies and the total System open
position.
MR. ANGELL. While we are making increases, why would we not
want to allow more room than that?
What reason is there to keep the
limits that close?
MR. CROSS.

I have no objection to increasing it beyond that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I understand it correctly, the
only formal limit is that $10 billion limit.
MR. CROSS.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] enough yen so that we are
going to be comfortable within it, but I don't know about one-way
[unintelligible].
We were up to $9 billion, but now-MR. CROSS. On yen balances, we have more room than we had
because we have been spending yen recently. The reason to change it,
since it does get published and it does draw some attention, is that

3/31/87

now is the time to change it.
And I think the $1 billion increase
would give us room for what we do not anticipate, assuming we follow
the same practices that we have followed in the past.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I myself don't see any problem if we want
to raise them further, say, to $12 billion, and consider that
informal. We don't vote on it, I guess.
MR. CROSS.

I would certainly be very pleased with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

$7 billion is what you are saying?

MR. CROSS. I am proposing to raise the mark limit from $6
billion to $7 billion. If we raised it further we could-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue we formally have to vote on is
the overall limit, for which you are suggesting $11 billion. Governor
Angell, I guess, is suggesting $12 billion.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assumed under that would be an
understanding that marks could go at least to $8 billion, if I may
reword it that way, under that $12 billion. Do you want to go to $12
billion? Does somebody want to make a motion to go to $12 billion?
MR. ANGELL.
MS. SEGER.

Yes.
And I will second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections to that, we
will change the overall limit to $12 billion, with the informal
understanding that mark balances could go to $8 billion. What's the
informal understanding on yen now?
I realize that you are going in
the other direction on yen now.
MR. CROSS. We have $3 billion on yen as the informal
understanding. The present $10 billion breaks down to $6 billion in
marks, $3 billion in yen, and $1 billion for other currencies.
If we
go to $12 billion, we could propose to divide that into $8 billion, $3
billion, and $1 billion [respectively].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BERNARD.

It brings us to the regular minutes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have a motion?
MR. JOHNSON.

We have to approve the minutes.

Can I

I move we adopt the minutes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Okay, returning to the agenda--

Any objections?

Mr. Cross' report.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.
MR. BLACK. Sam, to what extent have the market participants
been able to figure out how much we have done in exchange market

3/31/87

intervention for our account and for the Treasury's account?
a pretty good idea?

Is there

MR. CROSS. Well, on a number of these occasions we have been
operating in a way to make it quite open and quite obvious that we
were there. We have dealt with a lot of banks. We have dealt with
It's very difficult
them directly and we have done it quite visibly.
to be absolutely precise about the amount of our intervention, but
certainly market participants know that we have been in there in a
very substantial way. And I don't think these numbers would shock
them. Certainly, some people are expecting that these numbers are the
We have not made
amounts that we can go in. They have seen a lot.
any statements and the Japanese have not made any statements about the
precise amounts, but they know we have been in there very heavily.
SPEAKER(?).
Are we sharing this intervention with the
Treasury on a 50/50 basis or has that changed?
MR. CROSS. We are sharing it with the Treasury on a 50/50
basis with one minor exception. Generally, we are doing it on a 50/50
basis.
SPEAKER(?).

Where is the yen/dollar relationship this

morning?
MR. CROSS. The yen is just over 146.
The Japanese have had
some interest in trying to hold it around the 146 level and so they
closed yesterday at just over 146; we closed yesterday at just over
146, although it declined in the course of the day and it declined
They did another
again in the course of the day in Tokyo last night.
The
or so of intervention, but it closed again at 146.
dollar against the mark is at 1.80-1/2.
The dollar did weaken
somewhat against the mark yesterday in the course of the trading day
and got down to about 1.79-1/2, but then it moved back up and is now
at about 1.80-1/2.
SPEAKER(?).
Do you attribute much significance to the
Japanese fiscal year ending today?
MR. CROSS,
SPEAKER(?).

It certainly has been a factor.
Will it help us, then, as we get past that?

It has been a
MR. CROSS.
Well, that remains to be seen.
factor; firms have had dollars to deal with because of their need to
This has
straighten out their books at the end of the fiscal year.
been a factor over the past several weeks.
SPEAKER(?).
Sam, what's the tone in the market?
Is there
some growing concern that we really could run into a significant
[unintelligible] or is there some feeling that the intervention would
prevent that from occurring?
You pay your money and
MR. CROSS. Well, it's hard to say.
I am sure there is a
It's hard to be too certain.
take a choice.
range of ideas involving a lot of people. Obviously, given this
massive amount of Japanese investments, much of it unhedged, there is
concern that a real loss of confidence in the dollar could lead to

3/31/87

That's obviously hanging over the market. But
very [unintelligible].
to what extent that view is held, it's pretty difficult to say. We do
that a fair amount
know
of the dollar sales that they assumed in Tokyo in the past week or ten
days has been in the form of investment firms like insurance
companies, pension funds, and so forth, doing a certain amount of
So that's certainly a big [unintelligible] supply and demand
hedging.
equation there.
SPEAKER(?).
When the Japanese sell dollar-denominated
In what currency?
assets, where then do they go with those funds?
MR. CROSS.
I wasn't suggesting that they were selling on and
off although what they have been doing recently is diversifying their
They have been buying a lot more Canadian
purchases much more.
securities, Australian securities, and European securities; and they
have also broadened out from government-bond types of investments
toward more diversification. But there is also a certain amount of
hedging, without selling the assets--hedging against these in order to
protect oneself. And that is fairly important to do.
SPEAKER(?).
themselves?
MR. CROSS.
MR. HELLER.

What kinds of techniques are they using to hedge

I imagine they use

[unintelligible].

Sam, are they all sterilized here and abroad?

They are certainly sterilized here.
MR. CROSS.
generally speaking, they are sterilized abroad.

I think,

MS. SEGER. When you said that the Desk intervened when the
dollar got to 1.87 marks, was your next comment sort of a suggestion
that maybe we should [not] have done that?
It was that once it
MR. CROSS.
No, it wasn't that at all.
had gone up and we intervened in a very light way--we didn't go in
with guns blazing by any means--and once the market realized that we
were in there intervening at those levels with all of the attention to
the Paris understanding and talk about [unintelligible] and all, it
didn't take too much to say, well, now that we have established this
[unintelligible], it is likely to be resisted. Now we can see where
it is going to go on the other side. So it reduced the expectations
of the possibility of a continued rise in the dollar.
Fundamentally,
I think the position was kind of bearish anyhow. Everybody looking
ahead not just a matter of days but a substantial period [knows] we
still have the big deficits and the Japanese have their big surpluses.
That sort of gives you a fundamental position toward the dollar. And
once this had been hit on the up side they began to look toward the
down side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And it's almost like

[unintelligible]

a

mistake.
MR. PARRY. Sam, with the appreciation of sterling and the
mark, are pressures developing in the United States?

3/31/87

MR. CROSS. No really, it has been relatively peaceful at
times. There has been [unintelligible] had the ability to destruct
itself, as it were, after the last [unintelligible] and to get back

some of the reflows that had gone out in anticipation of it.

Some of

the interest rates have come down in some of the countries that had

moved them up.
[unintelligible]

So there has been a little return to normalcy on the
side.

SPEAKER(?). What kinds of actions other than exchange rate
intervention might be helpful in this kind of a situation either here
or abroad?
MR. CROSS.
SPEAKER(?).

Are you addressing that to me?
I asked a question.

MR. CROSS. I think there is certainly going to be continued
watching as to whether any of these policy commitments that were
talked about in Paris are actually carried out via fiscal policy or
monetary policy. The German economy is very soft; they haven't really
taken anything new. They, of course, have been [unintelligible] at
the time that they reconstitute their government. But their economy
has been very weak, and people have seen that they have done nothing
on monetary policy and don't show much prospect of doing anything in
fiscal policy except in a framework of next year and the year after
next. The Japanese economy is equally well below what it typically
runs at, and nothing has been happening there. The problem is that
they have to get through this fiscal year and get their budget passed
before they can start with a new budget, they say. Nonetheless,
nobody has seen anything.
SPEAKER(?). They haven't taken the opportunity to leave some
of this intervention unsterilized to give a boost to monetary policy?
MR. CROSS. I think they sterilized it. They feel with their
discount rate now at 2-1/2 percent that they have gone pretty far.
Also, people don't see anything on the U.S. side. We make comments
about the budget deficit and one thing or another, and there is not
much evidence there. Still, the main issue that's in the newspapers
is the dispute over trade matters and that raises in people's minds
the possibility that the way to deal with the trade--if you really get
into a trade war--is to pound down the currency in order to deal with
the situation in that way. That has been the main issue in the
newspapers, so the trade disputes have been a very negative factor.
Also, in the present circumstances, a neutral statement by U.S.
officials seems to be taken by the market as a kind of a negative.
It's a lack of a positive firm commitment--I guess that's the way to
put it.
MR. HELLER. You put a lot of emphasis on these statements,
but there was an awful lot of hot news that was very bad too. All of
the trade numbers that came in were very bad. The current account
numbers were very bad. I think that was the real substance that-MR. CROSS. Absolutely. I thought I had a sentence somewhere
We haven't seen any compelling evidence.
in there [in my statement].
We know that our exports are looking better, and so forth and so on;
but looking at the trade deficits and things like that, all we get is

3/31/87

the very bad nominal trade deficits and surpluses with little, if any,
evidence of any reversal.
SPEAKER(?).
But I presume, Sam, that the firm commitment
implies, among other things, some unsterilized intervention or
something else that would back up whatever statements are made.
MR. CROSS. Well, I am not sure it would imply unsterilized
intervention but I think that it's [unintelligible].
MR. TRUMAN.

Fiscal policy area; we are not in monetary

policy.
SPEAKER(?).
Sam, would you care to speculate at what level
of the yen you would think Japanese investors might begin to sell off
dollar assets--143, 142?
MR. CROSS.
I don't really have any confidence in people's
attempts to make estimates of that sort, because I am not sure there
is a number out there.
I think it depends upon people's attitudes and
those are changing all of the time.
I think we could have a
confluence of circumstances that could lead them to sell. But what
might go into it to require that?
I am not sure about a specific
number, but I think we are obviously in a very dangerous area where
problems of that sort could build up very quickly and cause great
damage.
SPEAKER(?).
You could also have it go so low that investors
think the bottom has been hit.
MR. CROSS. Well, that's right--if one were convinced of
that. But, again, I don't think we live in the kind of world where
there is a magic number that when you hit it, then everybody knows it,
and says: Okay, now we buy.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, our current published [foreign
currency] directive limits our operations to countering disorderly
market conditions.
This last episode seems to me maybe not to fall
into that category; rather it seems that we are getting awfully close
to a managed float situation which-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Not very well managed float.

MR. GUFFEY. To be sure. But the point is either that the
directive should be changed if we are going to go the route that we
have been on the last couple of weeks or, in the alternative, that we
shouldn't be doing what we have been doing--other than the commitment
that was made in Paris. That speaks to changing the directive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we just approved the directive and I
am a little hesitant to raise it, but I guess we can.
It has been a
while since I looked at this, but I take comfort in that it says
"shall be generally directed at countering disorderly monetary
conditions."
It talks about behavior consistent with Article IV.
MR. GUFFEY. Article IV, as I read it, is not a constraint or
type of directive, so I go back to the simple phrase countering
disorderly markets.

3/31/87

MR. TRUMAN. The reason for that reference, President Guffey,
was based on a little history; it was to guard against circumstances
in which there was so-called manipulation of exchange rates. That was
why we might be more aggressive. The other point, of course, is that
this [directive] has been in existence since 1976 and has covered
periods in the past similar to the one we had in the last few days.
MR. CROSS. I think it has been interpreted broadly enough to
deal with all of the situations since then. It's similar to the
undertakings which the United States has with the IMF as to what its
exchange rate policy will be. So it's part of a broader-MR. GUFFEY. Well, I understand the term countering
disorderly markets can be interpreted [differently] and I guess that's
the prerogative of the Chairman's subcommittee or the Committee. In
my mind, what we have been engaging in does not fall within that
category.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it does or it
doesn't. I guess we are going to be hard pressed to make up other
language. Maybe somebody can look at it.
MR. GUFFEY.

Maybe somebody should look at it, at least.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do it sitting around
this table right now. I designate Mr. Cross to look at this and see
if he comes up with any better ideas.
MR. CROSS. Yes, we will look at it in light of what we are
doing now and see if it looks like there is something we should
change.
MR. HELLER. Sam, has any consideration been given to forward
purchases and sales rather than spot?
MR. CROSS. That is one of those endless debates that goes
on. We haven't really [unintelligible]. We pretty well had our hands
full [unintelligible] spot.
I am not sure I am convinced
[unintelligible] but it's something we have been watching.
SPEAKER(?).

How many more bullets do we have in our belt as

far as-MR. CROSS. Well, with the yen we have in our pocket about
$700 million, but these are at a valuation that was set at the time
they were acquired; they are now worth a third or so more than that.
The Treasury has substantially more. They have $2.1 billion, again at
the acquisition cost. And then, of course, we have a swap arrangement
with the Bank of Japan of $5 billion dollars.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
current market value?

We still have about a billion dollars in

MR. CROSS. Yes, a little over $1 billion.
around $3 billion at present market value.
SPEAKER(?).
week or ten days?

The Treasury has

And we have spent how much, again, in the last

3/31/87

MR. CROSS.

A little over $2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We together?

We--the Treasury and the Federal Reserve and the
MR. CROSS.
Japanese--have spent over
SPEAKER(?).
MR. CROSS.

So we have spent about half of our holdings?
[Unintelligible.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's right.

Silver lining behind

a cloud.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
will turn to-MR. CROSS.

We need the approval, I guess.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
and approved.]
MR. CROSS.

We have to approve the operations.

[Moved

I am glad we had the election before my report!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

past.

Well, if there is no other discussion, we

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
Comments or questions?

MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you have advocated buying coupons in the
You said there was a possibility for an add need?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
I think that's part of the add need ahead.
It makes very good sense to buy coupons for some portion of that.
MR. JOHNSON. There has been some controversy over that issue
in the past.
I just wondered if-MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have been talking about it and I
think as we work out this need, which runs to several billions of
dollars, there is room for bills and coupons as part of the-MS. SEGER. At what point would you let the rising federal
If it got
funds rate override your concern about a weakening dollar?
to 8 percent, would you-MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if it got to 8 percent as a longstanding matter that would obviously be a concern; even 7 percent, I
think, would cause one to sit up and take some considerable notice.
We are getting a high rate today just because it's the quarter-end.
The very early report I saw had today's funds rate opening at 6-3/4
percent. That was a surprise. To see it getting up to 7 percent or
higher on this day-MS.

SEGER.

I am not talking about a one-day shot.

-10-

3/31/87

MR. STERNLIGHT. On a lasting basis, I'd feel concern about
rates that were considerably over 6 percent, given the current set of
expectations and the current kind of borrowing need that we have in
our reserve paths.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Clearly, though, if the bottom fell
out in the context of the conversation that was taking place earlier
between Mr. Cross and--I forget who it was--Si Keehn, maybe, the
markets would do [unintelligible] in a very decisive way no matter
what we did.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. MORRIS.
[unintelligible].
MR. JOHNSON.

Like yesterday?
I wouldn't go on to admit that the more

Well, that's what got kicked so hard yesterday.

MS. SEGER. I was reacting to Peter Sternlight's comment that
our own estimate showed a need to add reserves, but that apparently it
wasn't done to the full extent because of the concern about what was
going on. I just wondered where those trade-offs come.
In relation to the borrowing target, generally
SPEAKER(?).
over the intermeeting period you have at least [unintelligible].
MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowings came in just close to the $300
million, and in this current reserve period they're running around
$250 million, which is consistent with the recent period.

needs?

MR. JOHNSON. What's coming up, Peter, in terms of reserve
Do we have a seasonal draining or adding period?

MR. STERNLIGHT. There is a big seasonal add need, mostly
from currency and partly from required [reserves].
We are adding to
it somewhat by the foreign exchange intervention that [has occurred]-several hundred million a day at the recent pace.
But for this
current reserve period, at least on the numbers we were looking at
yesterday, there is roughly a $3 billion need to meet in the remainder
of this period, and we are just about halfway through; and then there
is about a $5 or $6 billion need in the subsequent reserve period and
slightly more than that in the period beyond that. These estimates
are cumulative; there are some additional needs beyond the $3 billion,
which accumulate to about $5 or $6 billion in the next period and to
$6 or $7 billion in the period beyond that.
MS. SEGER. So we don't have a contingency plan, then--that
if all hell broke loose even more than it has so far--as to exactly
what we would do when?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, our basic stance has been to meet the
needs, following the directive to the extent that there is some dayto-day discretion about the pattern of reserve needs as they unfold.
We try to implement in a cautious manner, [and be aware of] anything
that could be helpful or avoid exacerbating the international
situation. I don't think it makes a tremendous difference; it's more
at the margin.

3/31/87

-11-

MR. GUFFEY. I have been on the call the last several weeks,
Martha, and I think they have been very skillful at that, in terms of
attempting to do what needs to be done domestically but dealing with
this international situation that is overhanging the market. And I
think they have handled it well.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forgot to ask you to ratify the domestic
operations. Would you like to ratify those?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the business outlook.

I move it.

If there's no objection, we can discuss

SPEAKER(?). Jim, I have a question. Inventory investment is
clearly an important component of your forecast, especially in the
first quarter of this year. One thing that struck me in terms of your
forecast is the forecast of negative changes in farming inventories
over a 9-quarter period which is clearly unprecedented in the postwar
period. I wonder what you had in mind in assuming decumulation in the
farm sector over that length of time.
MR. KICHLINE. Part of what is going on there is our
assumption that more crops are going to be placed in CCC programs. I
am not an expert in the agricultural area but, given the change in
some of the farm programs, apparently farmers have been induced to
transfer more of their ownership to the government--essentially to CCC
stocks, which are rising--and it's coming out of the farm inventories.
SPEAKER(?).
So that should show up in terms of more
[unintelligible] purchases and federal nondefense.
MR. KICHLINE.
SPEAKER(?).

Correct.
A little weak.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's weak in part because of other
things happening in the federal sector. Given the deficit-reducing
actions taken last year, we think that real nondefense outlays will be
negative this year and next year.
SPEAKER(?).

In spite of that CCC development.

MR. GUFFEY. Jim, for the fourth quarter of 1987, your
projection in this Greenbook shows personal consumption expenditures
down about 1-1/2 percentage points from last Greenbook to roughly a
half percent. What are the factors?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, you are looking at an auto story. We
decided to put in what has happened over the last two years
[unintelligible].
In the third quarter we have personal consumption
rising only 1-1/2 percentage points at an annual rate. Part of that,
we think, is because of the increase in purchases of autos, with
manufacturers once again trying to clean up their stocks in the third

3/31/87

quarter. The offset is a weaker consumption growth picture in the
fourth quarter. I just might note that, on average in this forecast,
we are drifting into a range of very low personal consumption figures.
A one percent [growth rate over the two quarters] is historically very
low.
MR. BOYKIN. Do you figure in very much of a kick from the
Do you see
home equity loans, from the standpoint of consumption?
that helping very much?
MR. KICHLINE. We haven't done much there explicitly. Our
assumption has been that a good deal of that is substituting for
consumer credit and other second mortgage loans rather than leading to
a substantial increase in consumer spending. That's an open issue.
MR. BOYKIN.

The banks seem to be trying to push them pretty

hard. I wondered whether or not that would be successful and what it
would lead to.
SPEAKER(?).
Jim, how about some of the price indices that
you follow in a more current sense--commodities indices and so forth.

What are they showing in terms of recent behavior?
MR. KICHLINE.
I think some of the commodity prices recently
have calmed down; the big run-up was from August through early this
Since then, there has
year when there was a substantial increase.
been some bouncing about, particularly in terms of industrial
materials prices, but they have been relatively flat.
MR. GUFFEY. Just to continue on with a question about
If you look at services, particularly beginning in the
consumption.

second quarter of 1987, growth rates spend most of their time,
Is there any time that we have
actually, at less than 1-1/2 percent.
ever experienced that other than in a recession?
Secularly, growth of
service expenditures is probably more in the range of 3 percent plus.
I think on a cyclical basis we have seen it for a couple of quarters,
but nothing like this.
MR. KICHLINE. I was hinting in our personal consumption
story, President Guffey, that basically I think a one percent growth,
when we have 3 percent growth in real GNP, is a very [unintelligible]
number. In putting this together, we have really looked at the income
side as well. In forecasting, as you well know, one can view the
saving rate as somewhat of a constraint. I didn't want to see saving
rates without the first digit being at least 3 percent; and if that is
the case, we really get [unintelligible]. We don't have much in the
way of real disposable income growth. We think wealth is explaining
the lower saving rate, in part. We are getting some increased
spending [unintelligible] wealth positions. But basically, what comes
out--if we view the saving rate as having some implicit strength--is
that we are going to be forced into slow rates of increase in real
PCE. But it is, as you point out, quite unusual.
MR. GUFFEY. This goes back to the old story. You are
depending greatly upon the turnaround in net exports to make this a
palatable forecast.

3/31/87

-13-

MR. PRELL. If the circumstances that we presume will bring
that about didn't occur, real disposable income would be a bit
stronger and there would be at least some offsets. So we have to look
at it simultaneously.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What is the automatic offset?

MR. PRELL. For example, if we didn't get the great
improvement because import prices didn't rise substantially, then
consumer inflation would be less and, in the first instance, real
disposable income would be higher so that consumption wouldn't be
affected as much. Basically, our weak consumption is part of an
overall adjustment process that is shifting resources away from
domestic consumption.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that. But suppose the
external side did not improve because business was so weak abroad?
MR. PRELL. Well, interest rate [unintelligible] and a whole
assortment of different variables.
MR. JOHNSON. That raises a point that I was asking about
yesterday; I still haven't cleared it up quite in my head. I got an
answer, but I can't repeat it. The staff's forecast for growth abroad
was revised down by a significant amount, yet our GNP numbers haven't
really changed. I need a review of how we would make that up.
MR. TRUMAN. We make it up, I think, in the short run in two
areas. When we do the forecast we take a look at some of the factors
that go into it. Although the effect of the lower growth abroad would
be less growth in nonagricultural exports, we also look at prices of
those exports. Those we had moving up a bit more than we thought was
comfortable and, as a result, we tended to offset the price effect on
the volume.
[Unintelligible] lower. Looking back over the last 6
months or so, since last July, there has been a substantial decline in
[the outlook for] industrial countries; we have 3/4 percent lower
level of real GNP at the end of this year than we had last July.
There you see it more clearly; essentially, the growth effect is quite
pronounced. There you get another offset because the dollar has been
much lower. Looking at it from their side, those two [factors] also
go together. The dollar was about 6 or 8 percent lower than we were
thinking it would be last July. It's projected to be 6 or 8 percent
lower at the end of this forecast period. We have gotten a lot of the
movement actually [earlier] in the period, so that has had a slight
offsetting effect on-MR. JOHNSON.

But is that helping us on the trade side any

more?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think it's part of the same [story].
Part of the answer to your question about the reasons why growth is
weaker abroad is that the dollar has been lower. The direct effect of
that in the first approximation is neutral.
[Unintelligible] means
weaker net exports, if you want to put it that way. The secondary
effects, where you get into the big discussion you were just having
with Mike but view it from the other side of the pond, [depend on]
whether you have the kind of offsetting automatic stabilizers that
come along with higher real [income] on the one hand, or on the other

3/31/87

-14-

hand the negative impact on investment intentions and that kind of
activity and [economic] activity in general. If you have nominal
targets for your fiscal policy, for example, and inflation comes in
lower, then in fact you might find that [government spending] would
get better. There could be an offset. That tends not to be the case.
It tends to be a taking of those benefits into the [fiscal] position
and lower prices in the fiscal situation give you less of an automatic
[stabilizer effect]. The third factor, looking back to last July, is
that we were cautious about a forecast too strong in terms of exports.
The models were saying exports were going to be very [strong], so we
tended to judgmentally adjust that down because we didn't at that
point see much evidence. Now, in the second half of the year, the
evidence was that U.S. net exports were doing quite well; so, although
we still have damped down our [projected] rate of increase in export
volume relative to what standing historical relationships might
produce, we have damped it somewhat less than we had done before.
Again, that's one of the factors that is viewed from the side of the
trade [balance] as shown on the lower growth [abroad].
MR. JOHNSON. It's the speed of the depreciation that made a
big difference in your mind?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, these factors net essentially. This
[unintelligible] but my sense is that clearly it does seem to be
strongly negative in both Germany and Japan. The investment [is
negative], which is one reason why things are being marked out. The
other factor is that in [Japan and] Germany they both were looking for
growth in [exports] this year, and it doesn't look like it's going to
be there. Maybe it shouldn't even have been there, but they were
looking for it. The other problem, basically, is the extent to which
policy is used to [cushion these effects]. We talked about this some
earlier: [whether] these countries tend to push [policy] given the
change in the exchange rates or to respond in terms of supporting the
adjustment process, if you want to put it that way. The adjustment
process coming on the external side may be going along faster than
In neither Germany nor
otherwise [anticipated] and that's [negative].
Japan do you have a sense that policy is out ahead of the adjustment
Sam Cross
process; it's being forced by the exchange rate [change].
noted that in Germany monetary policy is [unchanged] although there is
a small [chance of] adjustment in the latter part of the year; fiscal
policy adjustment is going to come in January 1988. And in Japan
[policy] is paralyzed. What little they might be prepared to do, they
have essentially been paralyzed by the [political] process. And as a
result, any fiscal [policy action] or lack thereof that is likely to
come along in Japan is not going to be here for another 3 months
longer, later than one might have thought it was going to come last
December.
MR. JOHNSON.
[Unintelligible] the last comment. I wonder if
you have attempted to factor in this latest trade retaliatory measure
that has been taken. Is that going to have any effect, or do you have
to make some assumptions about retaliation for--?
MR. TRUMAN. We didn't really have it in hand in time to put
it into the forecast. Even with it in hand, we would have to [factor
in prospects for] retaliation. The other issue is how long it would
last even [unintelligible]. We did not want to let them have a strong
pricing effect, because essentially they are saying ["x"] equals a

3/31/87

-15-

certain amount of supply of imports that are just not going to be
there anymore. Essentially, it's a question of what the price
[response is]; it's going to be [unintelligible] but it's not 100
percent higher; it's [a function of] whatever you think is the
[elasticity of the] supply curve absent Japanese suppliers and that's
probably not terribly steep.
MR. JOHNSON.

But you would expect some upward pressure?

MR. TRUMAN. Well, there would be some upward pressure, but
not [too large], assuming that the measures are taken and they are
permanent and there is no retaliation. I think the big risk, which
seems to be what the financial markets were reacting to yesterday, is
that this could get out of hand. There is certainly some risk that it
could get out of hand.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
on, presumably?

What products are we putting these tariffs

MR. TRUMAN. The list of products is $900 million worth of
potential tariffs--various consumer electronic products and those
types of things.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[I didn't] see the list; it sounded like a
lot more than the $300 million they talk about.
MR. TRUMAN. There is $900 million on the list; $300 million
will be chosen and they might choose this side [of that figure].
There are two pieces of it: $135 million of third market effects and
$165 million of Japanese market effects.
They could choose to do one
and not the other.
MR. JOHNSON.
I love this rationale, which is we [don't] want
to put a tariff on the chips themselves because U.S. producers buy
those. We will put it on the electronic equipment that's processed
from those chips and [not] import it.
It's just unbelievable
analysis.
MR. TRUMAN. [Unintelligible] was called with the agricultural
trade-MS. SEGER. Maybe I misread it, but I thought that one of the
major objectives was to use this playing tough to get the Japanese to
knock down some of the barriers that are keeping our products out.
MR. TRUMAN. That's absolutely the motivation. The question
is whether, rather than knocking down the barriers, they respond by
pushing them higher. Then we have [unintelligible].
If I had to
guess, I would think it's going to move in the direction of the
[unintelligible] may not come down $300 million but they might come
down [unintelligible] worth and you won't get the retaliation. But
there is certainly some risk that things will go the other way.
MS. SEGER. What would happen if either Germany or Japan
slipped into a recession?
I am hearing about the weakening of their
economies and their disappointments with their performance and the
downward revisions [unintelligible] of their own governments.

-16-

3/31/87

MR. TRUMAN. Both of those economies are large relative to
[their neighbors]--Germany with respect to Europe and Japan with
In fact, in terms of the world economy, the
respect to the Far East.
Far East has been one of the brighter spots in terms of overall
performance. I would think that the issue of negative numbers is not
so important.
The point basically is [not] whether growth is above or
below zero; the point is that growth in these countries, which is
[unintelligible] at this stage [is slowing], partly because
Two percent growth in these
[unintelligible] lagging behind.
countries at a time when non-U.S. [growth rates] are very modest and
one was hoping for something like 3 percent--that is 1/3 of the way to
zero.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

quarter]
whole.

Two percent for Germany when you have--

MR. TRUMAN. We have 1 percent [fourth-quarter to fourthfor Germany; we have 2 percent for the G-10 countries as a

Ted, I recently saw a chart that I think you
SPEAKER(?).
produced that showed a comparison of the growth of real GNP and
domestic demand in Japan. It was surprising to me, and also very
dramatic, that their domestic demand was growing at a rate twice that
of GNP, I think.
MR. TRUMAN. All of these countries have had quite good
growth in domestic demand. The problem and the puzzle is--and we
looked at this before the February chart show because I was puzzled as
to when [unintelligible]--we didn't seem to see corresponding things.
I would say as professionally as we could [figure out] the numbers as
to basically what happened in 1986, there seemed to be a counterpart
with the developing countries--the oil and non-oil producing
OPEC
developing countries--in 1986 rather than the United States.
pumped a lot more oil last year and the price went down. We all
bought it.
Their price went down and they cut back on their
[imports].
Of course, then the terms of trade were going against
other developing countries, [not] like Japan. So domestic demand has
[generally] been holding up reasonably well, but the overall level
also has been on a downtrend and that's-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Domestic demand doesn't look so bad
compared to the GNP. You couldn't call that great in absolute terms,
considering what their potential is.
Are there other comments on the
business scene here?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Do you mean of a more general

nature?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Of a more general nature.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a couple of more general
comments.
I don't feel that there is any fundamental difference in
the economic outlook today as compared to what we have been talking
As I said before, I tend to go
about for the past couple of months.
hot and cold on this trade improvement situation and right now I guess
I am cold, partly for the reason that has just been talked about and
that the performance in some of the industrialized countries looks
pretty sour. But even beyond that, I still am a little skeptical

3/31/87

-17-

about the extent to which there have been broad-based opportunities on
the import or the export side to see the kind of breakthroughs that
would seem to be implied in the current forecast.
Although one can be
surprised, I am a little more skeptical on that front.
I can't quite shake a question in my mind, too, about the
inventory situation, even though I understand the auto part, and the
CCC part, and all the rest of it.
I sense, when I look at the
production side of the economy against the backdrop of the inventory
situation, that one of two things should be true that aren't showing
up in the numbers. One would be that export growth is stronger than
the numbers suggest. The other is that there is some demand in the
economy someplace that isn't showing through. Again, I don't think
there is anything decisive there, but it does continue to raise a bit
of a question in my mind on the inventory side.
In the context of the
external situation--this point has already been made--the escalation
of the tensions on the trade side is a new and troubling development
which, in my mind's eye, simply reinforces the view that the greatest
risk by far at this point lies with the dollar. Any material further
depreciation in the dollar is going to exacerbate the situation in
countries like Japan by extending the J-curve.
It seems to me that
you can make an argument that in relative terms Japan is already in a
recession, although not in the statistical sense that we define
recessions.
But on top of that risk on the dollar side, the other
risk that I think is closer at hand than we would like it to be is
that a further dollar depreciation will trigger at least a mini chain
reaction on the financial side that could be very, very destabilizing
in the short run.
So the net is probably a somewhat higher level of
apprehension about the economy, which is Kentucky windage in nature.
But I have a significantly heightened concern about the dollar
situation in the immediate circumstances that we face right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What is Kentucky windage?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Kentucky windage means I don't have
any numbers to back up those hunches, just a bit of a feel in the air.
You throw a piece of grass up and you see which way it blows.
MR. BLACK.
It's the allowance you make for the errors in the
accuracy of your rifle.
SPEAKER(?).

Did you learn that in Manhattan, Jerry?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
you thought--

You could associate it a little if

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's all a very precise science; now I
am really confused. Mr. Morris.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have been getting anecdotal
evidence from our New England manufacturers that their exports were
doing pretty well. But when I looked at their employment numbers, the
last four or five months of 1986 showed pretty quiet employment in
manufacturing.
The non-manufacturing economy is doing well; the
unemployment rate had drifted below 4 percent, and now it's running
about 3-1/2 percent.
So I asked our manufacturers: If you are doing
so well in exports why isn't this showing up in manufacturing
employment?
The answer was that domestic capital goods demand is so

3/31/87

-18-

weak that it has been offsetting the strength in the exports sector.
In January we had an uptick in manufacturing employment at a 7 percent
annual rate. Now, one month in these numbers is not enough to give a
signal, but at least it supports the proposition that maybe the
improvement in exports is going to try to [unintelligible] the first
time on the employment side. My Boston airport indicator is still
In the three months ending in January, air
looking pretty good.
freight exports in pounds were up by 16 percent over the year-earlier
numbers, and air freight imports declined for the first time on a
It was down one point, so the numbers are still
year-to-year basis.
confirming the anecdotal evidence. The employment numbers still
haven't shown through to any great extent, but we may be at a turning
point in manufacturing employment, depending on the export side.
MS. SEGER.
from Boston?

Do any of the exports go by ship or is it all air

I am told that about 90 percent of the high-tech
MR. MORRIS.
exports go by air freight, because their value-to-weight ratio is
high.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, discussions with our directors and
others in business in the Twelfth District indicate that business
There clearly are
conditions are improving to some extent.
exceptions, and the two that I would note would be Alaska and the
central valley of California. However, California's total employment
has been quite strong. California's employment represents 60 percent
of the District and it surged in February, pushing the District's
Some fragmentary data
unemployment rate below the national average.
that we have on retail sales for the beginning of the year indicate
that the fall-off that was so pronounced at the national level in
January was not shared by the Twelfth District. Also, data that we
have on trade from the Pacific Coast ports provide some evidence of
improvement in our net export position, as the trade deficit has
narrowed significantly in the past 12 months.
Turning to the national economy, our forecast indicates a
somewhat worse trade-off between growth in output and inflation than
is incorporated in the Greenbook. We have slightly less growth in
1987 and 1988 and inflation--at least in our forecast for 1987--is 1/2
percentage point higher. We have a similar inflation outlook for 1988
because we agree with the Greenbook that we are likely to see upward
inflationary pressures arising from import prices persisting through
all of next year. However, in contrast to the Greenbook, we expect
these inflationary pressures to emerge as early as the second half of
this year. Thus, we see a period of upward pressure on nominal shortterm interest rates beginning soon and probably extending into the
In my view, it will be necessary to allow
second half of 1988.
nominal interest rates to rise; if we don't, short-term real rates may
be pushed too low. We also are looking for somewhat stronger growth
toward year-end 1987 than the Board staff, as we have slightly higher
consumption and, of course, the trade account begins to improve at
Thus, we believe that it may be appropriate to allow real
that point.
In our view, it would be
interest rates to nudge up toward year-end.
a bit too risky to allow the pickup in demand pressures to the point
where the temporary price shocks become a factor in longer-term

3/31/87

-19-

inflationary expectations. In our view, the gap between actual and
potential [GNP] is really pretty small.
Some estimates that we ran
suggest it's on the order of one percentage point. Therefore,
available slack in the economy is also small, and we think that
inflationary risks at the present time are fairly significant.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. While the conditions in our District are largely
unchanged from previous periods, at least in the fundamental sense, I
do have a feeling that there is a better tone out there.
It is
entirely possible that this has been affected by the winter. We
really have had exceptionally mild weather this winter and, as a
consequence, anything that would normally be adversely affected by the
weather is doing very well. Construction is the very obvious example.
Home building is strong. Jim Kichline has commented on that, but in
the Midwest in January and February home starts were up something like
40 percent over the previous year--obviously very heavily weatheraffected. Commercial office building continues to be, I think,
astoundingly active. There are a number of new buildings that are
planned; despite a creeping up in the vacancy rate there are more
buildings going up. As a consequence of all this, all the building
materials people--cement, masonry, and the like--are doing really
exceptionally well.
There do continue to be plant closings, but I
think they are slowing down a bit and there is some offsetting good
news.
Last week, or maybe earlier this week, Youngstown and Nippon
announced a very sizable joint venture--a $400 million coal power
plant.
That is the first significant development in the steel
industry like that for quite some while. Employment in the District
is also a bit on the positive side.
In January our employment
increased by the national average; that is the first time we have had
that in some while.
Even the farm sector looks a little better or, at least,
maybe not worse. Farm earnings are probably going to increase this
year; that does not really reflect a fundamental change but rather the
huge government subsidies.
I will say, though, that the livestock
business has been and continues to be pretty good. There is some
improvement or expectation of improvement with regard to corn exports,
offset a bit by lower soybean exports.
We think land values are-we've been saying this for a while but we have a growing confidence-in a zone of stability that ought to be helpful to the banks.
If that
does occur, we have a hope that the whole farm sector may be at a zone
of stability, if you will, albeit at a very low level, as it has been
for quite some while. There is renewed concern out there about the
Farm Credit System; but despite that concern there is, I think, the
absolute expectation that at the end of the day the Government is
going to be there and provide support for that. But certainly, that
has put an air of uncertainty into it all.
On the trade picture, we would have somewhat of a
disagreement with the staff forecast.
We have commented already on
it, perhaps, but the people I talked to are not experiencing the
improvements in exports that the Greenbook would suggest.
They are
concerned about weak conditions in foreign markets and, therefore, the
opportunity for their products. But on the import side, there is
very, very broad agreement that we've got some improvement. The
companies that are manufacturing products for the domestic markets are

-20-

3/31/87

finding a better receptivity there, a little less out-sourcing, and an
increase in domestic production. And that is certainly an
improvement. With regard to the exchange rates, just a specific
comment:
told us that the increase in the
deutschemark has basically priced German equipment that is used in the
paper industry out of the market for the first time in quite some
noted that in the machine tool industry, U.S.
while,
labor rates are now lower than is the case in Japan. That is also a
very significant change for that industry.
On inflation, I think the picture is a bit mixed.
The labor
situation continues to be good. The people I talked to about
contracts are continuing to get what they think are very favorable
deals--some as low as 1 or 1-1/3 percent.
Generally, most of them
were under 3 percent with pretty good work rule changes resulting in
productivity improvements. Pricing on other commodities and
materials, everybody says, is fiercely competitive--that they can't
raise prices, etc., etc.
But I am hearing of more instances of the 3
to 4 percent increase and occasionally the 5 percent, so I think there
In a specific industry, the
is a bit of an upward movement on that.
paper industry,
a broad upward trend in [the
prices of] the commodities that they use, and most specifically
polystyrene resin.
I think there is a special reason for this, but
they have had a price increase on that of about 30 percent in the last
year.
In some ways we certainly are in very close agreement with
the staff forecast; we see no recession or a strong break-out on the
up side either. We are a little apprehensive that the export side may
not be quite as strong as we expect.
On the inflation side we see
nothing yet to be alarmed about but are beginning to sense some upward
It is not pervasive yet but I think it is the
pressure out there.
area that we want to watch.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I don't think I can contribute much to what has
been noted on the national level or the international level.
In our
District things seem to be going along really very well.
I am
impressed with the drop in the unemployment rate that we have
experienced. A year ago it was about 6-1/2 percent in our District
and now it is about 5 percent and probably will slide under 5 percent.
In places like New Jersey, where it was 5-1/2 percent a year ago, it
is now under 4 percent; in Delaware it was a little under 5 percent
and now is approaching 3 percent; and we have areas in our District

where the unemployment rate is under 3 percent. So, we are
experiencing a tightening in wage costs in the area. As in the whole
Northeast, wages seem to be rising faster than they are elsewhere in
the country. A good bit of it is in construction, especially
residential construction; retailing is stronger than expected; and
loan growth is running 1-1/2 to 2 times the national rate. We are
getting the same kind of experience that Frank Morris has had in
manufacturing. Growth in that sector has been about flat and yet they
seem to have some positive things to say about export growth. But I
think that has been offset by the capital goods area. So, in the
Northeast and the middle Atlantic, especially in the eastern part of

-21-

3/31/87

the District, things are going along really very well and for some
areas I would call them boom kind of conditions.
MS. SEGER.

Does this include the steel towns that I read

about?
MR. BOEHNE. No.
If you take a look at our District, for
example, areas like Lancaster and York and Harrisburg have
unemployment rates of right around 3 percent.
If you drive 100 miles
west of that, in areas like Johnstown, you have rates of 8-1/2 to 9
In Wilmington you have about 3 percent unemployment; you can
percent.
go across the Delaware Bay into some sections of South Jersey and you
will find 7 percent unemployment. You wonder about the mobility and
the skills of the people. But overall, the general tenor in the
District--especially in the Eastern part of New Jersey, in Delaware,
and in the southeast quadrant of Pennsylvania--is that they are doing
very well. Even in places like Johnstown and Altoona, and Scranton to
some extent, people will say that conditions are not as good as in
some other parts but they are better than they were a year ago.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. The same general report can be given for the
Sixth District as the one that Ed Boehne just gave.
The reports that
we're getting, both in terms of the data and anecdotal information,
seem better to me than what I have heard for quite a long time. We
are getting quite good reports on the service industry generally.
Retail sales have been much better than most retailers had expected,
and to a certain extent I suppose that is not very surprising. But
what is heartening, I think, is that we are hearing increasingly
optimistic reports from the manufacturing sector for the first time in
a number of important industries.
These include industries such as
paper and chemicals and especially textiles and apparel. The
petrochemical companies mention very strong orders, as do the apparel
manufacturers, and some of this is export-related. We see the same
thing Frank Morris mentioned in terms of manufacturing, where the
orders are increasing due partly to export-related activity and
employment is not moving up very much, if at all.
But the explanation
we get, and I think it is valid, is that there has been so much
automation put in and productivity is so much higher--particularly in
the textile industry--that you are not going to see a very rapid
increase in the number of employed people.
So, generally throughout
the District it looks pretty good and confidence is very high. Even
in the construction industry, where we had expected some downturn as a
result of the tax act, I am hearing from people like architects, real
estate people, and construction developers that their firms have never
been busier in the month of February. This, of course, is basically
in the large metropolitan areas like Atlanta and Nashville, and to
some extent Miami, which are experiencing some boom. To be sure, we
continue to have difficult areas. Agriculture may have reached the
bottom; we're beginning to see that land values are coming back a
little. And Louisiana continues to be in a depressed state. Even
there, with the recent firmness in the price of oil and strong
tourism, I think they feel a little better about their situation and,
of course, they are putting a lot of hope and a lot of expectation in
the visits of both the Republicans and the Pope!

-22-

3/31/87

Looking at the national economy, our forecast is very much

the same as the Greenbook.

The outlook and expectations we have over

the rest of the year have changed very little since the last meeting
of the Committee. We differ a bit with the Greenbook with respect to
inflation: we think the deflator will turn out to be more toward 3-1/2
percent rather than the 2.7, 2.8 percent that the staff has; and as
opposed to the constant rate of increase in each quarter that the
staff seems to be expecting, we anticipate that an upward trend will
set in during the latter half of the year. Wage contracts and
settlements continue to be on the modest side, although I am not sure

what is going to develop at the end of the year with the UAW and
others coming on stream. But I think the more important thing is that
the second-stage impact of rising import prices could be a bit
stronger than reflected in the staff forecast. And given the lesser
deceleration in service sector inflation, I am a little concerned that
in some sense we still have an underlying rate of inflation in the
economy that is closer to the 5 percent area than it is to 3 or 4

percent. That is more a gut feeling than anything that I have in
terms of statistics.
I think there is a very serious downside risk to this
outlook, if we agree that a significant portion of the year's forecast
growth is attributable to a turnaround in the foreign trade balance;
we keep revising downward our estimates of growth in other nations,
particularly Germany and Japan, as someone else has just indicated.
Obviously, that partly reflects a fall-off in U.S. imports from them;
but with weaker growth abroad, I think that we could get weaker export
expansion also. So it seems to me that there is very little reason to
expect more improvement in the trade balance in 1987 than we did six
weeks ago and, perhaps marginally, there may be some concern that it
won't be as good as we had expected. But, as someone also has
mentioned, the real threat is the dollar and the increasing likelihood
of protectionist legislation of some sort that will bring retaliation
by our trading partners. I am not sure that we have any particular
way to solve this at the moment except through monetary policy,
perhaps, and its effect on the dollar. But I think that this is a
very, very important issue and one that I am very concerned about.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. On this point about manufacturing, Frank, we not
only saw a big pickup in January--8.1 percent at an annual rate--but
an annual growth rate for the last three months of 3.2 percent. So we
have been seeing the strength in manufacturing for some time now and
it is reflected in non-agricultural employment more broadly. Retail
sales are reported with a considerable lag, but I think that retailers
generally feel pretty good about the way things are going. Someone
made the comment before that economic conditions are a little better
than they might have thought. I think retailers generally feel good
about things on that side. A lot of these sectors could have been
affected by weather, as residential construction was, but I think
there is a sentiment that there is some fundamental underlying
strength as well. The one area of weakness that has shown up more
recently is nonresidential construction. Yet in
one of the local businessmen who is in the commercial glass business,
or quasi-commercial or whatever you call that, indicated that late
last year and early this year they have put through two 5 percent
price increases both of which stuck, after a long history of trying to

3/31/87

-23-

put them through and they just wouldn't stick. And they are looking
at maybe another 5 percent increase down the road this year. On a
broader front, I personally am somewhat skeptical as to whether the
effects of the lower dollar, which I think will filter through in many
ways over a long period of time, can really be handled as a one-time
level adjustment, as perhaps energy prices would be viewed, in terms
of inflation. I would be somewhat concerned about the ability to
contain, as Bob Forrestal mentioned, the secondary effects arising out
of higher import prices.
Finally, on another note, we had a group of institutional
investors in for lunch last week--this is perhaps somewhat irrelevant
at this point in that it has already happened--but I was struck by the
level of anxiety about market valuation. Generally, people felt that
the U.S. stock market on a valuation basis was overpriced but in
comparison to other world markets it looked like a great buy right
now. So in the cases where investors maybe had taken some U.S. funds
offshore, where they have enjoyed tremendous gains both in the
currency and those market movements, they now look at the relative
valuations and say maybe the U.S. market isn't a bad buy. But there
was this general anxiety that a rising tide lifts all ships and that
that is not a very good fundamental underpinning for the level of
markets.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Tide capsizes all the ships.

MR. MELZER. Yes, I think. Again, I was struck--and maybe it
was just because this was at our Reserve Bank and they were saying
what they thought they ought to in the central bank--that, generally
speaking, they felt that the liquidity that had been provided wasn't
having a lot of impact on the real side of the economy. It was all
going into the financial markets and it was blowing up this balloon
and creating anxiety about what might happen should that balloon
burst.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
staff's forecast of the economy we have no great quarrel. I will just
say that we are a touch stronger on personal consumption and less
optimistic about the turnaround in net exports to the extent of about
$5 billion or so. Where we would differ is on the projection for
prices. On the deflator, for example, we are roughly a half
percentage point or more higher than the staff. I think this has been
mentioned two or three times around the table up to this point and we
would be consistent with those comments.
With respect to the District, I am delighted to tell you that
over the past couple of weeks, in meetings with boards of directors,
businessmen, bankers and others, there is a decided turn in the
outlook. More optimism has been expressed over the past two weeks to
a month, I think, than I have seen in our part of the country for
three, or maybe even four, years. There isn't a great deal of good
hard evidence that there has been a turnaround. It may be part of the
optimism that comes in the Midwest when the sap begins to rise-people's outlooks become a bit more optimistic. I was accused of that
by Governor Angell when I mentioned it to him earlier. But the fact
of the matter is that there is some evidence of a turnaround. For

-24-

3/31/87

example, in Oklahoma, there has been some leasing activity in the oil
and gas area with leases on a three-year basis of $35 to $50 an acre.
That is not a great amount compared with what they got two or three
years ago, but it does provide a cash flow that eases some of the
strains for the lenders, particularly those small banks located in the
petroleum-producing areas.
Also, as has been mentioned earlier, there seems to be some
stabilization in the price of agricultural real estate. There are
reports that some sales have taken place in remote areas such as
western Nebraska in which fairly good prices were established; and
some sales are actually moving property. There's an interesting
It started
development that's occurring with the Farm Credit System.
with the St. Paul Farm Credit Bank, and perhaps Gary Stern can expand
on it, but they are adopting a new program in which they are going to
accelerate the sale of the agricultural real estate that they now have
by using a program of incentives based upon term, price, and
For example, they will go as low as 4.9
particularly interest rates.
percent for 3, 5, or 7 years, and after that time the interest rate
rises to a market interest rate for the 25- to 30-year amortization
period of the loan. It is obvious that the price of the property that
is being sold is not the true price because of the incentives being
granted. But it is something that has received some rather positive
comments. And if you are concerned about the amount of land that
might be dumped on the market through this by the Farm Credit System
or other lenders, let me just tell you that there are about 4-1/4
million acres now in the hands of lenders and that represents only
about 5 percent of the agricultural real estate that is normally sold
So it is not a big amount but it may mask a bit
in any given year.
the problems in the Midwest because much of it is centered there.
There is an optimistic tone that hasn't been present in the past.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. I have been impressed for some time at the
It seems to me that
ongoing employment gains at the national level.
rather healthy employment gains have been underway for roughly six
months or so now, going back to September. I must say that that kind
of improvement seems to be evident, at least anecdotally, in many of
the comments I hear around the District extending over roughly the
same period of time. But it is not mirrored in many of the other
national statistics that I look at, although maybe if one looks
carefully at some of the consumer spending data, excluding autos, or
I
some of the construction data, one can see some of it in there.
conclude from that divergence between what I am hearing anecdotally in
the District on the employment gains versus some of the other
statistics that the recovery remains uneven and unbalanced. But I
also wonder if it isn't a fact that a lot of our statistics don't
focus on services and trade, and finance, insurance, and real estate,
and so forth, where a lot of this activity, in fact, lies.
On the inflation side, I have been expecting, of course, that
we would see some deterioration this year in any event, and I haven't
I would report that in talking to some
changed my views about that.
people in the District, in two very different kinds of businesses-pulp paper, lumber, etc. and in health care which is a small but
stubborn component in the CPI--prices, at least in general, have been
rising more rapidly once again. There seem to be growing indications

3/31/87

-25-

of some rebuilding of price pressures, at least in those two sectors
out our way. Despite what I would consider my basic satisfaction with
the immediate economic outlook and conditions in the District, I must
say that, if anything, I am less optimistic about the longer term. It
Many of the things
seems to me that some people have touched on this.
that we have talked about over the last several years that might go
wrong seem to be in the process of going wrong at the moment, as I
The dollar has been touched on: what that means for Germany
view it.
and Japan and what that means for domestic inflation. All those
Protectionism adds to those concerns.
things are not looking good.
The LDC situation looks to me to be worse. Probably I could add to
that litany if I really tried. But I guess my message is that as I
look at that and what it might imply for economic performance here and
abroad I am, if anything, more concerned.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We will hasten to Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I did look real hard for something positive: I
was able to leave the District for a few days! Mention has been made
on the manufacturing side of exports and the effect of the dollar.
That is, or appears to be, a positive factor in the Eleventh District
--lumber, paper, and chemicals seem to be responding. Attitudes,
which I think really are important, have not changed all that much.
I
would say that some people are not quite as pessimistic although I
certainly would not consider people optimistic at this point.
Looking
at some of the negatives that remain in the Eleventh District,
construction, which I've reported on, is a big thing, of course. We
don't see much possibility for a turnaround in that.
In commercial
construction Houston had a negative absorption. Dallas does have a
higher vacancy rate than Houston but our absorption is doing better.
The thinking was that we probably were two or three years away from a
major announcement on a new building. Now that has been extended to
probably three or four years, indirectly, because we have had a major
announcement of 900,000 square feet coming on the market in downtown
Dallas with the InterFirst-Republic Bank combination; they are going
to free up that much space--their prime or best space--through that
consolidation. The rig count is off slightly after growing steadily
for about six months. Retail sales are weak. I can confirm what you
say, Roger, about leasing.
In Oklahoma we just leased a little
mineral interest that the Bank has there and we got $105 an acre but
we went out for five years and I think it amounted to about $3,000.
MR. BLACK.

The Bank has?

MS. SEGER.

Are you speculating in oil?

MR. BOYKIN. No, this goes back to the '20s and '30s. We
were given quitclaim deeds and we haven't been able to get rid of
this.
We should have given it to you when you took Oklahoma, Roger!
The employment numbers have been a surprise for us in Texas because we
have been reporting eight consecutive months of growth in employment.
Those numbers have now been revised and, as a matter of fact, we have
had eight consecutive months of decline.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. At the time of our February meeting we had
slightly higher projections on real GNP and inflation than the Board

-26-

3/31/87

staff had.
The staff has not changed its overall projection, although
it has changed the shape or the profile, and we left ours pretty much
the same--partly out of conviction and also probably because we knew
if we made another forecast that we would have two errors rather than
one.
The main point of difference that we have with the staff is in
the area of residential construction. We think, given the sharp drop
that we have had in mortgage rates, that it ought to be a little
stronger than 1.3 percent. Even more important than that, the staff's
downward revision in construction and personal consumption
expenditures, to which several people have alluded, is pretty
significant.
It has come down from 4 percent in 1986 to 1 percent in
1987 and we have not had that low a rate of growth since 1981, which
was a recession year.
In view of the proliferation of home equity
mortgage loans--which I would think would make a difference--and also
the wealth effect of the stock market, we think that that's apt to be
a little stronger. We come out about the same on the net exports of
goods and services, although I think that is probably the most
vulnerable part of all of our forecasts. Things don't look all that
good abroad now but we would stick with about what the Board's staff
has said.
As I mentioned, in the area of inflation we are a little
higher than the Board staff. Although we are still predicting a
fairly moderate inflation in the implicit price deflator for next
year, I think this price level bears some closer monitoring. There is
a lot of money and liquidity out there and that is going to be felt at
some time. We have had a substantial depreciation of the dollar and
there has been an increase in capacity utilization, and all these
things ought to work to put some upward pressure on the dollar at some
point.
It may come a little sooner than most people seem to think.
Some of the pickup in industrial prices, as shown in the Greenbook and
also reported in several of the District surveys contained in the
Beige book, suggest that there may be a little more there than meets
the eye.
I hope not, but it is something that I think bears some
watching for the time being.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economic
situation in the Fourth District is broadly consistent with what the
staff has forecasted. Most sectors of our economy, believe it or not,
are expanding begrudgingly and fitfully. Metal producers, of course,
continue to suffer from excessive worldwide supply. Housing, on the
other hand, seems to be holding its own and, in fact, is moving
forward at a rapid pace.
Some others have commented on housing starts
in the Midwest and we are no different. The directors and others with
whom we speak admit to feeling that the worst is now behind them in
terms of the foreign trade front. You can twist their arms a little
and they will admit it.
Domestic producers say that it is easier to
compete now against imports but that competition is still very
intense; yet they seem to feel as though they are back in the ball
game.
Our staff feels that we still are a long way from being secure
about the economic fundamentals governing the current account. The
improvement could take longer and may require a lower dollar than we
think today. Our people don't see as much strength, perhaps, in
exports as is indicated by the Greenbook forecast. One interesting
thing our staff did was to take a look at capacity in the various
sectors, and there are spotty areas where capacity utilization is

-27-

3/31/87

beginning to approach the highs reached back in 1978 and 1980.
Several of the industries are at their long-term 20-year average.
Somebody mentioned some pressure on prices in textiles; they're
So just as a
showing up to and beyond their 1978-to-1980 highs.
general comment, there may be some spotty places in the economy where
As I said at the
capacity [constraints] are beginning to show up.
outset of my comments, the staff's outlook in the Greenbook is very
consistent with the conditions we see in the Fourth District.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER.
I agree with the growth and inflation forecasts
of the staff. I was happy to see that the first quarter was revised
upward: I always thought that the tax would have an overall beneficial
effect. Let me focus mainly on the external side. As many speakers
have pointed out, our main problem is the high and persistent trade
deficit.
Sooner or later we will have to correct it.
But at the
going exchange rates that trade deficit will continue to persist, as
the staff's projections have shown for the exchange rates and foreign
growth, I should hasten to add.
The staff projections in the
Greenbook, I think, already have incorporated the decline in the value
of the dollar. Obviously, if foreigners were willing to expand their
economies that would help on the trade side. But as we have also
So the question that will be
learned they are unwilling to do so.
before us here is whether it will be advisable for us to delay the
adjustment in the exchange rate by letting interest rates drift
upward. I think that that would lower the growth projections we have
for the U.S. economy which are only running slightly above 2-1/2
That wouldn't help the world economy; the LDCs would be hurt
percent.
by higher interest rates and clearly their export markets would be
I am
hurt by having lower growth in the United States as well.
willing to let interest rates drift up if it would be necessary in
But in spite of the few hiccups
order to help on the price front.
that we have seen, overall the projections still show that inflation
is essentially flat in the profile for the year as a whole, and I am
comfortable with that projection.
So I think that the debate we are
really going to focus on in our later deliberation is whether we want
to focus monetary policy on domestic or international projections.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
There does seem to be a growing consensus about
the world economy, so I don't think I need to elaborate much more on
low world economic growth rates.
That's certainly not good news, as
all of us know, in regard to the LDC's debt and to many other things
that are very important to us.
Unfortunately, in the news on the U.S.
economy it is hard to see any bright spots, because if we do get any
rebound--and if it is rather significant--in view of the world economy
that may very well overwhelm the exchange rate effects.
So we would
end up having a bad world even if we meet U.S. growth projections. So
that is somewhat of a negative.
I tend to be sympathetic with the staff's view on the
inflation rate because I think a global perspective is very, very
significant.
I noted here today that I haven't yet heard a president
of a Reserve Bank who has come in with an inflation rate that is lower
than staff's.
I hear a lot that are higher.
I am about up to the
staff's level now on inflation because there has been a development in

3/31/87

regard to the spring storms that might have an adverse effect on food
prices.
That is, this blizzard in the Midwest occurred at a rather
unfortunate time with regard to calving and there is a lot of
livestock damage--anecdotal at this point. We don't know what the
numbers are but the situation could be somewhat severe.
I guess there
is some benefit in that we have moved a lot of that cow/calf operation
to Florida and that works pretty well for reasons I have not quite
understood. You feed cattle, or start them off, on a very poor grass
diet--I am not trying to draw aspersions to Florida--but then you
transfer them to the good blue foothills grass and you get marvelous
kinds of changes.
So we don't have as much of the cattle exposed as
we did before, but that undoubtedly would have an adverse impact.
I would second what has been mentioned about agriculture. We
are now beginning to see farmers who are having prosperity and
ranchers who are having prosperity come forward. For quite a while
farmers who were making any money tended to be very quiet about it in
this kind of environment, but they're beginning to come forward.
It
does appear that most of the land purchases are being made by farmers,
not by out-of-farming interests.
It may very well be that our
agricultural banks are going to get through this year to a period
I wish we could say the
where in 1988 we may have some better news.
same thing about banks with LDC debt.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I think just about everything has been covered.
I have heard
For my own benefit, I'll summarize my thoughts a bit.
from a lot of the Districts that things look better. Production is
picking up and employment looks a little better in the trade-related
I think the aggregate statistics
area and in some manufacturing.
reflect some of that and that is encouraging. What concerns me a
little is how much of this production that we are seeing is going into
inventories. How much of it is really meeting domestic consumption?
There seems to be some circumstantial evidence of some involuntary
inventory buildup.
It is more in the automobile area than anywhere
else, but there are at least some signs of inventory pressure even in
the non-auto area.
That may be just the rebuilding of stocks to more
normal levels but given the low forecast that we have for domestic
demand--which a lot of comments reflected around the room--you just
wonder if all that production and greater optimism we are seeing are
going to be permanent or if there will be a flash into inventories.
If so, there is some risk and a little concern as to whether this
production activity is going to be continuing. That bothers me a
little, especially when we are marking down growth abroad and the
potential for our export markets.
So, we may not be seeing the
strength in the future from the export side that we had been expecting
earlier.
That is somewhat of a problem which brings me to the dilemma
that I keep worrying about.
I think we all agree that the dollar is
at levels where we wouldn't like to see it go particularly lower.
Having it go lower would make it counterproductive on the trade side
as well as the inflation side at this point. But I think the concern
is: should we get dragged down by trying to stabilize the dollar
against some countries who are experiencing economic decline?
I worry
a bit about the overall macroeconomic effects of trying to stabilize
the dollar against some weakening economy. At the same time I am at a

3/31/87

-29-

loss for knowing what to do about it simply because I think there is a
risk to our financial market stability, especially in the short run-and maybe even for inflation in the long run--if we don't try and do
something about the dollar.
It is a real predicament that we have to
deal with and the protectionist sentiment that we are seeing surface
is part of that problem now.
I just hope we don't have to get into a
situation where we are defending the dollar because of a confidence
problem associated with destabilizing exchange rates against
currencies whose countries are showing continued decline.
That is a
real risk; in my mind that seems to be the major problem and I just
don't know exactly how we should deal with it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. My own forecast is a little below the staff's
forecast, at least in terms of the overall growth for the economy.
In
going back to the time when the staff first presented its forecast for
1987, I have had this concern--which I have heard here at least seven
times already today--about the ability of the trade picture to improve
enough to make the contribution to our overall growth situation that
we seem to have expected and we continue to expect. Also, I must say
that I am still not convinced, even with exchange rate adjustments and
even with more American businessmen interested in exporting, that we
in fact can do a lot more exporting--because of not necessarily having
the kinds of products, or enough of the kinds of products, that are
wanted in other parts of the world.
I have been lectured on this
matter by some Germans over the last couple of weeks or months, so I
hope they haven't unduly colored my view. But I think there is some
of that going on. Also, I am not convinced that all the markets in
the world are really open to our products; I think the events of the
last few days have suggested that some other people have wondered, at
least, whether the Japanese markets were open to our products.
So,
that concerns me.
On the domestic side my nagging concern continues to be the
auto industry. They already have very substantial supplies of new
cars sitting in various dealer lots and showrooms. There have been
some cuts in production and there have been some downward revisions of
production schedules. But my woman's intuition suggests that maybe
scheduling changes have not gone far enough and that we will see more
of them. Therefore, I hope that the staff's forecast does prove to be
right because I do want a good healthy economy, and I like faster
growth rates rather than slower growth rates.
But I really think we
are putting a lot of our eggs in one or two baskets and I just hope we
don't stub our toes.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

Okay.

Mr. Kohn, can you be fast?
[Statement--see Appendix.]
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think we can proceed and decide what to
do.
I don't think this is the simplest situation we have ever been
in. The course of action in one way seems pretty obvious. But
whether that is really satisfactory to the situation, the answer is
probably no.
Things are not under our control.
I'd say our decision
is easy in one sense: It is a little hard for me to see, in listening

-30-

3/31/87

to what everybody has said, that we would want to move importantly in
one direction or another from where we have been just in terms of the
business outlook and ordinary domestic criteria. I guess the question
is: Under what conditions would we want to move at all significantly?
The aggregates are coming in low, which can't upset me after a year or
18 months of coming in high. I don't see that as a strong reason for
easing, for a fair amount of time anyway. That leaves us with the
question of the dollar and the international situation and all those
related concerns that have been discussed, which are very difficult
issues. Obviously, they are by their nature a multilateral concern as
well as our concern. I would just note in that connection that the
[Unintelligible] for all those numbers we ought
G-10 meets next week.
to extract great wisdom out of the meetings next week. I wouldn't
count on that but there is an opportunity for a closer discussion with
our major trading partners next week. [We could provide] some sense
of what we might think is useful in terms of entering into those
discussions. Who wants to say something?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I will if no one wants to. As I
look at the situation now, in my judgment, we would have to be
prepared to let interest rates go up a little for a little while in
order to avoid a situation where they had to go up a lot for a long
while. In the context of the alternatives in the Bluebook, following
them in a conventional sense, that would lean me toward the
alternative C side of things. But I don't think the alternatives in
the Bluebook are really the best way to think about the situation at
the moment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am beginning to worry about that when I
look at this, too. Let me just interject a comment. As I said, I
don't see any reasons to change strongly. I am thinking about it in
terms of borrowings right at the moment. It was implicit in what I
said that if the aggregates continue to come in below 6 percent--or
6.9 percent, or whatever the staff has here--I wouldn't see that as a
I don't know whether those
strong signal for easing at this point.
aggregates are too high or whether the staff always judges them
absolutely correctly.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think they are too high if interest rates

pick up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who knows what they are.
don't think that is the crucial variable for this period.

But I

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's partly what I was just trying
to say. I don't think it is very easy to think about policy in terms
of conventional alternatives A, B, or C. The way I would state it is
that I would be prepared, in the face of continued weakness in the
exchange market, to see the borrowings level go up--in the extreme
maybe even as high as $500 million, say--in the hope and the
expectation that that would be temporary. The idea is to avoid having
to permanently increase interest rates. But I do worry; I am not at
all sure that we have seen the real test in this exchange market. If
we were to see the kinds of pressures, or even more pressures than we
have seen in the last few days, materialize in the very near term I
don't think we could head that off just through intervention. And in
those circumstances, I think we would have to be prepared to show our
hand a little in the hope that that could get us over the hump.

-31-

3/31/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for purposes of clarification: If I
understand you correctly, you are saying do nothing now but be
prepared to raise borrowing if the exchange market comes under still
more pressure.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And I would be prepared to go up to
at least $500 million in those circumstances.
I think Jerry has
MR. JOHNSON. Can I just comment on that?
a good point. My only concern about it is that I think we might need
discretion for something like that.
I would hate to see us make the
fundamental move on monetary policy when I think [the move] even more
So, I would only want to do
clearly lies with the surplus countries.
that if we saw some tendency for them to let money market rates drift
down so that we would get that interest rate differential we need. To
see the fundamentals change in the right way over there would seem to
be the desirable feature.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Oh, the best of all possible worlds
would be that. As I have tried to describe this, I would not view
this as a fundamental change in policy; I would view it as almost a
tactical change that says we are prepared [to move] at least for a
transitory period. To some extent we have been finessing that a
little, as someone said earlier, just in terms of the way we have been
conducting our open market operations from day-to-day. All I am
saying is that I would be prepared to go a little further than simply
finessing open market operations from day-to-day in the face of
renewed downward pressure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
understand you correctly.

You're saying do nothing today, if I

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Depending upon what's going on in
the market.
I think it means do nothing today.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't mean today;

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I mean on borrowing.

I know.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this seems to me too like a good
time to hold our policy steady. I would opt for "B" and I would
maintain that tilt toward restraint in the language of the directive.
There's a good case for making this language symmetrical, which is
what I generally favor, particularly now with the aggregates slowing
down. That case can be made; but I think over the last couple of
years we assumed that at some point the rapid growth in the aggregates
was going to be followed by a slowing in those growth rates as they
adjusted to the downward drift in interest rates.
That is what we may
be seeing now. And, like you, I would be very reluctant to do
anything in the way of ease if the aggregates continue weak for a
while because, if anything, the economy looks a little stronger to me
now than it did.
So, that would not be any signal to me that we ought
to act in that direction in the immediate future.
I would not favor
putting a greater weight in the written directive on the foreign
exchange side, although I think we would necessarily emphasize that.
We already have language in the directive now, and if we use the kind

-32-

3/31/87

of language suggested in the Bluebook I would have some concern as to
how the markets might interpret that. Although I certainly don't
know, I fear that the markets might think that means more of a
I wouldn't want to
[unintelligible] than probably we have in mind.
I would just ride with the reference that
give that kind of signal.
we already have in the directive about giving due attention to foreign
exchange matters.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I come out in essentially the same place. Let
me just mention a couple of things. While it is implicit, I think, in
the discussion, maybe one thing that ought to be mentioned explicitly
is that the problem with the dollar is not the level but the rate of
decline that we have experienced--more than 7 percent between the
I am not sure what the decline is
December and February meetings.
through yesterday, but it's probably on the order of 5 percent on a
So, one thing that is important in thinking
trade-weighted basis.
about the dollar is that we are not necessarily saying that this is
the right level but that some stability is desirable. Picking up on
Governor Johnson's earlier point--it seems to me that the message
being sent to us there is really quite a negative one if our real
growth outlook is considerably more attractive than that of our major
trading partners and yet our currency is weak. I think that is saying
something about what people think about the inflationary prospects
I recognize that there are a lot of risks on the table with
here.
respect to the economic outlook, but going back to what Jerry Corrigan
said earlier, the most destabilizing risk would be that of losing
control of the dollar on the downside after the very rapid declines
So, in my mind that alone takes away any thought of
that we've had.
easing. In fact, it seems to me that the dynamics we've been
witnessing here, with a weaker dollar and how that spills right back
into the bond and stock markets, are what will unleash the liquidity
that's in the economy that we've been talking about for some time.
It's going to lead people to tend to want to liquidate financial
assets and, I would guess, be much more inclined to spend. That could
really add to the momentum in the economy, particularly on the price
It really comes down in my
side, which is where my concern would be.
I guess we can
mind to a question of whether we tighten now or wait.
all take some comfort in the slowdown in the growth of reserves and
money but, on a quarterly basis, we're really talking about M1 slowing
down to 11 percent in the fourth quarter; for the average through
March the projection is around 9 percent. Reserve growth also has
slowed down from very extraordinary rates toward the end of the year.
In my mind,
But we're still talking about historically high rates.
there's no reason to be at all concerned about slow money growth.
Eventually, although it's not a very happy choice, it seems to me that
I
we will likely be put in a position of having to tighten policy.
don't know whether it's now or later.
It seems to me that the
arguments against any move now are these international discussions
that you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, and also the trade negotiations with
the Japanese right now. While I don't necessarily agree with it, I
could see that at this point--as a negotiating tactic, really--the
dollar bashing is the club we have in trying to reach some agreement
in a very short-term sense.
So, all things considered, I'd be in favor of maintaining the
existing degree of reserve restraint now. But if we can't hold the

3/31/87

dollar at about this level, then I think we have to be prepared to
move to a firmer policy much more quickly. Or if, at the present
degree of reserve restraint, we see a pickup in the rate of growth of
money in relation to what's projected here--let's say we have 9
percent on the table for the period ahead--I think we're going to have
to pay more attention to that.
I say that for all these other
reasons: inflationary expectations are quite high now, and I don't
think we have the latitude as a central bank to ignore extremely rapid
money growth. The slowdown from the rapid rates of last year, from 13
percent down to 9 percent, is okay. But if we see either a pickup in
monetary growth--and when I say pickup I mean in relation to this
9 percent projection for the quarter--or a weak dollar, those would be
the things I'd be looking at as short-term indicators of the need to
respond in the direction of further tightening.
CHAIRMAN
to date, Mr. Kohn
little lower than
percent, I guess,
MR. KOHN.

VOLCKER. For what it's worth, just to bring you up
tells me that the March figure is likely to be a
what's been indicated to you--by more than a
for M1.
About 4-1/4 percent for March.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B and,
like President Black, I would favor language that tilts toward
firmness.
As I indicated previously, I believe that inflationary
pressures will require some interest rate increases in the second half
of the year; and if inflationary pressures surface sooner, policy may
have to respond earlier as well. With regard to the aggregates, I
think it's quite likely that we will run into a period where they are
growing toward the low end, or even below the low end, if we see
interest rates rising. If that's the case, we're likely to tolerate
that.
I would think that we would have to change the wording of the
directive because the way the directive is worded today any change
from the existing reserve restraint depends primarily on the behavior
of the aggregates, taking into account business conditions, etc.
I
think we almost want to reverse that and have as the primary
determinants what we really are focusing on, which is business
conditions and progress against inflation, and so forth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think Jerry Corrigan
captured my feelings very well.
That is, I would favor no immediate
change in policy but I would be prepared to move to a higher borrowing
level. Having that in mind, and trying to capture that within the
framework of the way we talk about these things, that is somewhere in
the "B-C" area.
I'm not sure that I would be prepared to go to $500
million. On the other hand, I feel that there may be some advantage
to showing some modestly higher interest rates earlier rather than
later--that is, to permit the market to understand that somewhat
higher interest rates effected by the Federal Reserve, as opposed to
just the technical factors, would be acceptable in the near term.
However, the point is--and I think Jerry made this point very well-that this does not mean a change in Federal Reserve policy but rather
the management of Federal Reserve policy at or about the level that we
presently operate.
The other thing that I would just mention is that,

-34-

3/31/87

contrary to some other comments that have been made, I would move the
reference on the dollar in the directive to a more prominent level; I
would move it up in that sentence as proposed in the directive
language and as mentioned by Don Kohn.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. As I look at the domestic economy, Mr.
Chairman, I don't see any case at all for doing anything with respect
to policy at the present time. We have had reports around the table
this morning that reflect perhaps somewhat better economic conditions
than we had last time. The forecast isn't all that bad, although
inflation looks like it's going to be ticking up toward the end of the
year. But I think all of this is premature with respect to policy.
For purely domestic reasons I would prefer to stay where we are. The
only reason that I would favor a move in interest rates or a move in
the borrowing is because of the dollar. Again, I think perhaps we are
in a position where we can afford to wait a little longer to see what
happens with the dollar. It's possible that this Japan bashing that's
going on with respect to the semi-conductor situation may resolve
itself. When we get past this quarter some of the window dressing
that the Japanese are engaged in may sort itself out and we may have a
little easing of the pressure on the dollar. If that doesn't happen I
would certainly want to be in a position to move rapidly to counter
any further significant drop in the dollar. With respect to Governor
Johnson's point, I think it certainly would be wonderful if we could
get the interest rate differentials to contract a little. But even if
our trading partners don't make those moves, if the dollar were to
fall somewhat more I'd be prepared to go ahead unilaterally on our
own.
With respect to the directive, I too would favor giving a
more prominent place in that directive to the foreign exchange
situation. One other point that I would make is that I'm not so sure
that the word "instability" that is in the directive is the right one.
The phrase "in light of the recent instability" strikes me as being a
bit on the strong side. I would prefer language that would suggest
recent weakness of the dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that no change, or alternative B,
is the right place to start because we have so much uncertainty in
regard to the direction our economy is going. We just don't have the
facts out there that tell us exactly which move we ought to make. And
the last thing we ought to do is to make a move in one direction and
have it turn out to be the wrong move. I think we need stability when
we don't seem to get too much stability from other Executive branches
of this government. We need to stabilize here; we need not do
something dramatic. The only certain thing I can see is the dollar's
downward momentum; it just doesn't seem to me that that's apt to turn
around. At some point in time, we're going to have to be willing to
give that high priority or top priority. In fact, at some point in
time, we're probably going to have to be willing to make it the
dominant priority in order to change this momentum that exists. I do
believe it would be very important for us to get West Germany and
Japan and other G-10 countries also to recognize that this is a
critical juncture and that at some point here we are going to have to

3/31/87

-35-

be willing to [unintelligible] monetary policy. It would be most
important that we have them prepared to make steps at the same time we
might make a step.
So, we really ought to be sure that any upward
pressure on interest rates in the United States in this environment
calls for downward pressure on rates abroad.
I think the world
economy dictates that.
It seems to me that the transition for us
ought to be to look at the monetary aggregates.
I don't think we
ought to announce anything different about the monetary aggregates
now, but I do think we ought to look carefully at the M2 and M1 growth
paths.
If they are within this 3 to 7 percent range and conditions
remain as they are and the dollar continues to move downward for some
time, that might be acceptable. But at some point-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

3 to 7 percent range?

MR. ANGELL. Well, there's no number like that in the
Bluebook but it seems to me that a 3 to 7 range gives the path for the
dollar-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay.

You just made that up, I guess?

MR. ANGELL.
I just made that up, right.
Given the path of
the dollar, we want monetary restraint more than we otherwise would
have wanted; but we don't want to have an abrupt movement there, and
we want to negotiate with our-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
for M2 and M3?
MR. ANGELL.

Well, M2 and M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

3 to 7 percent is what you're thinking of

M2 and M1?

That is in this current environment of dollar

weakness.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. Like most speakers before me, I favor
alternative B.
I think it's important to keep U.S. economic growth
going and also to maintain inflation at a subdued pace.
I was very
happy to see that the Ms have been slowing, and I think we should not
do something that pushes them very sharply from their current paths.
I'd like to note that short-term interest rates are already very high
in real terms. With federal funds trading today between 6 and 7
percent, if you take the GNP deflator of 3 percent you're talking
about a short-term [real] interest rate of between 3 and 4 percent.
I
certainly wouldn't want to follow Germany and Japan into their
slowdown just for the sake of holding the dollar exchange rate against
those two currencies at the present time, as has been noted many times
before. The dollar has not depreciated very much against the broader
basket of currencies.
As is implied by the staff projection, if we
prevent the dollar from falling we will get lower growth rates than
are actually indicated here.
So we're risking the chance of a
substantial slowdown, if not a recession, in the United States. That
certainly wouldn't help the world economy, as such. We've mentioned
before that we should intervene in disorderly markets and I agree with
that.
With all that taken into account, I favor symmetric language in

-36-

3/31/87

the policy directive and would not move the dollar to a more prominent
place in the directive itself.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the economy is strong
enough that there's certainly no case for pursuing an easier policy
even if the aggregates should come in for the next month or so below
the projections indicated. I'd like to call your attention, though,
to the fact that we've already had some tightening in the last few
days. We've had the long-term government bond yield go up about 30
basis points. If that should stick, we should expect to see a similar
rise in corporate bond and mortgage rates. As far as moving to a
higher borrowing level and a tighter policy, I think that depends a
lot on the nature of the overall circumstances. I'm inclined to take
the same position that Governor Heller did: that with the world
economy growing so slowly, if we're going to stay on a path of
improving our balance of payments position we've got to be able to
increase our market share in a world that's not growing very fast.
And I'm not sure we can do that at the present level of the exchange
rate. I don't know where the equilibrium rate is but I suspect the
dollar has to come down somewhat further before we get enough momentum
going to begin to restore our balance of payments position. So it
seems to me that if we're going to raise the borrowing level we ought
to have a conference call so that the members of the Committee really
can appraise the situation in the light of what's going on
domestically as well as what's going on in the foreign exchange
market. If we're getting a modest, gradual, downward drift in the
dollar I don't think we ought to be concerned about that. If we get a
sustained number of days [of weakness], as we've had recently, of
course, that's another matter. It depends on the conditions, and I
think they're kind of hard to describe in advance. That's why I
suggest that we should have a conference call.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Given all the current and prospective problems we
face, I favor alternative B in terms of a borrowing target, at least
as the starting point. I think we should not roil things here any
further unnecessarily. I would maintain the kind of asymmetry that's
in the directive and I would be in favor of greater emphasis on
foreign exchange market considerations. As Jerry Corrigan mentioned
earlier, in the period ahead we may be in a situation where
intervention alone doesn't do it; we may have to be prepared to back
that up with something more meaningful. Beyond that, I would add that
I don't know what the right level for the dollar is, but I am
concerned that a lower dollar as a consequence of accommodative
monetary policy at this point will not solve our trade problem in any
sustained or any satisfactory way. It seems to me that in the longer
run that's going to produce either higher inflation or weaker domestic
investment than we would like to see, or some combination of both over
time. I'm quite concerned about that; that is a longer-term matter.
I think we have to be very careful with the dollar here and I don't
know that having it go lower at this juncture, as a consequence of
monetary policy, is a helpful development at all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

-37-

3/31/87

MR. BOYKIN.
I would also favor alternative B for the reasons
that have been given--the uncertainties.
I do like Jerry's approach
of starting with $300 million borrowing but being prepared to move
fairly rapidly a little higher.
It seems to me that what is really
important right now in this very current environment is what's
In
happening to the exchange rate, and that can move awfully fast.
terms of the response and implementation of policy, I differ a little
with Frank Morris simply because of the logistics of taking whatever
action might be required. I would be willing to go along with an
understanding of being prepared to move and to move very quickly
toward a little more restraint. Likewise, then, I would make the
exchange rate a little more prominent in the directive because that's
kind of what's guiding the policy decision right now, at least in my
mind.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. For the reasons stated it does seem to me that
this is an appropriate time to maintain our current level of reserve
restraint. That suggests a borrowing level of, say, $300 million.
But depending on developments in the exchange market as they may
evolve, if we were going to err I'd be in favor of erring a bit on the
high side rather than the low side. And I think the wording of the
directive ought to be phrased to reflect at least that level of
restraint. Translating that to the federal funds rate, if the rate
were to continue at the present level X--what's going on today, which
I think is an aberration--or even trend a little higher I wouldn't
necessarily fight that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has moved down, I guess.
So, before
you make your case, the federal funds rate has come down since this
morning.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
It came down to the 6-1/4 percent area after
So it wasn't working out-having been as high as 6-3/4 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
referring to.
MR. KEEHN.

Still, I didn't know what you were

6-1/4 percent was exactly what I had in mind.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay, I just wanted to make sure that you

were-MR. KEEHN.
It seems to me that that level is one that we
ought not to necessarily fight.
[From the discussion] around the
table earlier, I think it's clear that our principal focus is on the
international side, particularly the exchange markets. Therefore, I
do think that the directive ought to reflect that.
I think it's an
honest statement that would not in any way be surprising to the
markets.
The kind of wording that Don Kohn has in the Bluebook
relating to that is an appropriate statement.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I think we have some breathing room on the
domestic economy and our focus is on the international situation.
think it needs special emphasis both in the directive and in the

I

-38-

3/31/87

I find it hard to imagine a situation in which we
conduct of policy.
So I come out with the
would ease policy over the next six weeks.
view that we ought to stay where we are for now, with a directive
weighted on the side of restraint. Whether we have to exercise that
restraint depends on how developments, particularly international
developments, unfold.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I agree with the statements that where the
economy is headed is a little uncertain now. So I don't think that we
That's why I
want to make any clear-cut moves in monetary policy.
support something like alternative B. But I am concerned about some
of the potential destabilizing activities that are going on in the
So, even though I really wouldn't want a change in
financial markets.
policy, I think that it may be necessary to at least reserve some
potential discretion--or maybe the answer is to have the potential for
a conference call--to deal with a situation that might require some
I would reemphasize what I said
uptick in the borrowing level.
before: that my preference would be not to do anything like that, or
at least to make our best effort to convince our trading partners who
have these large surpluses to be less reluctant on their own domestic
policy. That's where I think the real problem lies more than it lies
here.
I'd hate to see us dragged into their scenario by trying to
defend the dollar when it's sinking against those currencies. And
that is a real risk. But I think we have to deal with the
destabilizing market activity. There is a real threat of inflationary
So there might
expectations surfacing if we let it get out of hand.
be room for some discretion. I'm not sure whether having the
discretion to run the borrowings up to a certain level is the right
approach. We recently had some trouble figuring out what the
So,
relationship between borrowings and the interest rate spread is.
if we were to say something like a $500 million borrowing target, I'm
We might
not sure what funds rate would be necessary to produce that.
want to think more in terms of just adjusting the funds rate a little
rather than trying to hit some borrowing level when we're not sure
I don't know what that means exactly-what funds rate it requires.
maybe a conference call or some sort of consultation. The problem is
that the developments that surface require quick action and I'm not
sure there's always the time to sit around and have a conference call
about it. Maybe there's some room for some discretionary allowance
there. I think we ought to at least give this upcoming G-10 meeting a
chance.
I hope we've got that much time without something happening
in the exchange market to give us more of a problem, but-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

So far it's getting weaker by the minute.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Hopefully we can maintain the current
approach until after that meeting. Anyway, that's the dilemma.
MR. MELZER. There used to be a range in the directive for
borrowings, which may be appropriate here. We could maybe skew it a
little in the direction of the sentiment that has been expressed.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Where is the exchange rate?

MR. CROSS. The yen is down to 145-1/2, which is down another
1/2 a yen in the course of today and below the levels where it has

-39-

3/31/87

been for the past couple of days in Tokyo and New York.
pretty heavy speculative pressure right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
down to 145.
MR. HELLER.

It is under

Just a little longer and we can get it

Then you get a different directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Hendricks.

MR. BLACK.

Just delay the vote awhile.

MR. CROSS.

It may be there now.

MR. HENDRICKS.
Although the business statistics have
improved in the last couple of months, they don't seem to be
impressive enough to suggest a significant step-up in the pace of
expansion. We're concerned about some price developments that we see
on the horizon and the pressure on the dollar in foreign exchange
markets. With respect to the prominence of the exchange rate in the
And, of course, the
directive we would favor not changing it.
alternative that we support is the "B" path.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We have exhausted my list.

Ms. Seger.

How much
MS. SEGER. Is it possible to vote with a question?
confidence do we have that getting interest rates still higher would,
I hear that come through in
in fact, stop the decline of the dollar?
these comments and in the votes, but could someone just lay some
probability numbers on the table for me?
MR. ANGELL. We can reduce the supply of reserves enough to
get the dollar to be stabilized but we don't know what rate of
interest that might entail.
MR. PARRY. Isn't the important answer that term interest
With higher
rates would [unintelligible] less of a problem now?
interest rates, the chances of success are greater than with constant
interest rates.
MR. JOHNSON. As long as we don't spread the impression of
seriously weakening the economy.
I would hate
MS. SEGER. Yes, and that is exactly my point.
to be chasing the dollar with higher interest rates and take down an
economy that in my judgment is performing okay, but not terrifically.
Certainly, there's some unevenness about the performance. The
expansion is getting old by historical standards, and not knowing what
that exact relationship is I just get a little nervous. As Wayne
keeps telling me, what odds do you play?
Because I do find the
uncertainties overwhelming, both currently and prospectively, I would
vote for just staying put.
I would hate also to give the impression
If you
that just international considerations are driving what we do.
listen around the table, obviously, that's a major factor. But when
the directive is made public I would hate to give the impression that
we've thrown everything else out.

-40-

3/31/87

I think the international situation only comes
MR. JOHNSON.
in to the extent that we see it affecting the domestic financial
markets and inflationary pressures here.
That's where the feedback
comes.
MR. ANGELL. It may become so destabilizing that the
international situation may come to the front no matter what we do.
It just seems to me that we must be prepared for rather decisive
actions at some point; we may have to draw the line and say it,
because once markets become destabilized-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

It

[unintelligible]

for you.

MR. JOHNSON. Jerry makes a good point there; I'd rather
build with some gradual changes in interest rates than have to force
this with a big bang at some point.
I think it's axiomatic that there is some level
SPEAKER(?).
of interest rates that would stabilize the exchange rate.
The problem
is: What level is it and what is the cost that goes with it?
MS. SEGER.

You'd have to pay along the way, too.

Right?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I certainly agree, Bob, with what
you are saying: Heaven knows what the "right exchange rate" is vis-avis the yen or anything else.
I don't know that either. But we're in
a period now where, as best I can judge, the market risks are very
asymmetric.
Because they're asymmetric and because of the
interdependencies, at least as I see them, between the exchange
market, the domestic bond market, the stock market, and so forth,
strategically we're in a position right now where a stitch in time can
save nine. That's all I'm trying to say.
If I had to take my chances
in terms of snugging or [unintelligible] or whatever word we want to
use to try to provide some protection against having to draw the line
the hard way--to use your term--I'd rather take that chance.
I'd
rather err in that direction now in the hopes that it could forestall
what I could easily conceive of as a much more difficult situation.
MR. HELLER. Let me speak against that a bit.
If we start to
tighten up now and are unsuccessful at holding the dollar where it is
at the present time, I think we will not see any improvement in the
trade and current account balances, especially in view of the
situation abroad.
Then as the bad data continue to come in on the
trade front, the markets will say: Well, the current level is clearly
inappropriate for the exchange rate. They will test us, and we will
not be able to sustain the current exchange rate.
So I think it is
probably more prudent to let the exchange rate drift down a little
until it is at a level where we can see an improvement in the current
account and the trade account.
Then if you spend your ammunition you
have a chance to convince the markets that you will hold it.
MR. ANGELL.

But, Bob, the time--

MR. PARRY. Bob, but the question is: What's going to take
you there?
The question is whether or not you're going to need
somewhat higher interest rates to get that smooth movement.
I think
the interest rates that Jerry and others are talking about do not
involve doing something to preserve the rate as it exists today

3/31/87

-41-

necessarily, but to provide a more orderly movement.
linkage is key.

And I think that

MR. HELLER. Well, okay.
But take, for instance, the one
suggested sentence in the operational paragraph that says "In light of
the recent instability of the dollar in foreign exchange markets,
particular emphasis will be placed on conditions in these markets in
That [conveys the] feeling that we should be
operational decisions."
holding the going exchange rate with monetary policy.
MR. PARRY. I'll be honest with you: I have a little
difficulty understanding what that means. When I first read that I
thought what it was telling the market is don't get confused by our
sterilization actions, the fact that we'll be putting in reserves to
I'm not sure I
sterilize our foreign exchange [intervention].
I think something probably ought
understand what that sentence means.
to be in there, but I'm not sure this is it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me raise a few questions about
the directive.
I don't think we'll solve all these problems by the
directive. I'm not sure the traditional type of directive at all
meets the current circumstances, but let me assume it does. By saying
"maintain the existing degree," that "maintain" may be for a very
brief period of time in some people's views.
Suppose we really did
something radical--I'm just thinking out loud here. We write that
first sentence, and then forget about this sentence that's stuck in
there about foreign exchange markets, and go down to the sentence that
says "somewhat" or "slightly" and "might" or "would", whatever it
says.
I'll get radical here: Suppose we make it totally asymmetrical
and say "might be acceptable depending upon developments in foreign
exchange markets"--put that first--then "and taking into account the
strength of the business expansion, progress against inflation," and
so forth. Then go back and say "This action is expected to be
consistent with growth in the aggregates" and so forth and so on.
MR. PARRY.
position is good.

I think moving the aggregates away from that

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me repeat it and see whether we've got
a basis for something here. Maybe it ought to be tightened a bit
because it's going to take a lot of changing.
"In the implementation
of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions."
Then we say
somewhat or slightly or whatever--let me come back to that.
"Somewhat
(or slightly) greater reserve restraint would (or might) be acceptable
depending upon developments in foreign exchange markets and taking
into account the strength in the business expansion, progress against
inflation, and conditions in domestic and international credit
markets."
That doesn't say anything about the aggregates.
We just
say-MR. PARRY.
aggregates."

Just add a phrase "and the behavior of the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just leave that in there: "taking into
account the behavior of the aggregates and the strength of the
business expansion..."

-42-

3/31/87

MR. ANGELL. But does the behavior of the aggregates at this
I don't think we-point imply the ranges we've already announced?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's leave out the aggregates then and go
We can say "This action is expected to be
back to the other sentence.
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March through
Do we want to say
June at annual rates of ___ and ___ percent."
"M1 is expected to remain substantially below its
anything about M1?
So, just reverse those and leave the wording.
pace in 1986."
Okay.
I don't
Somebody get that typed and we can talk about substance.
think there's any doubt, obviously, that if we move we would be much
In fact, we might be better off
better off if the others moved also.
if the others moved without our moving.
MR. ANGELL.
alternative.

At this point in time, that's the best

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. MORRIS.

That's probably about the best.
If we move we reduce their incentive to take

action.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
room to move.

Well, as they see it, they don't have much

MR. ANGELL. But since the world economy would not be
adversely affected by some increase in U.S. interest rates if we had
an offsetting decline in rates [abroad]-It can take
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume all that.
a lot of convincing; whether that's possible or not is another thing.
[The problem with] fooling around with the level of borrowings is
that, essentially, that's a very loose steering wheel. We could push
for a higher level of borrowing for two weeks and before you know it
the exchange market would be out there and not have any understanding
that that was going on and the funds rate wouldn't move at all.
MR. ANGELL.
our minutes.

Maybe this is the time to think about publishing

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
precedent-setting.
MS.

SEGER.

We have other vehicles that are less

Was that a motion?

MR. ANGELL. No, it wasn't a motion.
enough votes to make a motion.

I don't think there are

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always raise the discount rate-just to put another option on the table.
MR. ANGELL.

That might be appropriate at some point in time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can more deliberately, as somebody
suggested, try to push the federal funds rate a bit without worrying
about precisely what level of borrowings it takes.
It might take very
little if we did it in a certain way.

-43-

3/31/87

MR. ANGELL. Yes, we might say $300 to $500 million,
consistent with a federal funds rate and-MR. PARRY. Aren't there some operational advantages to
We think of
perhaps running with a little higher borrowing level?
$300 million as being almost the low point that one can reach, and
there might be some greater flexibility if we were working with a
slightly higher borrowing target in our operations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be true, but it conflicts with no
movement if that's what we want to do in terms of our present stance.
The in-between course, which we've been doing to a very small degree,
is trying to avoid actions that might inadvertently ease the market in
the sense that where the federal funds rate is on particular days when
the dollar is declining [unintelligible] but we have not been
Somebody said--Mr. Keehn, I think--that
anticipating reserve needs.
If we keep the
what we ought to be doing is erring on the high side.
$300 million borrowing target that may capture what we ought to be
I don't know how we reduce this to a formula.
doing at the moment.
So far as this consultation issue is concerned, I think if we were
making a big step we would consult or if we were changing the discount
rate a consultation would come about. But I don't know if we want to
consult every time we nudge slightly here or there, if we know what
direction we are nudging in.
MR. MELZER.

Put a range in?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just for our own information I don't
think we need a range in the directive. Certainly, nobody is talking
about moving above $500 million without a reconsideration of the
decision. We'd probably consult before we got there anyway, but as a
deliberate matter, one never can tell where a particular week is
I have no problem at all if you really want to change
coming in.
that.
MR. JOHNSON. How about something like this: We would stick
to the $300 million borrowing, but if conditions got disorderly we
would let slide our reserve adding and that might spill over into a
We
higher borrowings level. We don't really know what that might be.
would try to hit our $300 million on borrowing, but if we had to
postpone--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I would be very cautious about how we do
I
it.
The way I would interpret it is erring a bit on the high side.
We'll basically
don't know what else we can say. I can describe it.
I hear a
continue at the moment aiming at $300 million on borrowing.
I hear very little
lot of sensitivity about the exchange rate.
If anybody is
sensitivity about coming in low on the aggregates side.
very sensitive to that they better say so; I didn't hear anybody being
very sensitive on that.
I would like the funds rate where it is, but I
MR. HELLER.
wouldn't want to push it.
MR. JOHNSON.

MR. HELLER.

It all depends on how the economy looks.

I think they want to flatten it out.

-44-

3/31/87

MR. ANGELL. We don't have any guarantee at this point that
these negative velocities will not return. That's why I want to go
slowly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not talking about forever,
obviously. When are we meeting again?
The middle of May--the 19th.

MR. FORRESTAL.

MR. ANGELL. Right. Economic conditions could make what I
think is now [unintelligible] at the lower end of the range--to be at
If the economy were to deteriorate-5-1/2 percent--seem wonderful.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question that if the
economy were going down the tank we would want it a little higher.
would begin getting more sensitive to these aggregate figures.

We

MR. JOHNSON. If interest rates drift up we can expect to see
those aggregates slow even more from what we're predicting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
slow as I would read it.
MR. JOHNSON.

We are not predicting anything all that

I mean from what we've been seeing.

Isn't
It's pretty slow final demand isn't it?
MR. ANGELL.
U.S. final demand almost zero, fourth quarter to fourth quarter?
MR. PRELL.

Domestic final sales.

MR. JOHNSON. You are talking about final sales, which run
about 1 percent in the forecast.
MR. ANGELL.

Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
sales are what?
MR. KOHN.
MR. PRELL.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. PRELL.
investment.

For the year as a whole, domestic final

0.7.
That's private domestic final sales.
0.7?
Private domestic final sales, consumption and

You haven't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Private domestic final sales.
There's probably not much difference
got government up much do you?
for domestic final sales.
MR. ANGELL.
higher than that.

But you have state and local, which is a little

MR. PRELL. Well, government purchases are down 0.3, so
adding them in would make the number a little lower.
MR. ANGELL.

Adding them in would make what?

-45-

3/31/87

MR. JOHNSON.

Make it lower.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

A little lower.

That's not a very--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It's not a very good forecast.
[Unintelligible] that's precisely what you would like to see happen if
we do not get the expansion from the foreign side.
MR. ANGELL.
have happen.

That's right.

That's exactly what we'd like to

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what we're talking about is
starting at something like $300 million, pursued cautiously so long as
the exchange rate is so sensitive.
If the exchange rate really got
weak we would contemplate moving up certainly to $400 million or so.
Much above that, we'd want to have a conference, anyway. That would
be the sense of it.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I'd rather say more like $400 million,
because of this problem with borrowings and the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we would prefer to see the
others come down; I'd prefer to see any distinct moves made in that
direction. We can talk about other moves if different situations
arose but not decide that here. We are putting a lot of weight on
concern about the dollar--if it got too unstable--and we are somewhat
less worried about the aggregates.
So, let's read this.
The first
thing we have to do is decide, generally, this "somewhat" and
"slightly" business.
MR. ANGELL.
this environment.

I think "somewhat" is a little more decisive in

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be inclined to say "might"--not
because I think it's a weaker word, but because we are really talking
about a conditional thing.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.
restraint.

Yes,

"might" is the word.

Yes, but you need "somewhat" for reserve

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat greater reserve restraint might
be acceptable depending on foreign exchange market developments,
taking into account the strength of the business expansion. This
action is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the
period from March through June at annual rates"--.
Now, we had this
one suggestion on the table that we stick in a rather wide range.
That would be unusual but maybe it's what the doctor orders here in
terms of capturing what people are talking about.
MR. ANGELL.

3 to 7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 3 to 7 percent.
The upper part of that
range, actually, goes a bit above what the staff has on alternative B
but, obviously, the midpoint is below it.

-46-

3/31/87

MR. ANGELL. But whether we want the upper or lower would
depend upon developing conditions and portfolio preferences and the
dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put in something like that, the
meaning is, if I understand it correctly, that we would get concerned
if growth got below 3 percent. That would become a factor saying we
should ease regardless of what the rest of this says.
MR. MELZER.

Couldn't you finesse that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We would] move in that direction and
vice-versa if it's above 7 percent.
MR. MELZER. Could we not deal with that in a less explicit
way by just putting the behavior of the aggregates phrase in the
second sentence and keeping the third sentence what it usually has
been, which is really our best guess?
MR. PARRY. I think the way to do that, which would capture
what we have said, is to say "Somewhat greater reserve restraint might
be acceptable depending on developments in foreign exchange markets,
the strength of the business expansion, progress against inflation and
conditions in domestic and international credit markets, taking into
account the behavior of the aggregates." We've got it all there.
MR. ANGELL.

But the trouble with--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that, but it puts less emphasis
on the foreign exchange markets than I thought people wanted.
MR. PARRY.

Well, it's there and it's first.

MR. ANGELL. Bob, the problem is that if we don't specify
someone might assume that growth of M2 and M3 below the present target
path would be unacceptable. Right now we have a target path that we
have announced. What I am suggesting is that in light of the
conditions in the international foreign exchange markets we need a
lower band. That would give us some options between-MR. PARRY.
that, have we?

I don't think we have reached an agreement on

MR. HELLER. I like what Bob Parry said. We don't want to
look just at foreign exchange markets, and say everything else is
secondary, which is what this phrasing says as it is written. I don't
think we want to do that either. So what Bob is suggesting--taking
out the first phrase--gets us there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how much weight you want
to put in here. I would have read the Committee members as saying
they want to put special weight on the dollar.
SPEAKER(?).

I think that's correct.

MR. HELLER.

A lot more than on the domestic conditions?

-47-

3/31/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to distinguish here.
It's
not necessarily saying more in any fundamental sense.
It's saying
that looking at the next seven weeks--or however long before we meet
here again--we think the most likely factor that would make us be
tighter is the dollar, not all these other things.
SEVERAL.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not saying we would tighten.
It just
says that we think the dollar is the critical or the most important
variable for these seven weeks.
MR. JOHNSON.
I agree with that to the extent that my concern
I certainly
about the dollar is its effect on the domestic economy.
wouldn't worry about it so much if I thought it was going to have a
neutral effect on domestic inflation.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
issue in six to seven weeks.

Well, that's not going to be an

MR. JOHNSON. No, I am just saying that in the long run it's
got to have some feedback on the economy.
MR. BOYKIN.
Couldn't the M2 and M3 growth be
view of what goes before it, by saying that the action
be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period
"around 6 percent"?
Just say "around" that. We don't

handled, in
is expected to
at annual rates
really know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we traditionally say.
Governor Angell's formulation, I think, does add something. With that
wide a range, it's quite unlike what we usually say.
To go over that
previous sentence again: It says that the Committee is putting
particular weight on the foreign exchange markets during this
particular period of time.
In effect, it is saying that's the only
reason why we are likely to tighten during this period. It doesn't
expect the business expansion and all of that other stuff to lead to
some tightening.
It doesn't absolutely say it that way but it leans
in that direction: that this is the one factor that-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But by the same token, it doesn't
say that if the economy just died next week--although to me that is
highly unlikely--that we wouldn't ease either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It doesn't say that we would tighten, but
it doesn't say that we would ease.
I think we would have to change
the directive if we were to ease.
Obviously, that can be done.
If
the economy took a nose dive next week we would have a little
consultation and say in light of the economy taking a nose dive we
decide-MR. GUFFEY.
I have the impression from the discussion around
the table that the only tightening that would take place would be to
manage the dollar to some lower level in an orderly fashion rather
than that we would tighten policy for any other reason. That is to
say, I think the original intent was not to tighten policy except to
manage the dollar down to a lower level.

3/31/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way this is written, I would read it
in terms of likelihoods: that by all odds that's the most likely
It doesn't exclude [the possibility] that we would tighten if
thing.
the aggregates got much higher, or if the business expansion were
They are all mentioned here. But the
stronger, or if inflation rose.
way it is written suggests that what we are really worried about is
the dollar.
MR. ANGELL. But I would suggest that if the dollar were to
be under increasing downward pressure, long bond rates would move up
on us anyway. We would have the worst of all worlds.
MR. STERN.

The anxieties in the markets are such that that's

correct.
MR. ANGELL. We have to show that we have control over what's
happening--that we are not sitting here without acting when action is
needed.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the choices are pretty simple.
It's
just a matter of emphasis. We can write a whole separate sentence
about the dollar; Mr. Kohn has one example. We can do this in-between
course. Or we can take out the "taking into account," which is a
small change from what we had before--so small that I think it's
almost invisible. But we are left with [unintelligible] directive.
MR. BOEHNE.
I like it the way it is.
I have just one
technical question. We say conditions in domestic and international
credit markets. Do we mean that international credit markets are
separate in our minds from the developments in foreign exchange
markets?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know if I do.
conditions in the credit markets to avoid that.

We can say

MR. MELZER. The way this is worded right now, though, it
seems to me that we are not looking at the aggregates at all, which I
I wasn't advocating putting them up there in
am not sure is right.
the "depending on" phrase but I would put them in the "taking into
account" litany of things that we look at.
Otherwise, we're just
saying we don't take them into account at all and we are just making a
prediction of where we think they are going to come in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's because that's the way we
traditionally do it.
If you have any better wording-MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't read it that way. It seems to me
that we are saying that we expect all of the above to be consistent
with M2 and M3 at whatever rates of growth we decide on. And if M2
and M3 aren't consistent with that we would probably want to take
another look at the situation.
MR. GUFFEY.

During the 7-week intermeeting period?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to put that sentence back
where it ordinarily is as the second sentence?

3/31/87

-49-

MR. MELZER.
I wasn't suggesting that.
I was suggesting just
putting in this phrase that was dropped out when this was retyped.
MR. ANGELL.
I thought there was some feeling that the dollar
should move up to the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Melzer would put it in after the
taking into account, if I understand him right: "would be acceptable
depending on developments in foreign exchange markets, taking into
account the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the business
expansion, progress..."
That's easy to do.
MR. ANGELL. But how do we deal with the growth of M2 and M3?
Suppose M2 and M3 continue on the 4 percent path and then go below
the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have that sentence in here and we
have to put something in there. We have at least two proposals on the
table. We have Mr. Angell's, which was 3 to 7 percent. We have
somebody else's, which was "around 6 percent."
There is a substantive
difference between those two.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

6 percent or less.

MR. KEEHN. Just a thought: Does putting in a range now of,
say, 3 to 7 percent, which is lower than the annual range of 5-1/2 to
8-1/2 percent, condition it with regard to time?
Might that suggest
to somebody that we're easing up on policy here?
Would putting in a
lower range than we have established for the year suggest that we are
sneaking up on a policy change?
MR. ANGELL.

It just means that we are rebasing.

MR. KEEHN.
It's a different set of numbers than are
generally out there and understood by the market.
MR. MELZER. If we say "about 6 percent," it's pretty clear to
people that we are shooting for the lower end of the cone, and
everybody knows the uncertainty associated with that.
I think we've
already sent the message if we say "about 6 percent."
MR. KEEHN. It may be true that in the past we have not
always hit the trajectory exactly.
MR. HELLER.

Bob, it is better than missing our cone.

MR. ANGELL.

But they are not precise.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. HELLER.

Why don't we go up to eight?

I prefer six.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is not too big a deal here.
I rather
like the 3 to 7 percent because I think it reflects the flavor of what
was said. But whether or not 3 to 7 percent is precisely the right
range--

-50-

3/31/87

MR. HELLER. I would think the 3 to 7 percent conveys that we
are tightening. After all, the midpoint of 3 to 7 percent is 5
percent. Five percent is really alternative C, and there were not
many people who were speaking in favor of alternative C. So,
implicitly, we're changing the thrust of what people around the table
have said.
MR. ANGELL. But it's not really tightening. It just
indicates that we may be going to tighten. It sets the parameters out
for tightening.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
tightening.
MR. HELLER.
alternative C.

It depends upon what you think of as

Then you should be wanting to vote for

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you are talking about the aggregates
pure and simple, it's tightening. If you are talking about borrowing
as the measure [unintelligible]-MR. HELLER. If you argue for "C" then I think 3 to 7 percent
would be appropriate; but if you don't argue for "C"-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Alternative C says $500 million borrowing,
which is not what people are focusing on.
MR. HELLER.
5-1/2 percent.

Well, for growth rates of the Ms it says 5 and

MR. STERN. I don't see that at all. I think all we are
saying is that we wouldn't be too concerned, other things equal, if
the aggregates came in on the low side over the intermeeting period.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say growth of M2 and M3 of
around 6 percent, but the Committee would-MR. HELLER. I am not concerned with that either; but I am
concerned with our taking policy actions to get it down there.
MR. STERN.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. HELLER.

I don't think that's contemplated.
I think we need to make it clear though.
I think we need to make that clear in the

language.
MR. JOHNSON. We don't give that impression because we do say
that a growth rate similar to that is consistent with alternative C.
MR. ANGELL. Then there is a substantial difference of
opinion here, because in the environment of a weakening dollar and the
commodity price effects that are associated with such a weakening
dollar, I really do not want to go above, say, 7 percent. I really
would want to tighten in that environment. So I think there is some
policy difference that's cropping up.

-51-

3/31/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look at what the first two sentences in
the operational paragraph say. First, there is no change at present.
The second sentence says there might be a tightening. And the third
sentence says we expect that all to be consistent with something
between "B" and "C."
That's right because that's what the operational
language says.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Why couldn't the sentence on the Ms
say that the Committee expects growth in M2 and M3 in the period from
March to June at rates of about 6 percent and then add some language
to say that we would be tolerant of slower growth rates than that,
given the circumstances of the very rapid earlier growth.
MR. JOHNSON. What might clarify the M2/M3 issue is to say
what we would normally expect for M2 and M3, assuming no change in
reserves.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is technically correct, but it
attaches such precision to these estimates that are never that good.
MR. BOEHNE.

I think what Jerry is saying--

MR. JOHNSON. Otherwise we may be assuming a change in
reserve restraint. If we put a number other than what we say is
consistent with no change in reserve restraint we are assuming a
change in reserve restraint.
MR. ANGELL. The only reason I don't want reserve restraint
right now is because it seems to me that we've got a very low money
growth path right now. I don't know whether that's going to continue
or not, but in light of a very low growth path to put restraint on
right now runs a risk I am not willing to take. But if this growth
path proceeds along the bottom edge of our target-MR. JOHNSON.

But that's not what the staff is projecting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody support 4 to 7 percent, for
which the average is 5-1/2 percent?
MR. JOHNSON. We have a projection here for M2 and M3 under
certain assumptions. Assuming no change in reserve restraint, it's a
certain amount; assuming differently it's a different amount. And
that's building in what already has happened to the aggregates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's a half of a point difference.

MR. JOHNSON. I am just saying I would be comfortable with
changing those numbers if we said "might" or something--if we qualify
it to say, assuming no change in reserve restraint, we would expect M2
and M3 to be 3 to 7 percent.
MR. ANGELL. Assuming that the dollar continues on its
present path and assuming that the growth rate of M2 were to return to
a 9 percent rate or an 8-1/2 percent rate, would you want any
restraint?
MR. JOHNSON. All I am saying is that there is a projection
consistent with a certain set of assumptions. If you change those

3/31/87

-52-

assumptions you get different paths. There is no doubt about it; if
certain conditions arose I'd want to change the conditions affecting
that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me talk you into 4 to 7 percent. We
just change these numbers. You're putting too much weight on the
staff's numbers. What we say is that we want to be where we are now
or maybe tighter under certain conditions.
MR. JOHNSON.

Under certain conditions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we say we expect that approach--I
would say "approach" instead of "action"--to be consistent with a
range using two numbers that allow for our normal one percentage point
uncertainty around the projection plus another one percentage point
down on the low side in case we do tighten. Now, that ought to make
it beautifully consistent with what the staff technically estimates.
We often put in something like a 5 to 7 percent range that is
consistent with the 6 percent [expected].
MR. JOHNSON. That's sort of extracting the midpoints.
That's a range of midpoints.
SPEAKER(?).

But we often do it.

MR. BOYKIN. In trying to be consistent, we are becoming
inconsistent simply because we are saying that we don't want anything
to change. But then we are saying if we have to change, the M2 and M3
growth rates relate to no change. We don't know what the monetary
aggregates would do when we respond because we don't know what the
response would have to be.
MR. ANGELL. I believe that a continuation of M2 along a 5
percent path would be consistent with the dollar stabilizing.
MR. JOHNSON. That's not true. That's not what the staff
says. They have already built the March numbers into their
projection.
MR. KOHN. The staff would be the first to admit that there
is a range of uncertainty around that.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.
the staff.

We all agree but that's-One percentage point was perhaps being generous to

MR. JOHNSON. But then that means that you expand on either
side of that uncertainty.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
try that again.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the substantive question is
the aggregates came in at 4
4 percent, all other things
easing?

We can say 6 percent or less; let me

We can say 6 percent or less but I guess
whether we, in fact, would be concerned if
percent, let's say. If they came in at
being equal, would that be a cause for

3/31/87

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BOYKIN.

Not if we had to restrain reserves.
Not

[unintelligible]

at this point in time.

MR. BLACK.
I think the only feasible alternative to what you
suggested is 6 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
around 6 percent or less.
MR. BLACK.

We can say 4 to 6 percent, or we can say

That's the best one if we don't go with 4 to 7

percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

less.

There are no substantive differences.

MR. HELLER.
I prefer 4 to 7 percent, though, to 6 percent or
That really tilts it; that lets it get to zero if you want it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
getting it down to zero.

I don't think it would be interpreted as

There is some advantage in having us know what
MR. ANGELL.
would precipitate a conference call.
MR. JOHNSON.
In this first sentence in the operational part
of the directive we say maintain the existing degree of reserve
But if we are going
pressure and we say there is a contingency there.
to put in an M2 and M3 range consistent with that operational
sentence, it should be what the staff has projected, what the
statistical alternative would be. We might follow that up with a
sentence that says-MR. HELLER. Well, how about doing it like that.
Use the
first sentence and then say "This approach is expected to be
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period of around 6
percent."
And then say "Somewhat greater restraint would be
appropriate, depending upon foreign exchange markets..." and so forth.
MR. MELZER. I don't view that third sentence as really the
operational language. I can't ever recall a conference call, when I
have been involved, over the aggregates misbehaving. This is simply
saying-MR. BLACK.

We used to do that.

MR. JOHNSON. All I am saying is that we have these numbers
in the directive that were [adopted] in the past and people could
easily get the wrong impression.
MR. BOYKIN. In the wording, these numbers are associated
with our action to maintain, which is the first sentence.
So, I don't
think we have to put in ranges or other numbers because we are talking
about something that might happen.
MR. JOHNSON. It might help to move that sentence up, like
Bob said, to immediately after the first sentence on the aggregates.

3/31/87

-54-

MR. BLACK. Somebody from west Texas; there's always been a
[different] world down there.
MR. HELLER. If we move the sentence up, we have a consistent
directive up front and then we have our exception that follows.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just transpose the question. Do
you understand the third sentence? The third sentence will then be
that the aggregates might come in lower than that and that's fine.
It's all the same substance.
MR. JOHNSON. I think it's easier to assume that the
aggregates would come in lower if the sentence on the aggregates is
right after the first sentence and then we say "Somewhat greater
reserve restraint..." Obviously, somewhat greater reserve restraint
means lower aggregates.
MR. HELLER.
big difference.

I think switching the sentence really makes a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Greater reserve restraint would take place
because the reserve aggregates are high. A comment about the behavior
of the aggregates in that sentence might amount to the same thing.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, I see what you are saying.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The way it's structured, I don't
really care what we put in the second sentence about the aggregates.
MR. JOHNSON. I'd just say that we believe the staff
projection [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

4 to 7 percent is the staff's projection.

MR. JOHNSON. 4 percent is below what they project with no
change in reserve restraint.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This allows for some change in reserve
restraint, the possibility of some contingency. Where this sentence
is located, it encompasses the contingency as well. I am going to
have to look at what the staff puts down in these forecasts.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that if we are going to say
"this action is expected," we have to have some assumption that action
is taken other than no change.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would change the word "action" to
"approach," which encompasses the first two sentences.
MR. HELLER. Mr. Chairman, I think that's where I see the
difference. If the third sentence says "This approach is consistent
with growth in M2 and M3...", then that surmises both sentence one and
sentence two. I would rather have it the other way around and say we
are implementing a policy of the existing degree of reserve pressure
and this approach is consistent with M2 and M3 growth. And then I
would say if things in the foreign exchange market happen, then we
could have a bit more restraint.

-55-

3/31/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's fine, if you interpret that
as saying that if that next sentence happens then we can get slower
growth in the aggregates. I think they are substantively the same
thing, but I am not sure that's the way it would be interpreted.
Ordinarily, just as it is now, the second sentence is read to mean we
will seek greater reserve restraint if the aggregates are exceeding
what we say. That is the ordinary construction of that sentence. It
starts out with the aggregates and it says we will take note of the
change in that.
MR. ANGELL. That's why we moved the aggregates down--so that
would be less of a problem.
MR. STERN. I think the structure in the draft reflects the
concerns about the exchange markets. The 4 to 7 percent range also
encompasses alternative A.
I am trying to understand why it
MR. ANGELL. It sure does.
was I used to enjoy Manley's persistence when he was on my side.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We better settle on something; we
have to live with each other for the next two-and-a-half days.
MR. HELLER. The original draft that Mr. Kohn produced is a
good draft, in a way. You have taken out that sentence that's in all
caps, but otherwise that basically hits what we are really trying-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It hits maybe what you are trying to get

to.
MR. ANGELL.
difference here.

There does seem to be a bit of a policy

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

There is, but I don't think it's a very

big one.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't think there is a policy difference at
all.
I certainly support more restraint, and I think you will get
lower aggregates out of that restraint.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then I think you ought not worry about
this language if you really don't think there is a policy difference,
because I think it's saying what you are saying.
MR. MORRIS. For the benefit of the newcomers at the Federal
Reserve, I should note that the first statement Willis Winn made when
he came to an FOMC meeting and we were talking about the directive
was, "This is the largest editorial committee I have ever sat on."
MR. GUFFEY. I assume from the discussion that what we are
talking about in terms of restraint is only roughly a quarter of a
percent in any event.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What?

MR. GUFFEY. It's only roughly a quarter of a percentage
point, in any event, measured in terms of the federal funds rate.
About 6-1/4 percent, I think, was the sentiment around this table.

-56-

3/31/87

that is

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[true].

Clearly, without a consultation I think

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As a practical matter, we have stuck
every conceivable number in the book into these directives in the
past, including ones that don't even appear in the Bluebook.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say an annual rate of 6 percent or
somewhat less, or 4 to 7 percent, or 5 to 7 percent, but I think it
doesn't make that much difference.
MR. JOHNSON.

Around 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is nothing the matter with around 6
percent, depending upon what you think of it.
These forecasts are
almost always wrong by several percentage points.
The substance here
is: Are we more concerned if it comes in at 3 percent or at 9 percent?
That's the question. As a practical matter, the staff is saying that
they expect it to be somewhere between 3 and 9 percent and-MR. ANGELL.

If it's 9 percent, I think we better get

excited.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you get more excited if it came in
at 9 percent than at 3 percent?.
I think that is the issue.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KEEHN.

Tell me what has happened in the meantime.
Yes.

What is going on?

MR. HELLER. And why is it coming about?
difference whether it comes about--

There is a big

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's the only thing we know about it.
We
don't know about these other things.
If everything was as it is now
and it came in at 9 percent, would you-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For M2 or M3 in seven weeks, I would
have a stroke. M2 and M3 don't [unintelligible].
MR. ANGELL.

And the long bond would go to 8-1/4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is the substance.
If nothing
else changed visibly, would you be more unhappy with 9 percent than
with 3 percent?
I am one who would be more unhappy with 9 percent.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BLACK.

I am, too.
I think everybody would be.

MR. JOHNSON.
I think that's true. Of course, we haven't
found M2 and M3 to be very interest sensitive. They don't seem to be
nearly as interest sensitive as M1.
Maybe for M1, I would be.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how interest sensitive they
are. All I would say is that after what happened last year, and given
what's going on, if they come in at 9 percent I would be more unhappy

3/31/87

than if they came in at 3 percent.
the end of the world.

I am not saying that it would be

I would hate it because they are coming in at 3
MR. ANGELL.
percent and I don't want to ease when they are coming in at 3 percent.
Aren't they coming in at 3 percent?
MR. JOHNSON. What's happening now is built into the
Now, unless you
projection of the staff, which is around 6 percent.
believe that it's going to continue this way-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Put 6 percent or somewhat less.

I think Bob Heller
MR. ANGELL. We can say somewhat less.
doesn't want to say somewhat; he would rather say 4 to 7 percent than
somewhat less.
MR. HELLER.
would be happy.

If you change the words--the way you said it I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have 4 to 7 percent, 6 percent or
somewhat less, or around 6 percent.
Of the members of the Committee,
who would prefer to say, of these three choices, "around 6 percent"?
MR. JOHNSON.

I would say around 6 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
somewhat less?

What were the others:

6 percent or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Members of the Committee: Do you want to
say around 6 percent, rather than 6 percent or somewhat less?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
somewhat less.
MR. ANGELL.

My preference is 6 percent or

The Chairman has given three alternatives.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three alternatives:
6 percent or less; or around 6 percent.
MR. HELLER.
percent and-MR. ANGELL.

4 to 7 percent; around

Will you explain the differences between the 6
That's the Chairman's prerogative.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would prefer around 6 percent, period?
That's unmodified, symmetrically around 6 percent. Well, that's half
the Committee already. I suppose the others don't care whether it's 6
percent or less or 4 to 7 percent.
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. KEEHN.

I could live with all of them.
I would rather say 6 percent or less.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

I would, too.

6 percent or less is all right with me.

3/31/87

-58-

Well, who prefers 6 percent or less?

Then

Mr. Chairman, you get to vote if you like.

It's

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
what do we get?
MR. ANGELL.
6 to 6.
MS.

SEGER.

We need to have 13 people on the FOMC.

MR. BOEHNE. Who "could live with" an alternative might be a
good way to get rid of this issue.
It's going to be
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a new vote.
around 6 percent and the vote will be on whether we add "or less."
I changed the word "action" to
Who is in favor of adding "or less"?
"approach."
MR. ANGELL.

And the word "approach" is better.

MR. BOYKIN.
If you change the word to approach, then 6
percent or less I can live with very well; in fact, I would favor it.
"Somewhat greater reserve restraint might
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
be acceptable depending on developments in foreign exchange markets,
taking into account the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of
the business expansion, progress against inflation, and conditions in
This approach is expected to be consistent with
credit markets.
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March to June at annual rates
of around 6 percent or less. Growth in M1 is expected to remain
And I presume we still have 4
substantially below its pace in 1986."
to 8 percent or whatever we had on the range for the federal funds
rate. We are ready to vote, so we will vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Adjourn the meeting.
END OF MEETING

