Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 18, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel

Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,

Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

8/18/87

-2Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Zickler, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,
Ms. Munnell, Mr. Thieke, and Ms. Tshinkel, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,
San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City,
Boston, New York, and Atlanta, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of August 18, 1987
MR. JOHNSON. In the absence
FOMC, I'll try to kick things off. I
with nominations for the chairmanship
nominate Mr. Greenspan as Chairman of
MS. SEGER.
MR. JOHNSON.

of the Vice Chairman of the
think we need to begin, though,
of the FOMC. And I'd like to
the FOMC.

And I'd like to second.
Are there any objections?

[Laughter.]

Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was a longer pause than I expected.
[Laughter.]
I'd like to entertain a motion to move the minutes.
MS. SEGER.

I'll move that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
are approved. Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.

If there are no objections, then they

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Comments anyone?

MR. JOHNSON. I have one, Mr. Chairman. I was looking this
morning at the Telerate. A lot of the reasons given on the dollar's
decline are that oil traded down yesterday and oil prices are dropping
this morning in foreign markets. And I wonder how much of an
influence that is having on the exchange rate too; it seems to move in
parallel fashion.
MR. CROSS.
It has been mentioned that oil prices have
clearly softened. This morning's price is almost half a dollar below
what it was yesterday and it's almost a dollar below where it was a
week or so ago.
This has been cited as another factor. Most of the
people that our traders have been talking to seem to think that
today's decline in the dollar is perhaps related to that, in part, but
after the initial impact of the decline, it seems to be more a
reflection of rather sour trade figures.
Yesterday in New York, in
the latter part of the afternoon, the dollar began to soften without
anything very dramatic happening; it was just gradually declining.
And we are told that the Japanese are saying that when their markets
opened, they began to think that maybe they should cut some of their
positions, so there was some selling both in Japan and in Europe
subsequently, which brought us down to current levels.
It's possible
that oil prices are now a factor but more talk seems to be given to
this general attitude resulting from the continuing serious problem
with the trade deficit and the larger number announced on Friday.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To what extent is the general apparent
reduction of tensions in the Persian Gulf, which was obviously the
cause of the decline in the oil price, actually the cause of this
retrenchment?
In other words, periodically, when we see tensions in
the world, everyone rushes into the dollar; and, it looks to me as if
we are just unravelling that particular position. It strikes me as
rather difficult to believe that there is a secondary reaction to a

8/18/87

-2-

published news event. Is it possible that the markets are just easing
because of the decline in tensions, and people are just reaching for
explanations of this sort? Or is there some reason to believe that
it's really more than that and that there has actually been some
Japanese reevaluation, rather than this view being just somebody's
hypothesis.
MR. CROSS. Really, we don't have enough evidence, other than
what people are telling us. When the Middle East tensions flared up
here a couple of weeks ago, it was hard for us to see why that, in
itself, should have caused the dollar to go up so rapidly. We saw
some increase in [the price of] gold, but it came back down. We did
not see evidence that it was lots of [unintelligible] flows. It could
be that there is a kind of writing down of the dollar in light of the
somewhat less troublesome situation in the Middle East. But we don't
see much evidence of a lot of movement from this back and forth which
would lead to that conclusion; it's possible that people's attitudes
are influenced by it and, therefore, they are changing their views
about what is the proper level for the dollar, to some extent. It is
pretty much a matter of guessing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What happened to the DM this morning?

MR. CROSS. Well, the dollar fell in terms of both the DM and
the yen. It's now trading at about 1.85-1/4 DM and 147-1/4 yen. So
it has declined about 3-1/2 percent, I guess, from the levels
prevailing toward the end of last week before the trade figures were
announced and whatever has happened that relates to them. It's a
substantial move.
MR. PARRY.

What about in relation to sterling?

MR. CROSS. I don't have the sterling quote today.
sterling has been under its own pressure because of the
[unintelligible].
MR. PARRY.

But

That may indicate whether or not it is related to

oil.
MR. CROSS. Well, sterling sometimes acts like a petrocurrency and sometimes it doesn't. You can't rely on it reflecting
what happens in the Middle East. Well, sterling is up to 1.60-1.65.
MR. PARRY.
MR. CROSS.
the hypothesis.
MR. PARRY.

That's not oil.
But it should not move that way if you followed
That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
ratify Mr. Cross' actions?

Anything else?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Sternlight.

May I have a motion to

So move.

Without objection, they're approved.

8/18/87

MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to second that
recommendation for the additional amount.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we hold that until we get
through the total discussion of Mr. Sternlight's remarks. We'll go to
that later.
MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, in light of the increase in Japanese
interest rates, have you detected a decline in Japanese participation
in either the debt or equity markets?
MR. STERNLIGHT. At times, there certainly did seem to be an
abatement in their interest in the debt market; as for the equity
market, we are continuing to hear that they are pretty active. And
they have certainly continued to participate in Treasury auctions; in
this last auction they were there in the 10- and 30-year issues. As
for purchases in the secondary markets, at times over the period we
were hearing of some pulling away from buying in our market as their
own rates were pushing higher.
Both in Germany
Can I follow up on that one?
MR. HELLER.
and Japan, do you see the run-up in rates as mainly a result of policy
actions taken or do you see it as a result of general economic
conditions in the country changing?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Sam Cross or Ted Truman might be in a
At least as it was passed along to me, I
better position to comment.
got a sense that it was a bit more of the policy move type of thing.
MR. CROSS.
In Japan, the short-term rates haven't changed;
It seems to be a little
the long-term rates have gone up sharply.
element of both of the factors that you talked about. Certainly, the
market forces led to a substantial increase in their longer-term rates
and they have been quite concerned about the vulnerability of their
financial situation given the stock market rise, the increase in real
estate prices, and so forth. They also have allowed changes in some
of these rates, like the long-term prime; they tell us they are
resisting this, but at the end of the day it is clear that the longIn Germany, I think there has
term rates have gone up substantially.
been a little snugging, but again, it is hard to say how much, because
there have been some other things going on.
MR. TRUMAN.

I don't have anything to add to Mr. Cross'

comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further comments?

Are
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, on your concerns about September:
we anticipating, or is the Treasury anticipating, a cash balance
problem?
MR. STERNLIGHT. We are anticipating a sizable buildup.
I
I don't think
wouldn't say it's an unmeetable problem at this stage.
we'll approach the record levels that we had last April when their
total balance got up to $54 billion or so, and the balance at the Fed

-4-

8/18/87

was $30 billion.
I think their total balance could get up to the $4050 billion range and that could put the balance at the Fed somewhere
at $25 billion, or something like that.
It could be a substantial
reserve-draining factor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else?
I need ratification of
two items. First, I'll entertain a motion to ratify the open market
transactions since the July meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any objections?
Secondly, we need
another motion to approve the increase in intermeeting leeway.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

I move on that.

I second that.

MR. ANGELL. I guess the question is: Why not ask for enough?
If $10 billion might not do it, why not ask for $12 billion?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I considered that.
But for almost any
number I would pick, Governor, I could imagine circumstances that
would take it a little beyond that. So, I'm picking what I think
might well do it, but I just want to put the Committee on notice that
it could conceivably come in beyond that.
If I presented $12 billion,
I'd like to feel more confidence than I can feel at this stage of
[unintelligible].
MR. ANGELL. My question is: Is there any real danger of
erring on the side of having too much leeway to be able to manage the
account the way we want to manage it?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't see it as a danger.
I think it
may just be that the Committee would want to keep close to the
situation and realize that if some even larger increase were needed,
you'd like to be informed in some formal manner and have a chance to
note that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell is raising the right
question. This is an extraordinary circumstance.
If it happens, I
don't think there's any reason not to expand it, so why don't we
increase it--what did you want?--to $12 billion.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

As best our projections look.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Give us a number which you sleep well

with.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I was shrinking from that, Mr. Chairman,
because I just did not have that degree of confidence, but I'll stick
my neck out at $12 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a technical problem which does
not confront the Committee very often.

8/18/87

-5-

MR. STERNLIGHT.
It does get published and people will look
at it and say: "Gosh, did they really think it was going to go that
high?"
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

And I guess the answer is yes.

[Laughter.]

The answer is, we want to be prepared if it

does.
MR. GUFFEY. It is a simple matter, however, to get that
authority by wire if the need exists.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There has never been any difficulty in
getting the authority as we needed it, if a situation arose.
MR. ANGELL.

Do you want to formally recommend?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to formally change the motion.
Was it Jerry Corrigan who made the wrong motion?
[Laughter.]
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
[Laughter.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Prell.
MR. PRELL.

I think I can make it $12 billion.

I assume it is approved.

Thank you.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

If you
MR. PARRY. I have two questions about the forecast.
were to take another look at your forecast for the third quarter-incorporating the most recent data with regard to employment, retail
sales, and production--do you think the number you'd come up with
would be higher?
And is it possible that the weakest quarter of the
year, in fact, could turn out to be the second quarter?
MR. PRELL. Well, we won't know for sure what the second
quarter looked like even in next week's numbers. At this point, the
incoming expenditure flow numbers don't point clearly to an upward or
a downward revision. For the third quarter, I suppose if we were to
recalculate today, our best guess is that our number would be
fractionally higher; I would say that it would not necessarily differ
significantly from the second quarter.
But, just on the basis of the
retail sales data, we could see a number that would be closer to 3
percent.
MR. PARRY. My second question involves inflation. You have
a very sharp drop-off, as you did last month, in the second half's
inflation rate in terms of the GNP fixed-weight deflator.
It seems a
little surprising to me, particularly given the revisions to GNP data
that we saw in the last month and also the somewhat brighter glow to
the economic statistics.
I'm not sure I understand what's causing
that.
MR. PRELL. Well, if we dissect the forecast, the
deceleration is primarily in the consumption area and, in part, that
reflects better food prices, as I noted. And, unless something goes
seriously awry, the increase in energy prices in the second half will
be distinctly slower than in the first half. We may get a little

8/18/87

bulge in the near term, but for the second half as a whole, we are
expecting considerable slowing. Also, we have been moderately
encouraged by the trend in the non-energy services area for consumer
expenditures; it seems to have decelerated a bit over the last 6-12
months, so that has carried through for a little while longer in our
forecast.
MR. PARRY. But you have more than a doubling of the growth
rate of PCE, and final sales are up very substantially in the third
quarter.
MR. PRELL. Of course, part of that surge in consumption
expenditures--and certainly a large part--is in the automobile area
where, to get that surge, they're going to have to give some
concessions in the way of lower interest rates or a more generous
rebate program.
MR. BOEHNE.
I'd like to explore a couple of areas.
You made
the point that 6 percent unemployment, more or less, is getting into
the kind of full employment zone where you start to get inflation
pressures.
It seems to me that as you look across the country, and
even within regions, there is such a variability of unemployment rates
that this average can be awfully misleading. Take my District, for
example. We have a number of areas where the unemployment rate is
around 3 percent.
We also have a few areas where the unemployment
rate is 8 percent.
And I would guess that across the country, you
would find unemployment ranges from 3 percent to, maybe, 10 or 12
percent. Doesn't a lot depend on where the additional growth comes
from?
For example, we're going to see the growth coming in
manufacturing. Does that 6 percent mean what you would think it would
mean, on average?
It seems to me that is the kind analysis which,
while it has an appeal, is greatly oversimplified, given the
variability.
That is one area you might talk about.
MR. PRELL. Well, I did try to highlight some of the
geographic disparities in the chart show [presentation to the
Committee] last month, where I showed that, regionally, the
unemployment rates are substantially different and we have been seeing
different wage trends.
Clearly, the Northeast is the area where the
average unemployment rate has been distinctly lower, and we have not
been seeing the wage deceleration, judging by the employment cost
index, for example, over the past couple of years.
Historically,
obviously, the economy has never been perfectly level. We try to
compress this into one statistic, but there are always disparities in
unemployment rate levels. At the present time, the disparity might be
a little greater than it typically has been. But, when you get into
the question of where the pressure points are going to be, this is
hard to say. Clearly, there is some slack in some of the prime heavy
industry areas of the country. On the other hand, some of the
industries that may benefit from the improvement in trade are located
in areas of the country where the labor markets are a little tighter.
For example, some industries in the Northeast will probably be
benefitting from increased competitiveness. We approach this question
with a degree of humility. We can't state precisely what the natural
rate of unemployment is; we assign a fairly broad band, and we
recognize that the question of bottlenecks or fortuitous precise
matching of the increase in demand to the areas that have the most
slack could create some variation in those spots.
Basically, though,

8/18/87

we think the anecdotal evidence is there. It's sort of a Sports
Illustrated story: Once you're on the cover, it's the kiss of death.
The Business Week type of headline that we are now in a crunch is
overblown a bit. We have a sense that the labor market has tightened,
though we have not seen the pressures on wages in-MR. BOEHNE. The other area I'd like to explore is the trade
numbers. You made the point that, in the forecast, we count on
improvement in foreign demand to more than offset the weaker domestic
demand. And yet, if we're moving sideways in terms of real exports-in a context of weak activity in Germany and real doubts in Japan--how
does all that fit together? How do you get a boost from the foreign
side when real net exports are moving sideways and you have weakness?
MR. TRUMAN. In nominal terms, you have a slight weakness. We
are expecting, after all, that in the translation that you go through,
we will end up later this month with a trade balance for the second
quarter which is essentially the same, in nominal terms, as we had in
the first quarter. But you would still have some small improvement in
the second quarter in real terms on top of improvements in both the
Basically, the
first quarter and the fourth quarter [of last year].
effect of the sustained period of exchange rate depreciation that we
have had, despite the slower growth abroad which you quite correctly
point to, is now giving an added boost; in fact, it's striking
something off.
MR. BOEHNE.
exports to continue.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PARRY.

So you expect the improvement in real net
Is that-That is correct.
Not in the third quarter.

MR. TRUMAN. In the third quarter, we think we're going to
have this special effect with the oil-MR. BOEHNE.

But out beyond that?

MR. TRUMAN. Beyond that, we expect essentially the same
forecast as this time--most of it accounted for by the exchange rate
depreciation, taking account of the weak growth abroad.
MR. MORRIS. I have a gut feeling that the economy in the
last half of this year and going into 1988 is going to be stronger
than we have projected, and I've been examining numbers trying to
figure out where the greater strength will come from. It seems to me
that it could well be from the producer durable equipment sector where
you show a continued rise in manufacturing capacity utilization
throughout the period. In recent months, we've seen a very strong
trend in new orders for capital goods. Yet in your projection, after
the current quarter, you show only a very modest growth rate. Do you
view this as an area of vulnerability in your forecast?
MR. PRELL. I think if we were to identify the areas in
which we would be most likely to get some upside surprises, that is
one. Our forecast for this year for nominal business fixed investment
continues to be below what the surveys were indicating a few months
ago, and it's clear that orders are picking up. Basically, we have a

8/18/87

forecast, though, that seems in line with historical patterns, giving
consideration to the cost of capital and what presumably would be a
rather modest accelerator effect here. We don't have output growth on
the whole as all that strong, so we have a moderate increase in fixed
investment. But that certainly is one of the areas where a surprise
would be less shocking to us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I guess I just want you to play a "what if" game
with me. With respect to oil prices--I'm not an expert on foreign
affairs or any kind of affairs--but the disruption in the Persian
Gulf, I think, definitely has had an impact on oil prices, as you
mentioned earlier. But what if they sweep the mines away and the
tensions are relieved. Then, if we were to see oil prices coming
down, let's say, to $15 or $16 per barrel--that's not my estimate,
just assume that would happen--what would that kind of change in this
one factor do to your overall forecast?
It just seemed to me, as I
read through this material a number of times, that the high oil
prices, and rising oil prices, were driving many of our concerns on
the forecast over the rest of this year and into next year.
If I may turn briefly to Mr. Morris' question,
MR. PRELL.
one thing that we've had in our minds as a sort of cautionary note on
these orders figures and so on, is that we can't tell how much of that
might be potential exports; so, at this point those numbers need to be
read cautiously. Our view on the oil situation, as I tried to
suggest, is that we could see a downside risk. Evidently, there has
If we get into another one
been a considerable move to stockpile oil.
of these swings where there's a movement toward destocking, and the
OPEC swing producers don't cut back promptly enough, we could see at
least a temporary drop in crude oil prices, maybe to an even lower
level than you've suggested. But, basically, we think we have
perceived, since the end of last year, a reasonable enough coherence
in the OPEC countries in containing production within levels that
enable them to sustain prices at their target level.
So we tend to
think that any crunch is likely to be relatively short-lived and
would, perhaps, introduce some [unintelligible] in prices of final
products, petroleum products. But we would be quite surprised to see
something that was permanent enough to produce a significantly lower
trend in energy prices over the forecast horizon.
MR. TRUMAN. Governor Seger, we have not raised our oil price
assumption for next year; in fact, it's the same one we had in
February. So, in some sense, you have to have some drawback in order
for our forecast to be correct.
Obviously, there are some risks: we
were talking about the risk that the OPEC agreement that they made
late last year would fall apart and that-MS. SEGER.
I think there's no honor among thieves.
As those
prices rise, I think those people are going to be more and more
tempted to cheat, and they will continue to cheat.
They're cheating
now in that they're exceeding their own quotas--ones that they set
among themselves.
I guess I'm not prepared to think that they'll get
religion real quickly.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's one of the reasons why you're
damned if you do, and damned if you don't; it's one of the reasons why

8/18/87

we had essentially stuck with an assumption that was close to what
they were targeting six or eight months ago. What will come out over
this forecast period, not certainly that there was cheating among--.
The real issue has to do with the behavior of the key producers in the
Gulf region--[whether] Saudi Arabia, just as it is now producing more
oil, will cut back sufficiently to sustain the price at something like
$18 a barrel. One of the factors which is [unintelligible] production
over this period more than is necessary to take off being driven by
the stockpiling.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that the Saudis are a selfcorrecting mechanism because they have maintained that posted $18 a
barrel light Arabian crude price, and if the spot price goes under it,
their liftings will fall, because no one is going to pay $18 if the
So, it's a sort of self-correcting mechanism, which
spot is $17-1/2.
And I think that's one of the
worked in the very beginnings of this.
reasons the cheating is really an issue and was relevant to bringing
But the Saudis have
crude price from, say, $22 a barrel down to $18.
demonstrated that they can lock the price at that level.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, of course, [unintelligible].
Governor Seger, if you wanted to adjust your thinking on this in terms
of our rule-MS. SEGER.

That's not my forecast.

MR. PRELL. But in terms of our rule-of-thumb, $5 a barrel is
worth something like a percentage point on the CPI over the course of
the year, and significantly less than that, obviously, in GNP prices,
in domestic output prices.
MS. SEGER. Wouldn't that also help our trade balance?
Again, it seems to me that the higher price of oil that we are
I would assume that that would cut
importing has been a negative.
current dollar imports, anyway, if nothing else changed.
MR. TRUMAN.
other way.

In the short run, I think it's going to be the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me comment that I
think our forecast parallels the forecast that appears in the
With regard to
Greenbook this time. But a question, I guess to Mike:
the really sharp swing that you have between the third and fourth
quarters in personal consumption expenditures, and the resulting
buildup in inventories, which we have somewhat [unintelligible] for
the period ahead, is that in your forecast totally as a result of the
auto sales picture that you've described?
MR. PRELL.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. PRELL.

Effectively.
No other factors-That's the key factor.

MR. GUFFEY. The other question I would pose has to do with
your outlook on inflation and your rather sharp jump in the unit labor

-10-

8/18/87

cost that appears between the third and fourth quarters and continues
on out through the projected period.
It's my impression, at least,
that other than the autos that come up in September, the union-labor
negotiations [calendar] is very thin, and we can't see where you're
getting that kind of a jump in the output, the decrease in
productivity, and so forth.
MR. PRELL. Well, maybe we didn't successfully answer this,
but the productivity numbers are being bounced around by our
expectation of what the timing of Labor Day will do to the hours
numbers in September. We feel that this is a sound enough arithmetic
point, in terms of our understanding of how the data have run over the
years. We have a very low September level in these numbers, which
affects the average level of hours in the fourth quarter; so we have
this gyration of 2 percent growth in productivity in the third quarter
going down to 1/2 percent in the fourth. On the compensation side, we
have the beginnings of an acceleration in compensation over the second
half of this year, but there isn't a big third- to fourth-quarter
jump; the big jump there is in the first quarter next year when higher
payroll taxes take effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. We have already touched on this, but have you
done some analysis of the impact of higher energy prices on the
acceleration in inflation we have seen so far this year?
MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure what kind of analysis you have
in mind. It's clear that it has been a very significant factor. For
the year as a whole, we have energy prices contributing 2-1/4 percent,
roughly, to the acceleration in the prices of consumption and
investment goods.
It's clear, though, that the first-half
acceleration in consumer prices is largely in energy prices; food
prices haven't done so well, but that's a rather small contributor to
the first-half acceleration; it's primarily energy prices.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Mike, I wanted to ask about short- and
intermediate-term business demand. How do you conceptualize the
slowdown that is occurring there? How would you explain that?
MR. PRELL.
MR. MELZER.

Short- and intermediate-term business credit?
Yes.

MR. PRELL. Well, part of it, we think, is the move to
longer-term financing after we had an interruption of the flow, so to
speak, when rates backed up earlier this spring. The rates came down
a little, and maybe [unintelligible] corporate treasurers began to
think that they shouldn't be waiting for still more decline. They
seem to have come to market in significant size. As best we can sort
these things out, that's the one thing we can put our finger on that
the data would seem to support very clearly. We don't see it as
reflecting a sudden drop-off in inventory accumulation, for example;
the data just don't show that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

8/18/87

-11-

MR. HELLER. Michael, in the federal deficit reduction to
$123 billion that the Administration is projecting, can you provide us
with more details?
Is it mainly on the expenditure side or the
revenue side?
MR. PRELL.
I haven't had an opportunity to commit all this
to memory yet. You're focusing on which year?
MR. HELLER. On your handout, there is a drop from $158
billion to $123 billion, and then you say with policy action-MR. PRELL. Basically, we assumed, in addition to some
Congressional action that has already occurred, that something akin to
their program will be adopted--an action which gives you on the order
of $35 billion in deficit reduction. That's on a par with the
Congressional budget resolution number as well. The outlay number for
1988 that they have now is $8 billion a month above their January
estimate. Obviously, the revenue is the other thing, and the receipts
number is $7-1/2 billion below the January estimate. That's largely a
reflection of the downward revision in their forecast of corporate
income tax receipts. That's the major [unintelligible].
On the
outlay side, they have had to respond to the higher interest rates
they have seen. They're expecting somewhat higher interest payments
and they're also responding to the higher inflation that we've had,
which will feed through to a larger cost-of-living adjustment for
social security recipients and federal pension recipients.
These are
the major features of the changes of the baseline for the 1988 budget
number.
MR. HELLER.

Thanks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff has done an
unusually good job in describing the outlook, and I know Mike has done
a very exceptional job in handling some very difficult questions.
I
guess I come out pretty close to where Frank Morris is on this.
I
think that the recent spate of statistics indicates that the economy
is really beginning to strengthen quite a bit and a lot of that
apparently is resulting from improved exports.
I would sort of
discount the last figures we got from Census on the trade balance on
the grounds that you have a lot of price increases of imported goods
in there, and price increases on oil, and probably some anticipatory
buying because of the oil problems and also because of protectionist
legislation. So, if this is true, then I think we could see some
bigger figures than the staff is projecting. We are approaching the
end of the fifth year of economic expansion at a time when we would
expect bottlenecks to begin to appear, and I think they are in some
industries. This is the kind of environment in which we could see
wage and cost pressures begin to turn around from what we have been
fortunate to have had in the immediate past, along with this further
heightening of inflationary pressures and attendant upward pressure on
long-term interest rates.
So, I think it's a situation where we have
to increase the care with which we look at the situation; we're now in
a different era from where we were a couple of months or so ago.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Forrestal.

8/18/87

-12-

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our forecast has
changed very, very little since the last FOMC meeting. We still have
growth in '87 turning out to be in the 2-1/2 to 3 percent range; if
there is any change in the forecast, it is that we now think we may
very well get closer to the 3 percent level than to the 2-1/2; so, the
If we
forecast really is for growth to be just a tad below 3 percent.
have any differences with the Greenbook, they're very minor.
In '88,
I think we may very well get somewhat higher growth. I'm also not as
optimistic about the deficit picture; I just have a gut reaction that,
given the election year, and so on, it may be difficult to achieve any
meaningful improvement there. Last month I mentioned that we had a
sizable difference of opinion with the staff about personal
consumption expenditures; I see that the staff has adjusted their
numbers up, but I still think they're a bit on the low side; but the
staff has come a little closer to our forecast, anyhow. On balance,
Mr. Chairman, we don't have much difference with the staff forecast on
growth.
As far as inflation is concerned, we have the deflator rising
to about 4 percent or a little more in 1988 and, I must say, this
I think that we were all hopeful
gives me some cause for concern.
that the low numbers we saw in price gains in 1986 were permanent, but
I'm beginning to think they are not; and I think that we still seem to
be stuck with a trend of inflation that's somewhat higher than we
would like to see. At earlier meetings over the past couple of
months, I was worried that economic activity could fall on the short
side of the forecast. Now I've changed my mind in that I think
perhaps the risks are on the other side, as some other speakers have
indicated. Revisions to the earlier data and higher activity in the
first half suggest that the appreciable decline we have seen in the
unemployment rate probably is not a fluke. We kept thinking that
there was something wrong with those numbers and that the unemployment
But it hasn't done that. And with the rate at
rate would go back up.
6 percent, I think we are awfully close to the point where some
pressure on wages is likely to emerge, as the staff has indicated.
So, in this environment, it seems to me that the inflationary risks of
economic activity turning out higher rather than lower are fairly
substantial; and it wouldn't take very much, in my judgment, for
expectations to build pretty significantly for higher inflation.
Economic activity
I'd like to say a word about the District.
in the Sixth District continues to be fairly good and, in fact, it's
gaining momentum. The weak areas in the economy, particularly
Louisiana, are beginning to show improvement partially, or perhaps
primarily, due to the increase in the price of oil.
For example, the
number of active rigs in Louisiana and in the Mississippi coast area
of Alabama is the highest in two years.
So that is fairly good news.
The other thing that is perhaps interesting to note is that, whereas a
few months ago, people that we talk to around the District were not
reporting any significant price increases, now they are indicating
that the prices of their raw materials, for example, are going up.
And for the first time, we're hearing people say that they are, in
fact, able to pass through some of these price increases to their
customers.
That's a significant change from reports that we had had
previously.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

8/18/87

-13-

MR. KEEHN.
Our forecast is certainly quite consistent with
However, I will say
the staff forecast as it relates to this year.
And, I would join
that our outlook for 1988 is somewhat stronger.
those who have commented that, as we go along, the revisions are
likely to be up rather than down.
Our District has lagged the rest of the country in the
recovery, but since the end of last year that has not been the case.
As we look at our industries and our indicators, we are tending at
This year, for example, as we
least to equal the national numbers.
have gone through the year, employment increases in our five states
The increases
have been consistently equal to the national increases.
have tended to be on the nonmanufacturing side, but even in the
manufacturing category, we are significantly above the low level of
Unemployment
manufacturing employment prevailing at the end of 1982.
continues to be a little higher than the national average, about a
percentage point higher; nonetheless, that margin seems to be coming
down.
And, I do think that some of the manufacturing sectors that
have been going through a very difficult period are showing really
In steel, for example, which is a very tough
surprising strength.
industry, the steel plants that are producing sheet steel are about at
Those producing structural steel are lower than that, but
capacity.
And, there are a number
nonetheless stronger than you might expect.
of other categories in the machinery side that are showing
A large manufacturer of diesel engines in our area is
improvement.
now really having a hard time keeping up with the demand; construction
equipment is stronger; and even the railroad equipment business, which
has been absolutely moribund, is beginning to show some signs of life.
All of this, of course, excludes autos, though the sale numbers for
autos, as Mike is suggesting, continue to look like 10 million or more
The production schedules in
[unintelligible] this year or next year.
the third quarter will be down by about 13 percent; and for the fourth
quarter, though the schedules are not final, it looks like they'll be
And the inventories do not seem to be out of
down about 5 percent.
line.
I am
On the agricultural side, I have just a quick comment.
almost hard pressed to say that, certainly, we have stabilized; and
The land values, which in
there are even some signs of improvement.
the first quarter were level, at least, did show improvement in the
second quarter; those land values continue to move up a bit, albeit
Nevertheless, transactions that are
from very, very low levels.
There was, as
taking place show some sign of strength in land values.
you know, a recent revision in farm income; and the outlook for this
year is for a significant increase and, therefore, those farm income
Surprisingly--or at least I find it
numbers look pretty good.
surprising--the increase in farm income is not a result of higher
subsidies, but rather of a decrease in production costs, which is an
encouraging sign.
So that part of the agricultural sector looks
pretty good.
Admittedly, we have a long way to go before the harvest,
but at this point the growing conditions look good.
We would
anticipate good crop yields per acre and, in some areas, there will be
The overall production will be down by 12 percent;
record production.
the acreage is down even more-- say, 14 percent; but, again, we have a
So, I do think the conditions in the
net improvement in yield.
District are much improved for the rest of this year and into next
year.

-14-

8/18/87

But, as I pointed out, there are a couple of key areas. On
this trade balance issue, I've had the feeling all year that we were
seeing a correction; the people I talk to suggest that that is the
case. The June numbers were certainly disappointing. I hope there's
nothing fundamental there. But if the major economies in the world do
not turn around and begin to pick up and take our exports, this
obviously will have a big impact. On the inflation side, we are
seeing some of the price increases that Mike mentioned. They are in a
couple of categories. Specifically, in steel, one manufacturer
increased prices 4 to 6 percent and this time they're sticking--again,
at very low levels. But if these price increases begin to become
pervasive, and then go through to the labor side, I think the outlook
for inflation will be quite different. I don't yet sense that. All
the people I talk to who are negotiating labor contracts are
continuing to get very good results: reasonably modest increases on an
annual basis, and importantly, very good work rule changes, so that
productivity and unit labor costs seem to be better. But, I do think
these are, of course, the two key areas: the trade balance and
inflation. Net, I think the economy, both nationally and in our
District, continues to look good and seems to be improving. As we go
along here, there is the opportunity for increasing the growth
forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, our forecast is in basic agreement
with the Greenbook forecast, but I'd agree that the risks, in terms of
growth, are on the upside, for many of the reasons that have been
mentioned. For example, we have assumed the $25 billion deficitreduction measures which are indicated in the Greenbook, and it's
possible that some portion of those measures will not be enacted.
That's another area, in this case resulting from the government
sector, where we could see a greater boost to GNP, at least until some
of the secondary impacts of a greater deficit are felt. Moreover,
when we look at the 12th District, the data to us, particularly in the
area of employment and retail sales, indicate strong growth. And the
discussions I've had over the past month with directors--not only at
the head office but also at our four branches--indicate a greater
optimism about business prospects than I have ever seen in the year
and a half that I've been with the System. I'm more pessimistic on
inflation than the Greenbook, since I believe that the fixed-weight
price index will continue to advance at a 4 to 4-1/2 percent rate in
the last half of this year and remain in that range in 1988. It seems
to me that recent tightening in labor markets raises the chances of
price increases in 1988, and it certainly heightens my longer-run
concerns about inflation. It would appear to me that, at this point,
our room to maneuver is rather limited, with the labor market around
full employment, nominal short-term interest rates rising about 100
basis points next year--at least in our forecast--and real interest
rates rising only slightly. The current forecast that we have and the
one that is in the Greenbook hold out little or no prospect of the
inflation rate subsiding in the near future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, our forecast also is pretty much
in agreement with the staff forecast. We have strengthened our
outlook for the national economy for the rest of this year and going

8/18/87

-15-

into next year. We think we do have a rate of expansion that is
sustainable. Subjectively, it is a little hard for me really to
believe all that, given what has been going on in our particular part
of the country. While we are seeing a little improvement, we
certainly are lagging the rest of the country. Both anecdotally and
statistically, we can kind of show that we are working through the
trough; but the recovery, to the extent that there is one, is so
fragile that it would not take very much to have us continue the
downturn that we've been in for the last couple of years. Reference
has been made to energy. We have seen a little improvement there,
certainly, in terms of perceptions. There has been a little
improvement in construction, but it's not in building; it's in roads,
public construction, that sort of thing. Manufacturing looks pretty
good. In agriculture, we are continuing to see cropland values
decline and we are not through yet; of course, we came into this a
year or two after the Midwest, in particular. And, of course,
everybody reads about the conditions of the financial institutions.
One concern that we are hearing, primarily from people in mid-sized
and small businesses, is that they're very concerned that they're not
going to get credit. And without credit, they're not going to be able
to grow and expand and create jobs. This is something that we're
hearing more and more. The banks are not willing or able to lend, and
a cutoff of credit has occurred; and they don't see very much end to
it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Is it because banks and thrifts are
getting super conservative? Is that the idea?
MR. BOYKIN. That's a lot of it, Jerry. The bankers say that
there just is not any loan demand. The small and mid-sized
businessmen say we have the demand but banks won't take the risk. So,
I think it's probably somewhere in between--the banks are not seeing
the kind of demand in the loans that they are willing to make.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I agree in general with what the Greenbook says
and what I've heard about the outlook. I do think it's picking up; it
looks better and there is some growing upside risk. However, I have a
number of concerns that really cause me to question this view
completely, and there are a few problems that I have with the
Greenbook forecast, in particular. So, I'm still uncertain, overall.
First, the growth that we see appears to be primarily due to the
improvement in real net exports; export volume is causing the stimulus
that we see right now. And, if that is indeed the case--if most of
the growth is coming in the external area rather than in domestic
aggregate demand--you have to really ask yourself how much of the
potential Phillips-curve type effects on pricing you can get from that
kind of growth. And that modest expansion in aggregate demand, I
think, is being verified somewhat by the aggregates, as well as by
other types of evidence for consumption. You really have to ask how
much inflation pressure can be produced by that type of a scenario.
When you look at the broader inflation indexes, the CPI, excluding
energy, shows some pressure, but the PPI shows no influence outside
the energy area. As a matter of fact, it has been decelerating this
year, ex-oil. So you really don't see a broad buildup yet on the
price side.

-16-

8/18/87

The staff forecast has rising interest rates, and I think
some of their policy assumptions are inconsistent with the forecast.
That rise in interest rates, at least if the aggregate models are
correct, is going to produce a further weakening in the monetary
aggregates. Looking at a further weakening in the monetary
How much nominal GNP can you
aggregates, you have to ask yourself:
get out of those kinds of aggregate growth rates, and does the
velocity number that is consistent with that make any sense at all to
you?
I don't think you can get too much from a rising interest rates
scenario out of the aggregates to produce enough nominal GNP to
produce a serious risk.
The other point I have is on the movement of the dollar.
One
problem I have on the dollar is what I pointed out yesterday in the
Board meeting: we really have had no net depreciation of the dollar
this year. Now, there's always the possibility, and I continue to
worry about the downside risks on the dollar.
I know it has come off
a little today; we've talked about some of the reasons. But the fact
of the matter is that there has been no net dollar depreciation this
year and we're late into the year. The forecast is contingent upon a
10 percent depreciation in '87 to produce the lagged effects on prices
in '88. Of course, there are still four months of opportunity for
that.
But you have to ask yourself, if you're not going to realize
that kind of dollar depreciation this year, how are you going to get
those lagged effects for '88?
The other point is that if the oil
price is expected to hover in the $18 range--and it's my feeling that
the dollar is being influenced some by the oil price--an oil price in
that range will keep the dollar high relative to the currencies of
major industrial surplus countries like the mark and the yen.
And if
the dollar stays stronger because the oil price hovers in the $18
range, how are we going to get the dollar depreciation?
On all of
these questions, I'm not saying that they can't be overcome, because I
see the outlook picking up some, too. But I really haven't resolved
these questions in my mind and I think they are serious alternative
issues to deal with. So, given these problems, I don't think we have
enough evidence to expect a big upward move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. In many ways, Manley, you've made my speech,
because I think what I hear you saying is that there is more
uncertainty than some of the comments might indicate.
It does seem to
me that it's appropriate for us to assume that inflationary pressures
need to be dealt with, and that it's appropriate for us to have a
monetary aggregate growth path such as we have been having. To me, a
4 percent M1, M2, and M3 path is, in itself, a rather significant
antidote for these inflationary pressures that exist.
Even though
those inflationary pressures are there, and we are far from having
turned the corner in abating these price increases, there might be
some possibility that we will be successful if we are willing to
maintain a monetary aggregates growth path such as we have. And
there's something that I notice when I get out in the country and I
talk to farmers and people in the oil business and realtors: there is
a sense of unease that's in our country that really goes against what
you were suggesting, Si, in regard to farm income.
It is true that
1986 was a record year for net cash farm income; and 1987 is going to
be another record above that record.
But what I notice is that there
is a conservatism, or even a super conservatism, that exists.
Those

-17-

8/18/87

people who are the survivors, and those businesses that are
successful, are the ones that kept their borrowing down. I notice no
rush to borrow; I notice no stories from the entrepreneur types about
how it makes sense to borrow money to do this or to do that. I notice
instead that the fast-food business is not quite what it was, and that
owning houses doesn't seem to be quite the way to profit. And I
notice some unease and a scare out there that moderates behavior.
So, it might be that this growth path of the monetary
aggregates could bring a stop to the commodity price rises that we've
seen during the last year, beginning last August. And if these
commodity price rises do abate and the inflation expectation goes
away, there is some possibility that deflationary forces could once
again return. I think what we need to do at this point is to be open:
to look at the various possibilities and to see if we can do the trick
of getting commodity price rises stopped in sufficient time before
they feed back into the wage/price cycle. If that can be
accomplished, then it seems to me that a 4.1 percent GNP deflator and
a 4.5 percent increase in the fixed-weight index for 1988 is totally
unacceptable. We just must not let that occur. But having said that,
let's not get ourselves too ready for an overkill.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, I am considerably more comfortable with the
Greenbook forecast at this meeting than I was in July, because it
seems to me that the thrust of the latest statistics on the economy,
with the revisions, serves to bolster the underpinnings and
credibility of that forecast, at least in my mind. I think the
revisions are important, as well, in this story because I think they
help to put things in a more consistent picture. Throughout the
expansion, it seems to me, we've had consistently strong increases in
employment and we were seeing weaker increases than I would have
expected in GNP and so forth; and at least in my mind, some of that
gap has been reduced. I think we are looking at an economy that
really has been performing rather well.
That's certainly consistent with what's going on in the Ninth
District. I have talked before about the two-tier economy and the
divergence between what's happening in the urban areas, which are
doing well, and the rural areas. But the latest developments suggest
that that gap has diminished; that is, the rural economies are doing
better, in part because agriculture is doing better, and in part
because other aspects of the natural resource industries that the
rural area of the Ninth District depends on are doing better. And
that's encouraging. I might also comment on the fact that I've
received a number of unsolicited reports from businessmen in the
District about increased interest in export opportunities--that is,
potential foreign customers coming to them to explore the
possibilities of sales abroad of various products. This is everything
from the high-tech end of the world to some very basic commodities.
Again, I think that's consistent with what we have seen happening in
the economy recently and what our forecasts suggest.
I do think that, with all that good news, we probably are
approaching a critical point when it comes to inflationary pressures.
As Mike indicated, I think you can attribute much of the acceleration
in the broad price indexes so far this year to the effects of higher

8/18/87

-18-

energy prices.
But I think that looking forward, we have a number of
things on the horizon that give me some pause even if energy prices
level off or maybe even come down a bit from here. One is clearly
what we're seeing in the bond market here and elsewhere around the
world, where there are some signs of heightened inflationary
expectations that manifest themselves in long-term rates.
Secondly, I
guess I'm not confident at all that in fiscal 1988 we'll achieve a
Federal budget deficit significantly below this year's level.
In
fact, it could could be higher, if we're not a bit lucky. And,
finally, as far as the labor market goes, I don't know what the
natural rate of unemployment is, but whatever it is, we certainly have
to be a lot closer to it today than we have been recently. And not
surprisingly, if you look at unemployment by various demographic
groups, as you would expect, we are at the lowest rates of
unemployment in general since 1980 and, in some cases, since 1977.
For some groups you have to go back to 1977, at least using quarterly
average data, to find unemployment rates that low. I think we have
benefitted heretofore from the rigidities in the wage determination
process with which we are all familiar; I'm not talking just about
what goes on with unions, but just the way business is run. But I
don't think that we can count on those rigidities in that wage
determination process always working in our favor, particularly if
price indexes start to move up here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our views of
economic conditions closely parallel the staff's forecast in the
Greenbook. As some others have suggested, there are a couple of areas
where we differ a bit. One is in the growth of income, and the other
is in consumption. On balance, it appears to us that the economy is
picking up strength. Employment, output, and exports are expanding,
as we see it, and we have noticed a jump in prices.
Comments by our
directors and others support this view. Even the hardest hit sectors
--commercial construction, agriculture, and metals--are said,
particularly by our directors, to be enjoying a period of stability
and possible turnaround. So it's not surprising, I guess, that we
would suggest that our forecast shows more strength, on balance, than
is indicated in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I hope that the staff forecast is right on
target, but I do have some questions and some doubts, I guess.
One of
them that I expressed yesterday at the staff briefing [to the Board]
involves our emphasis on the trade turnaround.
I'm just not convinced
that we will get as much of a boost to the overall economic picture
from the trade turnaround as we are counting on in the forecast either
for the rest of this year or in 1988.
It was mentioned earlier that
some of the trading partners have economic situations that are far
short of robust.
So I think that's a key factor. Also, no one has
mentioned it, but there are trade barriers out there that business
people tell me about. And some of the obvious ones involve trying to
get into the Japanese market.
Also, I'm not convinced that the dollar
is going to fall as much as we're assuming in our forecast.
I realize
it can be banged down but, as Governor Johnson said, there are things
going on that may prevent that from happening. Also, the staff is
talking about some gradual upward drift in interest rates. That may

8/18/87

-19-

happen, depending, of course, on what policy stance we take. But I
guess I don't see as much of a bite on the economy from that upward
drift as I might have expected. Looking at autos--and this would be
more of a near-term situation than for '88--I think it's going to be a
lot tougher to reduce those inventories than apparently you think,
Mike.
Some of the specific makes have over a 100-day supply; that's
not worked down easily even at 1.9 percent interest rates.
One of the
reasons they have so many is they haven't a lot of sex appeal in the
models; they may have to just give them away on some Saturday night, I
don't know. Anyhow, I think it's a lot greater challenge than -MR. JOHNSON.

That's pretty awful.

I don't like it myself. My final
MS. SEGER. That's right.
comment involves inflation, and here Governor Angell made my point
about commodity prices.
I don't think it's guaranteed that these are
going to just keep rising. We all know that commodity prices are very
volatile and influenced by many, many things above and beyond monetary
policy. And I believe, as he said, that there are factors at work
that may, as a matter of fact, keep those under control. Particularly
when I think about the crude oil situation, I'm not certain that we're
going to get what's in the staff forecast.
On the labor market
shortage, I just don't think there is a labor market; I think there
are all sorts of labor markets--for different skills, for different
industries, and for different geographic areas.
So I don't know that
it makes any sense even to talk about a natural rate of unemployment
because I just don't know how to use it as a guide. Finally, one of
the things that I really don't think we're emphasizing enough is the
I see more backbone among
real change in managerial attitudes.
corporate executives in their labor negotiations than I've seen in my
whole working career, which goes back a long time. And I'm really
delighted to see that they no longer assume that they can just pass
through these higher labor costs--which they used to do, particularly
in the major industries.
Also, the company heads are more and more
aware of import competition, more and more aware of the need to be
efficient and to get even more efficient.
They're pushing the
employees for moves that would enhance productivity. This is going on
all the time in the auto negotiations. The emphasis is on job
security; there is even talk of freezes on actual wages. To the
extent that there are pay adjustments, in a number of major companies
they are making sure that the productivity gains do offset them
because the 1.1 percent--or whatever the overall national number is-is not what the productivity gains are in specific companies. And so,
I think, they are tending more and more to tie their own wage
settlements to their own productivity enhancement moves. And I think
I put all that together and I don't see zero
that's all to the good.
inflation, but I don't see 4-1/2 percent heading towards 14 percent
either. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we'll
probably get a little better sense of things when we get back to work
in earnest in September and businesses start doing their planning for

1988. But, as I look at things right now, first, I think that the
outlook for the economy is better--not that I thought that it was all
that bad to begin with. And second, I have to conclude that the
inflation risks have risen. In terms of the "body english" that can

8/18/87

-20-

be put on that, some can say--as I think Mike Prell did a long time
ago--that one way to look at it is simply with a higher degree of
confidence that something approaching 3 percent real growth could be
realized. I would simply add that, in the current circumstances, I do
think we have to keep in mind that something like the staff forecast
for real growth isn't far from what is optimal, considering the need
to effect the external adjustments that we have all been talking about
and to maintain some hope that the inflationary process does not get
away from us, as a number of people have suggested.
On this all-important question of the external adjustment,
for what it's worth, the New York staff forecast is a little stronger
overall in real GNP.
Interestingly enough, it is also one in which
there is no assumption of further dollar depreciation in 1988, but
despite that, we get a better showing in the trade account and the
current account in nominal terms and end up at about the same place in
real terms. Now, the reasons for those differences, I think, are
important.
One is that we do have slightly stronger growth--not a
gangbuster pace by any means--but marginally stronger growth in the
non-U.S. industrialized world than is in the staff forecast. A second
factor, of course, is that without the second or third J-curve effect,
the nominal effects work in the right direction. And finally, we do
have U.S. export prices going up more rapidly than the staff forecast
does.
Each one of those, obviously, is a big "if" and, taken
together, they are a lot of "ifs".
But the key point is that they do
suggest at least the possibility that you could get an outcome that is
better in nominal terms and about the same in real terms, without
having to rely on a further depreciation of the dollar, with its
inflationary implications and the risk, of course, that further
depreciation of the dollar could get away from us.
I think that is
important for another reason.
I tend to look a lot at what I call "a
domestic savings gap" in trying to figure out where we are in terms of
capital and savings requirements.
As things stand right now, and
assuming a Federal budget deficit in 1988 somewhere in the $150 to
$160 billion range, the fact of the matter is that we have made
precious little progress in reducing the so-called domestic savings
gap.
If the budget deficit next year is in that $150-$160 billion
range, and if total net private investment is only about 5 percent of
the GNP, which is darn small, the savings gap relative to GNP is still
going to be 2-1/2 percent or more of GNP.
It is still going to be
$145 or $150 billion in absolute terms--not down at all from its peak
in 1985 or 1986.
So, that fundamental disequilibrium is still there.
In fact, it has not improved much at all, despite the reductions that
we have seen in the budget deficit, because the saving rate for the
economy as a whole has slipped off its peaks of 1985 and 1986--not
decisively, but enough so that the problem, both in relative and
absolute terms, is still very much with us throughout the forecast
period. That in itself says to me that we have to be especially
cautious, because one way or another that residual is going to have to
be filled from abroad, if interest rates and exchange rates are going
to remain consistent with the kind of economic profile that the
forecasts are talking about.
On the inflation question, I can be very brief and simply say
that a number of us, including myself, have fretted in the past about
crossing that threshold of 4 percent in the deflator and 5 percent in
the consumer price index; and it seems to me that the consensus view,
though not the universal view, among private economists and others is

8/18/87

-21-

that we are there. That, I think, is the reality. As things stand
right now, I can postulate conditions that would produce a result
better than that, but I certainly don't think that those are the
likely outcome.
Indeed, I guess I'd be on the side that says that I
could also postulate conditions in which, heaven forbid, we could find
ourselves looking at 5 percent on the deflator and 6 percent in the
consumer price index. If we get to that point, then we are looking at
a situation that inevitably carries with it the risks of highly
destabilizing consequences for the real economy here and around the
world.
Indeed, I think the lessons of the past are clear: if you wait
to see that kind of problem staring you in the face, the costs of
unwinding it are going to be exponentially greater than the costs of
checking it in the first place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the overall
numbers, which are rather satisfactory, are good not because the
aggregate economy is really good, but because the sectors which have
If you keep
been weak so far are the sectors that are picking up.
that in mind, I think the inflation picture also will look a little
different than it does when looking at the aggregate economy as a
whole. We are eliminating the sectoral imbalances in trade and in the
government sector as well as in the regional sectors that were pointed
out before. Overall, I think that makes for a healthier economy
because, in essence, we are pulling the weak sectors up without really
hurting the strong sectors at the present time. Consumers are still
moving forward but at a rather subdued 4-1/2 percent pace in the
overall forecast. And I agree with what President Morris said
earlier: that the investment picture may actually be a little better
than the numbers of 3.8 to 4.2 percent next year suggest.
I'd be
slightly more optimistic there, but not all that much. On the export
front, I think also that our growth will be sustained in the doubledigit area; 12 percent in the Greenbook is certainly sounding good.
Turning to the price area, because we're having that pickup
in sectors that previously were very subdued, we should not experience
the burst in prices that would be associated with an overall Phillips
curve.
Therefore, I also think the employment gains which have been
achieved are in areas and in sectors, such as manufacturing and
agriculture, that were previously very, very depressed indeed.
Overall, I think the producer price index, as has been pointed out, is
rather stable. And I agree with what Mr. Corrigan just said: the
final user prices, the GNP prices, are drifting up at a 4.5 percent
rate.
But then again we have to ask ourselves--this really should be
reserved for the next part of our discussion, but let me bring it up-if we're having monetary growth right now of 5 percent and we're
having price increases of 4 to 5 percent, what does that mean for the
real economy if you want to make that equation square?
I certainly
disagree with the view of the world that we're having a zero growth.
So something else will have to give. Either we have to produce a lot
more money or price increases will not be sustained at a very healthy
consolidation phase of the economy; and I don't really see very major
risks on either side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

-22-

8/18/87

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I've already made
comments with respect to our outlook and our general agreement with
the Greenbook forecast.
I'd like to make this very brief, in view of
the time.
The regional economy that we're experiencing in the Tenth
District has some positive outlook to it in the sense that, as others
have already commented, the agricultural sector is having and will
have one of its best years, with this major rise in net farm income.
There has been a good crop. The red meat industry is in very, very
good shape. As a result, there has been some uptick, or at least
modest turnaround, in what had been falling agricultural land values.
One survey shows that from the first quarter to the second quarter,
agricultural land values have increased about 1-1/2 percent; and
that's to be contrasted with a long period of declining land values.
I would just note, however, that the sales that have translated into
that greater land value number are one of two kinds: 1) cash
transactions in which neighboring producers are picking up depressed
or troubled land ownership; or 2) the Farm Credit System is offering
very attractive financing rates to move land off of their books in
order to avoid any additional loss.
I would just note that, as a
result of this, the margins in the production of red meat are very
good at the moment.
However, the inventory is beginning to build, and
we would expect that there would be little or no additional pressure
on prices from the food sector as a result of the [uninteligible]--no
real hope of increased commodity prices either in terms of crops or
red meat. Lastly, there is some optimism being generated in the
energy sector. There is some drilling now taking place; the rig count
is up modestly from a month or two ago.
So, psychologically, given
what we see, we would expect things to continue to improve but at a
very slow rate.
In the commercial real estate area, we have
overbuilding in Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa, which is depressing
that market; and those conditions, obviously, rose out of the
depressed conditions of agriculture and energy that they depend on
greatly. We believe things are looking up, but we have a long upward
pull to get back to better conditions than we have now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I wanted to pass on just one piece of anecdotal
information that bears to some extent on what Jerry and Bob Heller
were saying: one businessman in our District in the shoe business
mentioned to me that they're running at essentially 100 percent of
capacity now. I sense that's close to true in textiles, and, at least
in some respects, in the steel area.
So I mention that.
I guess what
concerns me, when you think about this external adjustment process
that Jerry talked about, is that we shut down capacity so quickly over
this period of years that I think we are bumping up against capacity
constraints in those industries a lot sooner than anybody could have
anticipated.
I asked a logical follow-up question to this executive:
"Well, are you going to expand capacity?"
In that case, they have
closed facilities that they could probably reopen without a major
capital investment. But, basically, the message was that chief
executive officers and financial officers, having been through this
period of shutting capacity down for so long, are going to be very
slow to make the investment to reopen. As a result, even in these
industries that have been depressed, I think the pressures on the
labor markets are apt to build a lot faster, because the investment is
not going to follow as quickly as it might have in a more orderly

8/18/87

-23-

period, if you will.
interesting.

I wanted to pass that on;

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I thought that was

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to spend just
a second on a little different perspective. There has been a very
good staff forecast and a lot of very good comment on it.
But it
might be worthwhile to put our attention just a little on whether or
not there may be some very fundamental long-range changes running
underneath the surface of the world economy and our economy.
If
there's an analogy there, it may be what happens in the sea: you have
the Gulf stream running up the East Coast from south to north; the
storms come and go and calms come and go; and the tide shifts back and
forth with the Gulf stream still running north up the coast.
It kind
of dominates everything in the long run.
I wonder if there's any of
that effect going on in the world economy.
I see several things out
there that could be fundamentally deflationary in the long term.
That's not to quarrel with the kind of forecast that we're seeing here
over the forecast period. But it seems to me that if we can avoid
falling into the protectionist sinkhole--and maybe we won't--that
there is a super abundance of pretty capable labor across the world
that's waiting to produce, and it's currently grossly underemployed.
And there's capital that's mobile enough to get there to set up
factories and economic capabilities, and do whatever is necessary to
employ that still quite low-cost labor. And we're going to be
competing with that labor.
In a great many commodity areas there is a
worldwide abundance of capacity. Absent political events, there's
The world is coming
plenty of energy for the next few years at least.
into a surplus of farm commodity production on an aggregate basis;
there are lots of metals, and so forth. The third factor may be that
it probably was inflationary to increase the enormous levels of
international debt that we now are struggling with, but it probably is
going to be deflationary to try and service that debt, now that we
have it.
There's a lot of pressure on a lot of economies to produce
in order to earn foreign exchange to try to service their debt.
So
there are some things out there which seem to me to possibly be
exerting a [unintelligible] deflationary effect.
And, while I see the
pressures that we have over the forecast period, and I would not
quarrel with those, I think that maybe these long-run deflationary
effects under the surface might damp that, as they play through in the
inflation numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Boehne, do you have any comments
you'd like to make at this time?
MR. BOEHNE.

No, I have none.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to make just a few
observations. We spent all morning, and no one even mentioned the
stock market, which I find quite interesting in itself. I think it's
important in the sense that as an economic force, history tells us
sometimes it works, and sometimes it doesn't.
It's conceivable to me,
however, that this may be one of the times in which we may begin to
see some opening up in the capital goods markets.
It's very dull;
appropriations are not expanding at a rapid rate, but they are
expanding. And I think what the new orders are showing is a mixed
bag. Mike mentioned that there may be some exports in those orders,

8/18/87

but we also may be seeing an increase in the share of the total
domestic capital investment markets because, remember, those figures
are orders at domestic facilities only. And the one thing that seems
to be appearing in the numbers, in real terms, is that irrespective of
the nominal trade figures, the share of capital investment coming from
abroad has been increasing dramatically, although it's now beginning
to taper off.
That will create a much stronger set of new orders
figures for equipment, as we see in the aggregate appropriation
I'm a little concerned
numbers and the aggregate investment numbers.
that we may be looking at more than the opening up in this area that
the staff numbers show, in part, because I think profit figures are
moving fairly quickly. The ability to pass through prices is another
way of saying margins are opening up. And we are beginning to see
very clear evidence in a number of areas that we are picking up some
form of potentially significant profit expansion. That would lead me
to conclude that we could very well be running into trouble at these
monetary aggregate levels; but my impression is--at least my hope is-to get to it a little later. But we may be looking at the
I think
possibilities of a turn in velocity numbers at this stage.
the presumption that velocity will stay somewhere down in this area,
I
or even approximate the staff forecast, may be wishful thinking.
think there is more of a potential on the inflation side, on the
nominal GNP side, at fairly low credit and monetary aggregate
expansion than I think we're willing to admit, if for no other reason
I think
than I think we're merely projecting the most recent past.
that is turning; and if it turns, we'll have some possibly significant
difficulties.
On the exchange rate question, even though the staff
forecast, as I understand it, has implied profit margins on imported
goods flat at very low levels--meaning that the import prices of goods
shipped into the United States are essentially reflecting very little
change in profit margins--I think history tells us that that doesn't
happen often either. The evidence suggests that, from these levels,
the likelihood is for more of an increase in those margins--meaning an
increase in import prices relative to the exchange rate. What I
conclude from all this myself is that, while the staff forecast is in
a way the most likely forecast, I'd be inclined to suppose that the
risks are clearly on the upside, both on volume and on price.
And my
last forecast is that that's likely to be the way Mike will come out
the next time around.
MR. KELLEY.

I wouldn't be surprised.

MR. HELLER.

Got the message?

MR. ANGELL.

Sometimes he's hard to influence.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In case there's any doubt, I think the
real world is going to influence him. If there are no further
comments on the economic outlook, let's move on to Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
minutes to 12.

Thank you.

Why don't we break until 10

[Coffee break]

8/18/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As we sit here, the dollar seems to be
dropping. Maybe we ought to adjourn for awhile. I would like to open
the floor now for a general policy discussion and some indications on
the directive and borrowing requirements and any tilt that you would
like to express as we go on. The Vice Chairman starts off.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I can be

rather brief. As I said earlier, in the totality of circumstances
that we face, I view something like the staff forecast as about as
close to optimal as we can get right now. But I also regard the risks
in that forecast as being strongly asymmetrical on the side of the
economy being stronger and the inflation rate being higher. Because I
have that view as to the asymmetries of the situation, and because I
regard the risks of that type of an outcome to be potentially so
severe, I would favor, at this point, a modest move in policy that
would take the borrowing level to $600 million--in other words,
something between "B" and "C".
It's not that I think that kind of a
move in and of itself is going to be decisive; but I do think that it
will be enough of a move to show through in the marketplace, and to
convey a sense of concern on the part of this Committee as to the
potential for things working in an adverse way. I see that kind of an
approach as relatively risk-free in that the initial change that it
would carry, whether in terms of interest rates or things like that,
is inconsequential as far as the forecast for the economy is
concerned. I do not regard signal value as being inconsequential.
So, on the theory that a stitch in time may indeed be worth nine, I
would proceed along those lines.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think that there is a case to be
made for some tightening for all the reasons that have been stated:
the risk of inflation in the economy and also the history of probably
waiting too long. I am not ready to make that move at this point. I
have enough doubts, and I think there are enough uncertainties, about
the outlook for inflation and other aspects of the economy. The
sentiment around this table has fluctuated a good bit in recent
months, and I think we very well may be heading into a period where
some tightening is appropriate; but I think it is premature at this
point. I would favor a directive that would maintain the $500 million
of borrowing, something along the lines of alternative B. However, I
would give the directive an asymmetrical tilt indicating that if
policy needs to be changed in the intermeeting period, that we would
more likely lean in the direction of some snugging than some easing.
So, I would be for no change, alternative B, with some asymmetrical
wording that would tilt it in the direction of some tightening, should
a change be necessary.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I was going to say that,
ordinarily, I would have been in favor of some slight tightening, but
I also was going to say that I would be reluctant to do that in light
of the dollar's strength in the foreign exchange market. However,
given what you have just said, perhaps my thinking will change a
little. I also was going to say that I thought the strength of the
dollar was temporary, so I guess the markets are proving me right in
advance. Given my view about the economy and what I see as the

8/18/87

-26-

potential for more inflation, particularly in early 1988, I think that
we probably should make the move now, recognizing that there are some
uncertainties in that forecast.
I wouldn't want to do anything very
dramatic, but I would opt for what I would describe as alternative
B-plus with borrowing at about the $600 million level.
That implies
that I am willing to accept M2 growth that is below its range for the
year; and I think it is pretty doubtful that we would be able to get
it up to the bottom of the range in any case, unless we did a very
pronounced easing of policy.
I am willing to accept lower than
intended growth, certainly, in preference to easing policy at this
time.
As far as the directive is concerned, I would suggest that we
tilt slightly toward firming and keep an asymmetric directive that
would enable us to firm even more, if circumstances required. As for
the various clauses that the staff has indicated in the Bluebook,
I
would stress the indications of inflationary pressures and general
business activity the most and downgrade the dollar. Also, I would
keep that sentence in the directive that would allow for greater M2
and M3 growth--that we would tolerate that if it occurred.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would like to raise a point with
respect to that.
This directive goes through a very short period of
time. And I'd raise the question as to whether or not it is really an
operational directive at all, because by the time this is actually
something that is likely to happen, we are beyond the period which we
are focusing on, with respect to policy in any event.
That's at least
my view; I don't know how the rest of you read that.
MR. JOHNSON.

Sounds like a good case for early release.

MR. BOEHNE. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I guess
understand the point that you are making.

I don't

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I am referring to the sentence
"Somewhat faster growth in the broader aggregates would be acceptable
in the absence of indications of worsening price pressures and
substantial weakness in the dollar, given the shortfall of these
What I am basically saying is
aggregates from their annual averages."
that we are not going to learn a great deal more about what those
aggregates are doing between now and the termination of the time frame
to which this directive applies.
So, I am not quite certain whether
the directive has any operational significance because of the
shortness of the time frame.
MR. MORRIS.
not interest rates.

[Unintelligible] with respect to the aggregates,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Oh, no, no.

Just the aggregates.

MR. MELZER. I read that, at one point, to mean the opposite
of what it is intended to mean. I think it could be interpreted that
way. If you were worried about the slow growth, you might actually
encourage--

MR. STERN. It seems to me, if anything, that is certainly
too open-ended the way it is currently written.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is all I meant.

President Parry.

-27-

8/18/87

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I believe a strong case can be made
for alternative C and I would characterize that, at least in terms of
anticipated effects on interest rates, as being a small move.
In
July, several Committee members expressed the view that a tighter
policy would be necessary in the coming months and I think
developments since then strengthen that view. Most data released
since our last meeting suggest that the economy and inflationary
pressures are picking up.
Inflation in the first half was over 4
percent and real growth was at a very strong 3-1/2 percent rate. Data
that we have seen so far on economic activity in July--particularly
employment data, retail sales, industrial production--indicate that
the economy remains strong in the current quarter. Given that it
takes a long time for our actions to affect inflation, I believe we
should make a policy adjustment.
If we delay much longer, until
inflation has really gained momentum, more severe action will be
required to bring inflation under control.
For those reasons I would
support the adoption of alternative C as presented by the staff.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

$700 million on borrowings.

$700 million.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would support Mr.
Corrigan's formulation of a modest tightening--a $600 million
borrowing level.
I think that we might need to move further in the
event we get a period of pronounced weakness in the dollar. There has
been so much talk in the foreign exchange market about the
inevitability of a further leg down in the dollar that that seems to
be the conventional wisdom. For that reason, this recent weakness in
the dollar has the potential, I think, of generating a test of the
If
earlier lows; that's just potential; I am not forecasting that.
that should turn out to be the case, we probably would have to make
another move prior to the next meeting. But I think the evidence of
greater strength in the economy would certainly support a modest move
at this time of the sort that Mr. Corrigan outlined.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that we need to remind ourselves
that these minutes will be published six weeks from now, around the
time of the next meeting. It just seems to me that we ought to be
somewhat careful about making asymmetric statements when there is this
much uncertainty. I think the real question is what do we do, not the
question of symmetric or asymmetric.
I would prefer a symmetric "B".
Now, that puts me at the far end of those who have been speaking so
far.
I do believe that the monetary aggregate growth paths are quite
different from those we had in the period that led to the price
pressures we are now seeing; and I think it is a mistake for us to
react with the monetary aggregates behaving in this nice 2 to 4
percent growth range, which might very well be the right path for the
long run. Yet, as you anticipated, Mr. Chairman, and I would agree
with you, we do have this change in velocity. It would be a mistake
for us, then, to go to $600 million on borrowing, because $600 million
will certainly be a vote for a lower monetary growth path. The
members of the Committee know that I have not favored returning the
monetary growth paths back to within our target ranges for the year; I
have favored coming in below the ranges. But, just as a year ago, we
were undoubtedly somewhat careless in not recognizing the 15 percent

8/18/87

-28-

monetary growth path when we made that discount rate change last
August, I think it could be just as much a mistake for us to move now
before we see the need.
I am prepared to make adjustments as might be
needed if commodity prices and the exchange value of the dollar were
to move in such a direction as to make inflation and our worst fears
realized.
I would want to move at that point, but I am not willing to
take a hard position now for minutes to be published six weeks from
now based upon our feelings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B.
I
would favor basically no change from current policy, and I say that
because I guess I am not totally convinced that the economy is going
to be quite as strong as perhaps some others believe.
I question that
inflation is a problem at this point. Granted, when you determine or
realize it is a problem, you are pretty far down the road, so that a
certain amount of anticipation is desirable.
But, given the fact that
the interval between this meeting and the September meeting is pretty
short compared to some of the intervals, and that the need for a
policy shift is less than convincing--to me, at least--I would stick
with alternative B, the $500 million borrowing assumption. Rather
than being symmetrical, though, I would have a sentence in there that
would allow a little tightening by the Desk, if that should become
necessary.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in agreement with the
position that Jerry Corrigan laid out.
For reasons that have been
well stated, it certainly seems to me that the economic opportunities
at this point are on the upside and not on the downside.
On the
inflationary pressures, though admittedly far from conclusive, we may
be going through something of a bubble here. Nonetheless, the signs
are there and I do think it is appropriate that we begin to move
against that.
I find the aggregates' performance this year to have
been erratic.
They may emerge on a more predictable basis, but as yet
I don't see the evidence of that. Therefore, I find the alternatives,
in terms of aggregate growth rates, to be a little awkward.
Accordingly, I would prefer to deal with the borrowing level and,
given the circumstances, I think a borrowing level between "A" and
"B", namely, $600 million, would be appropriate.
In terms of the
wording of the directive, I would be in favor of "would" for [greater]
restraint and "might" for lesser restraint. And I do think that this
sentence on the next page [of the Bluebook] does, at least
preliminarily, convey the reverse meaning.
I think we might fiddle
with the language on that to get a more appropriate wording.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. As Bob Parry indicated, Mr. Chairman, a number of
us at the last meeting thought that we were probably going to have to
let interest rates rise over the next 12 to 18 months if we were going
to prevent this underlying rate of inflation from accelerating. And
it seems to me that this expectation is even more likely now, in view
of the information that we have had since then. At the same time, I
am not exactly sure when it will be appropriate for us to take that
action; but I believe that it will probably be sooner than I would

8/18/87

-29-

have thought at the time of the last meeting.
I am also well aware
that the history of the System has been that, generally, we have not
moved fast enough against inflation. So, I tend to try to compensate
for that.
Despite that, since there is a good deal of uncertainty
out there, I believe the best case for now is to stick with
I would make it asymmetrical with the "would" on the
alternative B.
tightening side and the "might" on the other.
I think the Board
staff's statement with regards to the "as well as" clause does suggest
that it would be helpful to shift that around to deemphasize the
borrowing side; as for the weakness of the dollar, that may deserve
some further thought.
I think there is also another argument: that we
ought to put restraint of the business expansion high on that list if
we are going to change the list around. And I would not put in that
sentence on the undershoot of the aggregates at all.
And I say this
with the sneaking suspicion that later on down the road, I am going to
look back and say, "I wish I had been where Jerry Corrigan and those
others were".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. Basically, I am for no change, as I said
earlier.
I believe that we are in a period of sectoral catchup and
the monetary growth is very subdued at the present time.
So, I would
like to keep it at alternative B with a $500 million borrowing target
and I would do two changes: 1) I would upgrade the importance of
inflation, and maybe give it sole prominence in the first sentence;
and 2) I would downgrade the dollar, as Presidents Forrestal and Black
mentioned earlier. We are way above the lows that the dollar reached
earlier, and to say that we want to react now to weakness in the
dollar would probably be inappropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, as I suggested earlier, I think that the
principal risk we are likely to face, over time, is higher inflation.
The key question in my mind is one of timing.
I don't have the sense
that the inflation problem is a fait accompli. On the other hand, I
don't think we can afford to sit back and wait until it is obvious,
for reasons mentioned earlier about the cost of undoing it once it is
in place. Balancing those two considerations, I am not prepared to go
as far as alternative C, but I do view something between "B" and "C"
as perhaps a positive, helpful, preemptive strike at this point in
time.
That entails, in my judgment, relatively little risk to the
economic outlook; also, if it turns out that we were wrong, it would
not be terribly difficult to undo.
And from that perspective, I think
it merits consideration as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

Is that $600 million?

Right around there, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I'm in favor of no change, which is alternative
B, $500 million borrowing target, for three main reasons. One is, as
I think Governor Angell emphasized, the uncertainties that we are
facing. Another reason is that there aren't that many weeks between
this meeting and the next FOMC meeting; we have another chance, very

8/18/87

-30-

soon, to look at things and change our approach, based on additional
readings of the economy. The third reason is that I just don't see
that the economy is currently boiling.
The forecast certainly does
look pretty good; but, again, I question whether or not we're going to
see the hit from the trade turnaround in the way that many are
expecting.
So, for those reasons, I would like to propose keeping
reserve pressures as they are. And, in the statement, I would
deemphasize the impact of the dollar on what we are doing. Also, I
don't want to tilt the directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. We see a further acceleration in prices this
year and next, and believe that the risk is on the upside. Therefore,
I believe it's reasonable, at this point, to increase the pressure on
bank reserves by moving toward the "C" path.
I'm not particularly
picking the C alternative, but favor a $600 million borrowing
objective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I definitely would put the priorities on the
side of worrying about inflation as opposed to the recovery. I would
favor "B" with a tilt toward tightening. I could certainly accept a
$600 borrowing target, although I'm not voting, so I don't need to
accept it.
I'd feel particularly strongly about moving if I felt that
we were sort of maintaining a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent funds rate
against a very strong demand for reserves. Now, as you pointed out
before, Mr. Chairman, on the velocity argument, maybe we won't see
that. We're certainly not maintaining a lower funds rate than would
otherwise prevail through rapid reserve injection here; but that's
where I come out.
I would be inclined to leave language in there
about the dollar.
I think if we lost control of the dollar on the
downside, we could kick off that whole cycle that we dealt with just a
couple of months ago; and I'd be very sensitive to weakness in the
dollar in the language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would prefer staying
with "B", largely for the reasons I outlined a few minutes ago.
I
think that the underlying trends are going to tend to damp both the
inflation that is showing up and also, perhaps, the robustness of the
expansion that we're in.
However, I do recognize the short-term
tendencies toward some inflationary movement here.
So, I would also
like to see the language be asymmetric in the direction of tightening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
alternative B?

What do you want [on borrowing],

MR. KELLEY. I would stay with "B", the $500 million.
MR. JOHNSON.
I guess I see some firming signals and, as I
said, a little more upside risk than I did before. But, a lot of the
early warning signals--some of the financial market signals--are not
showing us as strong a concern as they did at our last meeting. So,
I'm a little reluctant to see us stick our neck out too far.
I guess
I'm somewhere around alternative B with asymmetric language to give us

-31-

8/18/87

the option of a potential tightening if we see firmer signs. But,
sort of like Wayne, I'm not sure I want to commit myself to anything
on instinct; I've got to have a little more evidence. When people
read the minutes in six weeks, they'll look at what was going on when
we made those decisions. The thing that has happened since the last
meeting is that the real economy is showing more firmness, but that's
about all I see right now. Maybe we'll be ready for a tightening move
later, but for now I favor alternative B, with asymmetric language. I
am for deemphasizing the dollar a little because, as I said earlier, I
see it somewhat influenced by the oil price; and I'm not sure that the
declining oil price, which might send the dollar down, is something we
should be worried about. The dollar declined significantly,
consistent with the decline in oil prices in 1986, and we saw
inflationary expectations break in the face of that; we tried to
resist the dollar's downward move; it certainly wouldn't have been a
resistance against inflationary expectations. I'd like to avoid that
kind of a problem. I think the dollar is still an important issue,
but I think it depends on what's influencing it. So, I would rather
highlight inflationary expectations and just leave the dollar as a
proxy for that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

$500 million?

Yes, $500 million, with asymmetric language.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A good deal of comment
has already been made about the growth--that it's perhaps a bit
stronger than we were expecting last month. But, I would just note
that if you believe the forecast, and I think virtually everybody
agrees with the Greenbook, you're only looking at 2-3/4 percent growth
in the third and fourth quarters. That doesn't seem to me to be
overly expansive. And, there is considerable uncertainty as to the
inflation outlook, at least in my mind. To be sure, prices are quite
likely to be up, but as a result of feeding through on import prices;
and I'm not at all sure that a bit tighter monetary policy is an
appropriate prescription under those circumstances. As a result, I
would favor "B", with $500 million borrowing, until some additional
evidence comes along. I would note, in that respect, for those who
believe that the aggregates are important and that there is some
informational content in them, that they're growing at a very nominal
rate now. As a result, to further tighten at this point, in
anticipation of some higher prices, seems to me to be inappropriate.
So I would go for "B" with a $500 million borrowing level until some
more information surfaces that would lead us away from that. Lastly,
I would prefer to leave the language with respect to the dollar in the
directive because, in my view, monetary policy has to act against a
depreciation in the dollar that becomes fast, no matter what the
cause. And, as a result, I would leave it in, and I would even leave
it at a fairly high level of visibility in the directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. If we averaged everybody,
we'd get a different result than if we averaged the voting members by
themselves. I don't know if this is a typical result of this type of
activity.

8/18/87

-32-

MR. ANGELL.
responsible.

The people who don't vote don't have to be

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'll put that on the record.
It's
fairly obvious that this is a unanimous vote for alternative B, and I
would read it as a mild--maybe slightly more than mild--majority for a
tilt in the language. There is some desire to move inflation and
business expansion up in the language and the dollar down. The
average borrowing requirement amongst the voting members is a shade
under $550 million. For those of you who are keeping score, I'd opt
for "B" with $600 million and a definite tilt.
Basically, my own view
is that the risk of snuffing out this expansion at this stage with
mild tightening is extraordinarily small. My view is not so much that
we know a great deal about what's going to happen in the fourth
quarter and beyond.
I just find it rather difficult to perceive a set
of forces which can bring this expansion down when you have the
following: lead times in the delivery of materials and investment
goods as short as we have now, which presupposes that the markets are
basically tight on inventories; clear evidence of an expanding capital
investment market; and, in effect, pretty much a full adjustment in
consumer expenditures [unintelligible] I think we are likely to get as
a result of the income adjustments from the tax bill and other
elements.
I do not believe that this is strictly a [unintelligible]
trade issue myself, but I think there is more to it than the trade
balances that are emerging. And when you begin to see order impacts
in some of the basic raw materials, such as in steel and aluminum, and
the extraordinary behavior of the textile industry, which is
surprising even with all the restrictions, I wouldn't join my
colleagues here who consider this a set of very uncertain things.
I
think what is uncertain is how it materializes; but, I've seen this
before, and this doesn't look uncertain to me.
I may eat those words
in six weeks, but it has a tone to it which I, frankly, find not
really inflationary yet; there is no evidence in the wage data that I
see.
In any event, that's the way that I come out; and that's the way
I read everybody else.
I guess we can structure some language which I
suspect would pretty much grasp the issue. Let me describe it.
On
the operational paragraph, it would read: "In the implementation of
policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions."
As you know, we
can either put this in terms of "somewhat greater reserve restraint"
or "slightly greater reserve restraint".
As I listened to the
discussion, I read it as "somewhat greater reserve restraint would or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending on
indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of the business
expansion, behavior of the aggregates, and developments in the foreign
exchange market.
I don't know whether or not that would be acceptable
or whether anyone would suggest some rephrasing. I think I was
capturing what I heard, but I will accept revisions.
MR. ANGELL. I wasn't quite certain what the vote was in
regard to the dollar's position.
I would be among those who would
like to leave the dollar as being an important indicator, somewhat
more prominent.
But I may be out-voted, I'm not sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Frankly, it's a close vote.

MR. STERN.
I agree with Wayne, in part because when this
directive is published it would seem to me to be an awkward time to

8/18/87

-33-

have downplayed the dollar if the dollar continues to do what it has
been doing the last three or four days. I don't think you gain much.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with that, Mr. Chairman. I don't think
we ought to downplay it. We may be feeling more comfortable about the
dollar just now, but it wouldn't take very much for us to find
ourselves in a very uncomfortable position. And six weeks from now it
will be more attention-getting if we change the emphasis than if we
leave it alone.
MR. HELLER. Let me speak on the other side. I don't think
we're writing here for the press release only; we're talking about the
operational paragraph. If we have the dollar right up front, as soon
as we get the kind of weakness that we are getting now, if sustained
for another day or two, it could be seen as an indication that we have
to tighten monetary policy. And that is not what the majority, at
least of the voting members, was agreeing to. So, I agree with the
Chairman in moving the dollar to a lower position. Let me note that
it still is in the same sentence. We haven't split it into two
sentences, as we have done many times before. So, it's a very modest
downgrading; it's just the order in which we are reading it rather
than a cardinal distinction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I ask a question? We had the
strength of the business expansion at the bottom of the list the last
time. As I read it, there's a fairly strong consensus to move that
up. Would there be any objection to moving that as #2 after
inflationary pressures?
SEVERAL.

That would be good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So the question really gets down to two
things: the relative positioning of the foreign exchange markets and
the behavior of the aggregates "as well as" phrase. If we move the
business expansion issue up, I would be willing to leave the sentence
the same as it was the last time.
MR. BOEHNE.

That makes a lot of sense.

MR. MORRIS.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there agreement on that? On the
issue of the M2 and M3 growth rates, which were 5 and 5-1/2 percent,
there were some suggestions of going to 5 to 6 percent in this
context, which would be reasonable as far as not wanting to be
splitting M2 and M3 apart. As I read the data and alternative B, I
would assume that we might want to say through the September period-that this approach is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and
M3 over the period from June through September at annual rates of
around 5 to 6 percent.
MR. ANGELL. I would really favor making that broader and
going 3 to 6 percent. It seems to me that you could have a
circumstance in which the aggregates were growing at 3 percent and,
for other reasons, you still might want to tighten.

-34-

8/18/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the problems is that it's such a
short time frame that that issue can be difficult to implement. Does
anyone else have views on this?
MR. HELLER. As long as we don't read a move to 3 to 6
percent as an indication that we are aiming for 4-1/2 percent, or
something like that, and that is where the policy should be directed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I thought that maybe the 5 to 6 percent
was really a forecast of what is likely to happen, irrespective of
monetary policy.
MR. ANGELL.

I guess I'd want to hear Don Kohn's comments on

that.
MR. KOHN. Well, our best guess was that under alternative
"B" we'd have M2 growth of 5 percent and M3 growth of 5-1/2 percent;
but, as you well know, there is a wide range of error around that. As
I said in my briefing and the Bluebook, that presumes that money and
income grow a little more closely together than they have over the
last couple of quarters. That could fall short; I can't rule out that
possibility.
The question is whether you would want to react; but
with the aggregates after the "as well as" clause at the end of the
sentence, I'm not sure how strong any reaction would be, in any case.
MR. ANGELL. How about going to 4 to 6 percent then?
seems to me that 5 to 6 percent is so narrow.

It just

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask another question.
In your
judgment, what is the average lead time between monetary policy and
the aggregates.
MR. KOHN. Well, it's several months, clearly; as I think I
indicated, whatever we do now will have its principal impact in the
fourth quarter. But it is also true that this goes the other way a
little: that is, whether incoming data that suggested the aggregates
were running outside a range of 5 to 6 percent or 4 to 6 percent
should have any influence on a proposal that Mr. Sternlight might make
on the borrowing objective is not quite the same as saying you're
actually going to have the effect. You can react and then assume that
your effect would be somewhere down the road.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask you this. Does anybody
object to 6 percent as the upper limit? Are there any objections to 4
percent on the downside?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I wouldn't object.
I would just
offer a historical caution, for what it's worth.
I think we have to
be a little bit careful about jiggling around these quarterly
objectives at mid-quarterly meetings, especially when we are so near
the end of the quarter.
It can convey something more than I think we
had in mind.
MR. JOHNSON.

I'd like to second what Jerry says.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it's better to leave them
close to where they were at mid-quarter.

8/18/87

MR. JOHNSON. I agree with Wayne's point that it is likely
that they could come in there. I would want to change the whole
language in terms of clarifying what we are saying if we go to 4 to 6
I would want to make clear that though we're assuming no
percent.
change in policy, the aggregates may come in in the 4 to 6 percent
But that's not what it could imply. So, I'd rather just leave
range.
it alone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

Leave it alone, meaning what?

You're going to leave it at 5 to 7-1/2 percent?
Well, 5 to 6 percent may be okay.

MR. ANGELL. If we're changing the top one, why is there any
harm in changing the bottom one?
MR. GUFFEY.
5 percent for both.
MR. ANGELL.

The alternative is to state it in terms of about

About 5 percent would be fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would 5 percent be acceptable to
everybody?
What's the general view on that next sentence?
MR. STERN(?).

Take it out.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
it.
Anybody object to that?
rate.

The general view is for just dropping
Strongly?
That leaves us with the funds

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN & MR. BOEHNE.
MR. ANGELL.

Keep it the same.

4 to 8 percent.

MR. HELLER.
I think that this is something we should
consider sometime in the future. That 4 to 8 percent is such a barn
door; it's very wide. At some future time we may want to narrow that
down a little.
MR. JOHNSON. That has always been the range used in the
past, just to convey within the reserve target-MR. HELLER.

Wrong direction.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If you narrowed it, you are really
saying that you're targeting-MR. ANGELL.
--the federal funds rate.
I think it would be
the wrong signal, in light of the 1976 experience.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the borrowing target--

Let me just ask, we haven't quite got to

MR. ANGELL.
I thought there were seven votes for five
hundred; that was the way I counted.
MR. HELLER.

$525 million.

8/18/87

-36-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
arithmetic.
$525 million?

I don't like people who are good at

MR. ANGELL.
I don't think anybody will know it's $525
million; you don't tell anybody.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know something, I
the answer to the question. The point being that I don't
the convention is here--whether you average these things,
can, or whether you take the majority. What has been the

don't know
know what
which you
convention?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The convention, I think, Mr.
Chairman, is that you do not average that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
$500 million.

If you don't average, then the figure is

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

The majority is--

MR. JOHNSON. That is going to lead to other
[unintelligible].
If it turns out to be an average number, you're
going to have people low-balling it until it clears the average.
MR. HELLER.

$536 million is the average!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is hard to average it.
One other thing that is done, in terms of trying to sense where the
critical mass is, if I could put it that way, or where the Committee
might stand, is that the Chairman has been known from time to time to
ask people what their preferences are as opposed to what they could
live with.
In this particular case, you may have some shadings of
opinion around those borrowing numbers, for example, based on the
question of symmetry or tilt that would go with them--in other words,
the "woulds" and the "mights".
I, myself, certainly would not
dissent, at this meeting, over the difference between $600 million and
$500 million in the context in which there was some tilt along the
lines that Governor Johnson has suggested. So, you do have some play;
but I don't think that most members of the Committee would be
comfortable with averaging the borrowings.
I think that can get to be
quite awkward when there are larger differences, as there may be, than
the difference between $500 million and $600 million.
MR. MORRIS.
You also have the authority, of course, to call
a telephone conference meeting to reconsider the borrowing level in
the event, say, we get extreme weakness in the dollar, which I think
is a possibility.
MR. ANGELL. We already have that in the tilt of the
directive, anyway.
That is, you can go firmer, based upon
developments, without calling a Committee-MR. HELLER.
If you start out with a base of $600 million and
then you have the language with the tilt, it gives you a very
different environment than if you start with a base of $500 million
and have the tilt in.
$500 million with a tilt in it gets you right
to the range where everybody may well want to be--in the $520 to $550
million range, or whatever--while $600 million with a tilt in it would
get you a lot closer to--

-37-

8/18/87

MR. KELLEY.
MR. BERNARD.

The tilt is worth $25 to $50 million dollars.
In the operational paragraph, there's a problem

that Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman pointed out on the factual portion of
lines 24 to 26. The dollar, at least as of an hour ago, instead of
having risen further, was unchanged. I don't know what the latest
figure is, so that needs to be changed to make it factually correct.
MR. HELLER.

Roughly unchanged.

MR. BERNARD.

About unchanged.

MR. CROSS.

It's, on balance, unchanged; it has been up and

down.
MR. ANGELL.

I think that would be appropriate.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Change that.

I'd like it reread just to be certain.

MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions. Somewhat greater reserve restraint
would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable
depending on indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of
the business expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, and
the behavior of the aggregates. This approach is expected to be
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from June to
September at an annual rate of around 5 percent. Growth in M1, while
picking up from recent levels, is expected to remain well below its
pace during 1986. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve
conditions during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate consistently outside a range of 4
to 8 percent.
MR. KOHN. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I thought I heard the
Committee express the view that they wanted to retain the "as well as"
in front of the aggregates. Normand, just read-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Right.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I read it, the next meeting is
September 22.
Thank you for your patience, ladies and gentlemen.
END OF MEETING

