Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 22, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 22, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
Seger
Stern
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey and Melzer, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis,
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

9/22/87

-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Messrs. Eisenmenger and Hendricks, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Cleveland,
respectively
Messrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Ms. Tshinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, and
and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Judd, McNees, and Sniderman, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston,
and Cleveland, respectively
Ms. Ann-Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of September 22, 1987
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL (in unison).
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the minutes?
SPEAKER(?).

Good morning, all.
Good morning.
Would somebody be good enough to move

I move.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CROSS.

Objections?

Approved.

Mr. Cross.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

Second.

Comments?

Any motions?

May I ask just one question?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

MS. SEGER. How much actual trading is going on in the
foreign exchange market for what I would call corporate business use?
In other words, not just trading for the sake of trading but for-Right now we have the feeling that corporations
MR. CROSS.
are not doing very much.
It varies a great deal, of course, but
typically the total turnover in the market is many, many multiples of
It may be 10 times as much. But right at
what the final users get.
the moment we don't get a sense of a lot of corporate activity taking
place.
It may be that they are holding off, for the kind of reasons
It may be that they are waiting to see if anything
that I mentioned.
emerges out of these dealings around the time of the IMF meeting. Or,
from what I hear this morning, there is some expectation being talked
about that the G-7 might do one thing or another that would give some
greater strength to the dollar. They may be holding off for these
kinds of reasons.
MS. SEGER.
I remember before when there was all this
turbulence, a lot of corporate traders did just sort of sit it out and
hold off on decisions.
They can be very big
MR. CROSS. At times they do this.
players in this game, too, and they can do a lot of churning
themselves.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
In general, based on a number of
these periodic surveys that have been done, the thinking is that the
percentage of transactions that will in some sense be related to the
underlying exchange of goods is very, very small.
MS. SEGER.
That isn't what I would suggest at all.
I am
just trying to sense what the attitudes in corporate America might be.
No, I don't think--

9/22/87

MR. CROSS. This always seems to be a pretty important time
for an assessment. We have the sense that they come back after Labor
Day and reassess their position; and they may be doing that right now.
Frequently, in recent years, we have seen trends begin shortly after
the summer holidays and after Labor Day. As I said, it may be that
they are holding off to see if anything emerges from these meetings
next week.
MR. GUFFEY. There is some comment in the press saying that
the G-10 or the G-7 had adjusted their target levels from 140 or 160
to 131.50.
Is that rumor, or is that--?
MR. CROSS. That's total conjecture.
There was a rumor last
week of exactly that--that the target range had moved down. And then
there was a rumor two days later that it had moved up.
The dollar
went down a little when the first rumor occurred and moved back up a
little when the second rumor occurred. But these are all purely
imaginative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS.

SEGER.

I have a motion; do I have a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, we'll assume the
transactions are now ratified. Mr. Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Any questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. MELZER. Peter, you reported on the first 11 days; there
is apt to be a pretty large borrowing spike Wednesday.
How would you
expect that to be interpreted in this environment? This is a period
that has had some technical problems with the tax date, so I guess you
are not going to be able to conclude much from that either.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't be surprised if there were some
kind of a spike.
I don't know what the average would work out to be.
We'll be seeking to put in reserves, so that if our estimates are
close and our estimates of the demand for excess are close, the
average will come out around the $600 million level.
There is always
an element of uncertainty as to just how far a spike takes you. But I
think there is a lot of realization in the market that this is a very
difficult period for reserve management.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, you mentioned the market being nervous.
I agree that there is still some of that, but I think we did achieve-though I realize it hasn't been fantastic--some flattening in the
yield curve out of the discount rate move.
Even though the long end
went up to around 9.80 percent at one point, it has settled down
around 9.60 percent; and we have seen a larger move on the short end
of the market than we have on the long end, even though it has
fluctuated.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think if you measure it just from the time
the discount rate moved, there would be some flattening. The short
rates came up more than long rates.
I think if you looked at the

9/22/87

whole intermeeting period, it is about similar at the short and long
end of--

MR. JOHNSON. I wouldn't do that because [unintelligible] it
could have been some fear of Fed tightening preceding it. But I think
the tone seems to be more inflation fears or psychology, or the
dollar, and everything else, more than just--.
I don't know how you
sort all this out. But still it does appear that there has been some
flattening achieved.
MR. STERN. On the other side of that coin, and at the risk
of some overstatement, I had the impression that the discount rate
change was received with a combination of indifference and resignation
more than anything else. Could you comment on that?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I am not sure what to say. I wouldn't say
that there was a very widespread expectation; there was some
expectation of the move, and there were even some people who were
thinking in terms of a larger move. And, initially, there were some
who expressed disappointment that it wasn't larger, although I would
have to think that a small, vocal, minority was expressing that view.
I suppose there is a sense in which [your observation] is true; people
who recognized that the dollar had been under pressure and was likely
to be continuing under pressure have come to expect that our rate
structure and our policy formulation process will be under that kind
of pressure. So there was that element of resignation to the process.
MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, is there an expectation in the market
of further tightening by the Fed?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Not in any imminent sense, but I think there
is an expectation that the dollar is going to remain under pressure,
given that we have this awful trade balance picture; and that would be
the kind of atmosphere under which there would have to be further
policy response.
MS. SEGER. Peter, did I understand you correctly when the
question was asked about the market response to what might happen to
borrowings before this maintenance period is up? Did you say you
thought we could come in around $600 million without stirring things
up?
Isn't the arithmetic to get $600 million in this period such that
it would require tremendous borrowings today and tomorrow? And if
those borrowings occur in the context of the knowledge of this meeting
date, I think [market participants] might make something out of that
rather than just saying, well, it is one way to get the average to
work out right. I don't think they know what we are shooting for.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It would take some bulge in borrowing to get
up to the $600 million [average].
I don't have yesterday's figure
yet, but borrowing had been averaging $460 million through Sunday. So
there would have to be some bulge, probably, on the final day. And as
I said, if you ask the people who follow these things closely, most of
them would probably think of us as using $500 million, although some
would say a range of $500 to $600 million. If they saw a number like
$600 million coming out, some of them might regard that as indicative
of a little firmer aim than they had estimated earlier. On the other
hand, they also were aware that it was very tough to manage reserves
in this period. So, I don't know that they are going to jump

9/22/87

immediately to any very strong conclusion if the borrowing comes out
at $650 million, or something like that.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but if there is all this nervousness in
general, and if you average, let's say, $625 or $650 million, with $2
billion of borrowing on Wednesday--which happens to be the day after
we meet here--there must be weirdos, anyway, who will think maybe
there is a connection. Maybe in New York they may figure all this
out, but there are a few other market participants outside New York
who might make something out of that whole sequence.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just because of the juxtaposition vis-a-vis
the Committee meeting date, possibly more [than a few]; but I think
more of them would just tie it to knowing that Wednesday is the
settlement date of the reserve period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think there will be critical questions
regarding what happens, not so much on Wednesday, but because that
type of spike is very difficult to interpret; they will look at
borrowing very closely in the next maintenance period.
MR. KEEHN. Peter, you suggested that the increase in longterm rates is a combination of factors, with inflation being one.
But, in the combination of factors, how persistent is the inflation
concern and is it just one of those issues?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the concern is very much tied to the
dollar. And when concern about the dollar [is high], the market is
more concerned with what would tend to happen with respect to
inflation. The market has been reasonably well impressed with the
actual price index numbers that have come along in the recent period.
But they do worry that, in the course of redressing the trade deficit,
we are going to be imposing more demands on our resources--that there
may well have to be further adjustment in the value of the dollar and
that that will do things to import prices, and so on.
MR. KEEHN.
pressures?

But it is more that side as opposed to domestic

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think that even with the trade
picture, it is partly domestic pressure because, as you are redressing
that trade imbalance, you'll be putting more pressure on domestic
resources.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Following up on Chairman Greenspan's comment,
Peter, suppose that in the next maintenance period you do come in
pretty close to $600 million and the market now expects $500 to $600
million. Would you expect much rate movement if you got closer to
that figure?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect a modest firming. My guess
is that you would get funds rates averaging in the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8
percent area.
I think we are averaging 7.15 or 7.20 percent so far
this period.

9/22/87

MR. PARRY. Peter, has there been much discussion of the
impact of higher interest rates on Treasury requirements? One hears a
lot of discussion from the Administration recently about the deficit,
at least in fiscal 1987, being somewhat lower than their estimates
because of revenues going up. But I don't hear much discussion of the
impact of higher interest rates on future requirements.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I have not really heard discussion of that
particular factor. However, while people are well pleased with the
deficit coming out this fiscal year at $160 billion, or somewhat
under, there is deep concern that without the Congress getting
something together on fiscal restraint, it will be heading up by $20
billion or more next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments or questions?
not, I will entertain a motion to ratify.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

If

So move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Objections?

Approved.

Mr. Prell.

MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I can be
relatively brief this morning. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you, Mr. Prell.

Questions for Mr.

Prell?
MR. FORRESTAL. The only thing that kind of jumped out at me
in your forecast this time, and I guess this has been there before, is
on the real export side. You are showing a marked deceleration of the
[trade] deficit; real net exports, for example, going from [an annual
rate of $131 billion in] the third quarter of 1987 to $63 billion in
the fourth quarter of 1988. Most of the other forecasts that I have
seen would not indicate nearly that much progress. Can you tell me
what that dramatic improvement is based on? Is it basically on the
export side or in the diminution of imports or a combination of both,
or what?
MR. PRELL. Well, the greater strength is clearly on the
export side. As we go out through the forecast period to the end of
next year, we have very modest increases in imports; indeed, we would
expect that real merchandise imports, not only [nominal] merchandise
imports, will be going down slightly, largely in response to the past
and prospective depreciation of the dollar. We are also anticipating,
of course, that domestic spending--consumption, in particular--will be
growing rather slowly, so we won't be sucking in great volumes of
imports because of the continuation of the kind of demands we have
seen previously.
MR. TRUMAN. I don't think that should govern
[unintelligible].
If you look at outside forecasts that go into
detail on real exports you will [not] find that much difference
between [unintelligible] and exports over the forecast horizon from
ours. Generally, they do show very substantial declines over the
period. DRI, for example, has something very close, almost shockingly
close, to what we have.

9/22/87

-6-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. Mike, you spoke about the sharp increases in
business equipment spending. How does that break down between
additional capacity and efficiency enhancing?
MR. PRELL. That's very difficult to get a handle on. The
anecdotal evidence--or if you want to characterize it in more solid
terms than that, the kinds of survey information that are gathered by
McGraw Hill and others--suggests that vis-a-vis historical experience,
a distinctly above-average percentage of this planned spending is
designated as being for replacement, modernization, and so on.
Clearly, in many industries there is plenty of capacity; in others
there is less. And one can identify some areas of significant
expansion of capacity, with additional plants being built. But,
generally, as we are looking at it, the major thrust will be on
continuing to reduce costs, to modernize product line, and so on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is most likely to show up first in
increasing lead times on the delivery of materials. In other words,
leaving aside the question of where the pressures are, that's the
first sign that you are going to get something of that nature--that
is, capacity expansion. There has got to be some evidence on the part
of the company that it is having difficulty in maintaining deliveries
on a relatively quick pace. Am I correct in assuming that there has
not really been any major change, or that there has been a slight
increase--

MR. PRELL. For materials, the lead times have been
lengthening. I think, implicit in your comment, is the question of
whether they have increased to levels that are not comfortable, and I
suspect that the strategy in many firms has been to run with a little
tighter capacity than they might have in the past. And they may not
be uncomfortable with what they are seeing. In the capital goods
area, average lead times don't seem to have lengthened much yet; and
that is probably consonant with the evidence that the capacity
utilization in equipment producing industries is not especially high-not what one sees in some nondurable material areas, for example.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I would like to ask two questions about your
assumption with regard to fiscal policy. This time, as has been the
case in the past, there is an assumption that there are spending cuts
of around $25 billion. I think there is a substantial risk that that
will not materialize. Some work we have done suggests that if policy
is accommodative and you don't get that $25 billion deduction in
spending, that it could add approximately a percentage point to growth
in 1988 and a half percentage point to inflation. Would you think
that to be roughly [the magnitude]?
MR. PRELL. I take it you are going to zero on the deficit
reduction action with that.
MR. PARRY.
zero.

You don't get the $25 billion reduction; you get

9/22/87

MR. PRELL.
I think that is probably a little higher than our
normal econometric results would give us, but it is clearly the
direction in which we would go.
At this point, the $25 billion looks
like a reasonable ballpark figure, given what is being discussed
currently in a compromise--a Gramm-Rudman revision that would be
something like $23 billion, with no loan sales or that sort of thing.
But I suppose there are still some risks that it would be less than
what we have and the result might well be somewhere in between that
zero and the $25 billion that we have.
MR. PARRY. One further question: I notice the change in the
I
assumption you have made with regard to the size of the deficit.
guess it would primarily be the higher interest rate assumption over
the forecast horizon. Does that feed back into income?
In other
words, is the loop closed in the model so that you get higher growth
of disposable income as a result of the higher interest payments on
the deficit?
MR. PRELL. Well, the forecast isn't generated by a model,
per se. As we go through and estimate the income flows, we definitely
do take account of the interest rate path that we've assumed and
projected. And we do have substantial growth in personal interest
income over the projection period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I would like to follow up on Bob Forrestal's
question. Basically, the U.S. strategy for turning the trade deficit
around is to shrink the value of the dollar and to get our trading
partners to grow faster than we are growing. We have done fairly well
on the dollar, but we haven't done so well on growth abroad.
It's an
appealing strategy, but it strikes me as being somewhat novel if you
look at the history of these kinds of adjustments. What has happened
most often is that the country that has the deficit ends up with a
recession.
In other words, you reduce domestic demand below what is
happening abroad and you also get downward adjustments on the
currency. And I would think that the longer it takes for us to make a
turnaround in the trade deficit--as we get month after month of these
disappointing trade figures--that it would put additional downward
pressure on the dollar. And it might also begin to raise expectations
that, well, as nice as it sounds to try this rather novel strategy, in
the end, the U.S. is going to have to go through kind of a wringer, as
most other countries do. My real question is: How much of a novel
experiment are we really running in light of what is happening in
other countries and what has happened over history?
I am having a
hard time thinking of a country that hasn't turned around this kind of
a trade deficit without a fair amount of suppression of domestic
demand. And the question is not aimed at [criticism]; I like the
approach that we are on. But it does strike me as somewhat novel on
the broader stage of history.
I would just like to see if that is
right or if we have had lots of company with this experiment.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, the truth of the matter is, President
Boehne, that there are some examples where this has been successful.
A lot of them come from the early 1980s and, of course, during that
period where you had essentially [slow growth of] GNP without going
through a recession--that is essentially the question you are asking-in a relatively short period of time.
There are several examples in

9/22/87

the early 1980s and, of course, those were [unintelligible].
The
other side of the equation, which you mentioned, is faster growth in
the rest of the world, which was then the United States.
And there
are some other examples. We did look at this record about 18 months
ago and that is basically what it showed.
MR. BOEHNE.

Are these sizable countries?

MR. TRUMAN. Germany and Japan [unintelligible].
We tend to
forget that they had deficits in the late 1970s and at the beginning
of the 1980s. They moved from small deficits to very large surpluses.
One feature of the forecast is that, while we don't have a recession
in a GNP sense built in, we do have relatively slow growth in domestic
demand. In fact, we have a quite dramatic slowing of domestic demand
built into this forecast.
In some sense, as Peter was saying earlier
in answer to your question, that's part of the process--the process
that makes room for this external adjustment in an environment in
which growth of production as a whole is kept relatively high but
domestic demand growth is low.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of questions for
Mike with respect to the sections that caught my eye in the forecast.
You mentioned that a further decline in the dollar was assumed in your
forecast. As I remember, the Greenbook only made reference to a
decline much like that projected in the last Greenbook. Further, as I
remember, that decline was 10 percent on an annual basis, and most of
that had been completed in the first half of the year. Am I correct,
or is there further decline assumed?
MR. PRELL. I guess I wasn't clear. The assumption is that
the dollar will decline further over the forecast period.
For our
purposes, we put in a straight line path that averages about 10
percent, at an annual rate.
MR. GUFFEY. My second question has to do with your
assumption about rising interest rates in the fourth quarter.
To be
very specific, do you have a level of interest rates in the fourth
quarter that you assumed in this forecast?
MR. PRELL. It isn't necessary that there be a precise
course. We put in a smooth trajectory that moves the federal funds
rate, for example, into the 8 to 8-1/2 percent range by next spring.
MR. GUFFEY.

In the first quarter?

MR. PRELL. We would be approaching it by the end of the
first quarter.
I don't want to be too precise about this.
If there
were flatness over the next few months and more increase later on, we
wouldn't be able to distinguish the economic effects in the forecast
for the period as a whole. But we do have a gradual rise here.
MR. GUFFEY. My last question has to do with your comment
about inflation picking up--I guess that's in 1988, if I read the
Greenbook numbers correctly, because your forecast has it actually
declining in the last quarter of this year, as measured by the fixedweight index or the deflator itself.

9/22/87

MR. PRELL. There's a difference in our forecast between the
In the fixed-weight index,
deflator and the fixed-weight GNP measure.
we have 3-1/4 percent for the third quarter and 3-1/2 percent for the
fourth, whereas there's a deceleration from 3-1/4 percent in the third
quarter down to 2-1/2 percent in the deflator. The difference there
is the peculiarities of weighting shifts that occur in the GNP
deflator; and the decrease in oil imports, which have a relatively low
weight in the deflator, actually tends to depress the GNP deflator
relative to the fixed-weight measure. Basically, we have a fairly
steady second-half inflation, as we see it; it's lower than in the
first half, in large part because of lower food and energy price
inflation.
MR. GUFFEY. So is it fair to say, Mike, that inflation in
the second half, and particularly in the last quarter and maybe even
into the first quarter of 1988, is reasonably stable in your forecast?
In some underlying sense, there is a fairly
MR. PRELL.
stable picture between the first and second half, but that's in this
game of stripping away food and energy prices, which obviously are
affected by special nonmacroeconomic influences in the short run. Of
course, there are peculiar things that affect other sectors, as well.
But, basically we have a fairly stabilized underlying trend, and some
increase next year in the rate of price inflation.
MR. PARRY. But the underlying inflation must pick up quite a
bit, because you have a marked acceleration in labor costs.
MR. PRELL. Some people would take that as an indicator of
the underlying rate of inflation. And yes, we do, as compensation
In that sense, the underlying
accelerates significantly next year.
trend is picking up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of the comments have been
My feeling the last
directed at particular parts of the forecast.
time was that the economy would be somewhat stronger than the
Greenbook was projecting, and the staff, indeed, have moved their
forecast in that general direction. So, we have very little quarrel
with what they have done. We think the main driving force is going to
be an improvement in net exports of goods and services; and plant and
equipment expenditures, particularly in the equipment area, also
If we were to guess, we would say the
provide a pretty good push.
But really
risk might still be that the forecast is a little low.
what bothers us, I guess, is the feeling that they might be right on
In saying that, I'm focusing on the inflation rate
this forecast.
that they are projecting for next year--when it goes up to 4-1/2
I think we ought to be able to do better than that for next
percent.
A 4-1/2
year, and we ought to target something less than that.
percent inflation rate could easily become 5 percent; and 5 percent is
So, rather than thinking they
not really reasonable price stability.
may have overestimated, we're afraid that they might be about right
and have come up with some results that are a little too strong on the
price side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

9/22/87

-10-

MS. SEGER. Yes, I just have a couple of questions that are
tied to a few matters that we discussed yesterday at pre-FOMC
briefings. These involve whether or not we have completely factored
in the rise in interest rates that we have already seen, plus wholly
factored in the increases that we think are yet to come.
In
particular, on housing starts, which as of last month were at a 1.6
million annual rate, we know that there are problems with high vacancy
rates in the multifamily area, at least in some parts of the country.
The incentives built into that kind of housing have been shifted
greatly by the Tax Reform Act. As for single family starts, at least
some people say they are sensitive to interest rate changes.
I guess
I have a hard time believing that for 1988 starts will not fall below
1-1/2 million.
I hope they don't, but I am sort of skittish about
this.
MR. PRELL.
It's purely conjectural at this point.
Various
econometric models would suggest that, over the relevant horizon here,
you are probably dealing with an interest rate elasticity of about 1.
We have a rise in mortgage rates from around 10-1/2 percent to
something in the high 11's, [an increase of] roughly 10 percent. We
have roughly a 10 percent decline in housing starts, from 1.6 million
to something around the 1.45 million area. In that sense, it's well
in line with the historical patterns. The other thing that provides
some comfort-MS. SEGER.
multifamily?

Is that true for both the single family and the

MR. PRELL. Well, I'm looking at it in the aggregate:
clearly, they are both to be affected by the change in interest rates.
Looking at it from another angle, mortgage rates are back up to levels
we saw in 1985, and we had considerably higher housing starts then--in
the 1.7 million area. Now, we've probably gone through some catchup
period in home ownership, but that number seems fairly reasonable to
us, looking at the response we've seen just so far to the substantial
increase in mortgage rates.
It hasn't made the market fall apart
entirely. We may not have it quite right, but this is a stab at what
we think is a normal response.
MS. SEGER. What if it just means that the lags are longer?
Maybe we haven't even seen the full impact of the spike we had back in
April or May, which was quite dramatic.
MR. PRELL. Well, clearly, we felt that we would be seeing
much of that response by this summer, before we even elevated our rate
forecast beyond what we had earlier. We only had a modest further
decline below the 1.6 million level in our previous forecast. As we
have taken the mortgage rates up more, we have lowered the housing
starts further.
It's very difficult to say. As you noted, there are
other influences at work, and there may still be some adjustment to
the tax law changes. There are still some problems of high vacancy
rates in home rental properties in various parts of the country.
Again, when you look at house prices, there too, the evidence suggests
that, at least in many markets, there's still a pretty robust demand
at these interest rates. And there is just no anecdotal evidence to
suggest to us that we are way off the mark in our assessment of demand
positions. Even the survey information suggests pretty high numbers

-11-

9/22/87

of people whose attitude is that this is a good time to buy a house.
That may be surprising, but that seems to be the pattern.
MS. SEGER. The other question I have again ties into
yesterday's briefing, and relates to our heavy reliance on the trade
turnaround to produce a good 1988. If I'm reading the numbers right,
about half of the real GNP growth, fourth quarter of 1987 to fourth
quarter of 1988, is expected to come from improvement in net exports.
Again, I think it's very, very difficult to get a $54 billion increase
in exports in one year--namely, this year--and then tack on $57
billion next year. That's just a lot to produce.
MR. PRELL. One of the main comforts we can find in the
numbers is that it looks to us like the trend in real exports has been
quite strong thus far. And based on our exchange rate projection and
the assumption that there are probably still lags in the order and
delivery process, that means that some of the improvement in exports
is still not fully evident. We think that we are forecasting,
basically, a continuation of patterns that are already perceptible.
In some respects, I think a greater concern, given our outlook, would
be that we get both the improvement in the net exports somehow, and
also get greater domestic demand growth. That puts still greater
pressures on resources than some people would have thought in the
past. We have two years now, in our forecast, of consumption growth
that is really subpar historically. So, in a sense, we have these
things put together in a way that gives you a rather smooth adjustment
to the picture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I don't have a question.
comment on the outlook.
minutes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.

I would just like to

Well, if you'll hold that for just a few

MR. PARRY. I just want to raise an issue to shed a little
light on this concern about a slowing in the interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy, such as housing. It seems to me that with the
economy operating where it is, in terms of employment at least, if we
did not get that slowing in the interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy at the same time we are going to get the strength in net
exports, we would have a real problem. So, one can be concerned about
the implications for housing or for other sectors but the picture
doesn't really fit together very well if you don't get that kind of
slump. And I would assume that's the problem.
MR. PRELL. That's what characterizes our outlook and I think
some of the comments around the table suggest that there is a hopeful
aspect of this--that everything falls nicely into place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Mike, if this linkage between dollar weakness
and inflationary expectations isn't broken, and you weren't able, for
example, to achieve over the forecast period the 10 percent annual of
decline in the dollar--let's just say that that becomes impossible-how would that affect the forecast in a broad sense? In other words,

-12-

9/22/87

if you couldn't achieve some of the external adjustment through the
foreign exchange price mechanism-MR. PRELL.

In other words, the dollar--I wasn't clear what--

MR. MELZER. What I'm saying is that the box we are in right
now is that, as a practical matter, if we tolerate that dollar
decline, it kicks off inflationary expectations.
So, let's say that
How would that affect
you just assumed that the dollar was stable.
the forecast?
MR. TRUMAN.
It depends a bit, I think, on what else is going
on at the same time. Much of the impetus to net exports from the
dollar, at least as far as this forecast horizon goes, is what is
already in train. Less than half of the increase next year in net
exports is directly traceable to a further projected dollar decline.
But, presumably, if you didn't have the dollar decline, then you
So you
wouldn't have the same kind of pressures on interest rates.
would have less pressures in the interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy.
So you have some compensation in terms of the economy's
operation as a whole which, in turn, would tend to feed back again on
the net exports, so you would have less improvement in net exports
too.
But, there is a certain sense of [unintelligible] that is
basically the way we think about this.
MR. HELLER. Wait a minute. You say that interest rates
wouldn't be rising; but you can also come up with that scenario of a
continued stable dollar that comes about because we are raising
interest rates in this country. Then, how would your answer be
different?
MR. TRUMAN. Under that scenario, maybe instead of a $50
billion change in net exports you would have something like $20-$25
billion.
So you would have less than 1 percent of GNP in this
forecast, and that's well within the error. Mike put it that way in
the overall forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I guess that was sort of what I was going to
ask. One other question I had in mind: I'm not a big "aggregates
person" but, in line with this whole issue of aggregate demand, it
strikes me that this recent uptick in interest rates is going to have
a further damping effect on the aggregates.
I think that is fine, but
at some point, you have to ask how much aggregate demand is plausible
in that scenario.
I think you are restraining it. You have to come
up with some fairly implausible velocity growth numbers to get
aggregate demand outside of a range that would present a real breakout
in overall aggregate demand.
It seems to me that we have it pretty
well cornered here.
In the long run, you could have a couple of bad
quarters under that scenario but, given these recent moves in interest
rates, what are we projecting on the broader monetary aggregates?
MR. KOHN. As you saw in the Bluebook, we are projecting that
the rise in interest rates, which is not all that large but is
significant, would damp growth in M2 over coming months.

MR. JOHNSON.

You have about 4 percent.

9/22/87

-13

MR. KOHN. If you abstract from September and you just have
Now we have this August-to-December target. And
the fourth quarter.
then for next year, under the assumption of further moderate increases
in interest rates, we would have M2 growth in the 4-1/2 to 5 percent
kind of range.
That implies-MR. JOHNSON.

Why would it pick up with higher interest

rates?
MR. KOHN. Well, first of all, the rate of increase in
And there are some things
interest rates may not be quite as great.
that seem to have been depressing M2 growth that we really couldn't
account for this year and we are assuming that they won't be quite as
active next year. For example, the IRAs won't be around, and that
might boost M2 growth a little; so, we have this assumed pickup in
If that came about, with our GNP projection that
growth next year.
would imply about a 2 percent increase in velocity. But, remember,
we're damping domestic demand here; we have slower domestic demand
than we have GNP, so if you look at velocity from that perspective, it
wouldn't be quite as big an increase. That's not all that large an
increase-MR. JOHNSON. That's sort of what I'm getting at.
it cornered a little, it seems to me.

You have

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I raise a question about what the
GNP demand numbers would really look like if we were to recognize that
the way we calculate the numbers is a function of the fact that we are
I was looking at the fixed-weight GNP
using 1982 as a base period?
deflator versus the GNP deflator, which tends to pick up a difference
in the mix, which is essentially an issue of how far we are from the
If I were to deflate the nominal GNP
base period to a large extent.
by the fixed-weight index--which is roughly, but not quite, the
equivalent of moving the 1982 base up to 1987, the current year--it
seems as though we're getting a good deal less in the way of real
growth. Let's take a case in point: the fourth-quarter over fourthquarter change this year and next, with respect to the difference
between the GNP deflator and the fixed-weight deflator, is .3 and .4,
respectively. Assuming that the nominal is the same, that would
reduce real growth. The problem I have with that, however, is that
I'm not sure whether the model is generating the real first and then,
by implication, the nominal, or vice versa. How do you look at that
issue?
In other words, how do we interpret that?
MR. PRELL. Well, it's difficult to dissect this precisely,
but I think we are dealing mostly with a process that looks at the
real first, infers from that the pressures on resources, which then
feed back through a short-run Phillips curve relation to the wage and
price side. That's a stylistic characterization.
In 1982, oil
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be very specific.
prices, and overall import prices, were much higher than they are now.
Therefore, a rise in oil imports on the import side of real GNP is a
I
larger subtraction with 1982 as a base than with 1987 as a base.
guess I'm really asking if you were to restructure the total system so
that say, 1987, equals 100 instead of 1982, how would your real GNP
look in that context?

9/22/87

-14-

Mr. TRUMAN. These two years, 1987 and 1988, oil imports
don't rise very much. You may get some effect on GNP to the extent
that you don't have the same rise in domestic production of oil or
energy, measured in 1982 dollars. But there's not much subtraction,
even in our forecast, from higher oil imports from fourth quarter to
fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Also, assume that the overall non-oil
import price deflator is significantly lower than it was in 1982,
which, as I recall-MR. TRUMAN. If I remember, it was just about 100; maybe I'm
off by a few points.
The non-oil price deflator was running about
100.3 in the second quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Which means that it's a relative issue
that the domestic thing is [unintelligible]?
MR. TRUMAN.

Well, you would get some impact, I guess, from

that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I raise the issue is that
it's becoming a very crucial question, not of statistics, but for real
evaluation here. We are trying to determine to what extent the net
exports are the crucial issue. We are getting some signals out of the
industrial production index. That is basically saying, if anything,
that the cutting edge of the net export figures is much sharper, so to
speak--much more positive--than the GNP numbers are implying, because
we are getting extraordinary strength in industrial production. Do
you read it that way?
Or is that-MR. TRUMAN. I don't know about extraordinary; maybe some of
the comments earlier suggested that.
One problem is that, to the
extent you get this going on, you're producing things which, of
course, you're shipping abroad; and you don't see it showing up in
consumption and things like that. And that is part of the adjustment
that President Boehne was talking about.
You are not going through a
recession actually, but you are going through a much slower growth in
[economic] welfare, as measured in current consumption.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could be building inventories for
export, which affects the industrial production index but doesn't show
up in the trade figures.
I think implicit in all of this is that if
the industrial production index stalls, it would raise some serious
questions about this hypothesis.
MR. PRELL. I might just note that, while industrial
production is growing much more rapidly than we think GNP is growing
this quarter--and the IP numbers must be regarded as still quite
tentative--that growth is well within the range of variation in that
relationship. And for the year as a whole, the gap is rather
moderate. So, at this point, we don't see a big disparity in the
signals coming from the industrial sector or industrial production
estimates and GNP, particularly when you start [unintelligible] GNP
goods output that most reasonably can be compared in industrial
production.

9/22/87

-15-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Mike before we
go to the general comments? May I request that, in the general
comments, you address one question that is bothering me particularly,
I would appreciate
and I think it's really crucial to the outlook.
hearing any views you have on how to interpret the rise in long-term
Treasury rates--that is, to what extent would you disaggregate the
rise into inflation premiums, or expectations instability premiums,
By expectations instability
and what part do you perceive to be real?
premiums I mean expectations that bond prices fluctuate so
dramatically that, in fact, you're imposing a premium on the overall
It strikes me that much of what we are viewing out
interest rate.
there, and how we view it, is going to depend to a very substantial
extent on how we evaluate the various components in what is a fairly
I think President
significant rise in the underlying bond rate.
Boehne wanted to open it up?
MR. BOEHNE. Let me just comment on the Philadelphia region.
It continues to perform well above the national experience. New
Jersey, Delaware and eastern Pennsylvania continue to have very low
unemployment rates. As a matter of fact, I think that if there's a
drag on growth in these areas, it is that there's a labor shortage and
Even the
business firms simply can't keep up with production needs.
traditional manufacturing areas in our District are showing
improvement, and unemployment is coming down in those areas as well.
Both residential and nonresidential construction are very strong;
retail sales are healthy, except for autos; loan growth is running
about twice the national average; and real estate lending is growing
about three times the national average. So, we have a rather bullish
region that is being constrained mostly I think not by a lack of
aggregate demand, but labor. The concern that I have picked up in the
last couple of months, mostly in the business community, is a concern
about inflation. And I think it's being triggered by these labor
If you
shortages that people report, particularly at the entry level.
look at the help wanted ads in the newspapers, and just the help
wanted signs generally, they are at pretty high levels. While wage
increases have been reasonably moderate, I think a lot of people in
the business community are concerned that this is just the kind of
situation that triggers a wage-price kind of spiral.
On the national scene, I think the Greenbook numbers look
In terms of the risks--and I am being influenced by
reasonably good.
where I sit and the people that I talk to--it seems to me that
whatever risks there were of having too weak an economy, or even a
recession out through 1988, have shrunk considerably. I see the risks
now on the side of triggering some kind of a wage-price increase.
There is one point, however, in the outlook that I think bears
mentioning, and that is that both the fundamentals and the trade
situation indicate a continuing downward movement in the value of the
dollar. Indeed, this is reflected in the Greenbook forecast. We are
But
in this "inflation/dollar" box, as you aptly put it a moment ago.
I think that fundamentals have a way of winning out, even over central
bank policy. So, as we deal with these bouts of a falling dollar and
falling bond prices, we have to bear in mind that this is really what
we expect. We expect the dollar to go down. And I think we have to
be careful that, as we deal with these episodes, we don't lose track
of the fundamentals. That leads to the question that you posed, which
is a very good question. I don't have an answer, but I have a
suspicion that more of this increase in long rates is real than it is

9/22/87

inflation.
I say that because, if you look realistically at the fact
that the U.S. is going to have to import lots of capital over the next
several years, as we have the last several years, I think that calls
for a certain premium over foreign interest rates. What we may be
seeing here is some adjustment to what it takes to attract the kinds
of funds that we need.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, with regard to your question about
real rates, we look at it in two different ways: first of all, through
a model approach and, secondly, at the survey that is referred to as
the Hoey survey from Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Both of these give us a
similar reading with regard to your question. In both of those
instances, much of the increase in nominal rates has produced an
increase in real rates.
For example, the Hoey survey shows an
increase of only two tenths of 1 percent in inflationary expectations
between January and June.
So, in effect, what we got was a very sharp
increase in real bond rates when we saw bond rates increase so sharply
in the April-May period. This has a big impact on our forecast--and I
think also on the Board staff's forecast--because it does damp the
growth of the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy.
In some
respects, I draw a little comfort from that because we also have
strong growth in the net export area and, in effect, it is the
weakness in the interest-sensitive sectors that makes room for this
growth in net exports.
With regard to our forecast more generally, we estimate that
real growth will average between 2-1/2 and 3 percent over the forecast
period. We have actually shaded slightly our expectations with regard
to net exports, but we still have real net exports contributing
approximately 1 percent to real GNP growth, both this year and next
year. Also, and here we have somewhat of a difference with the
Greenbook forecast, we have greater strength in consumption in next
year's economy than the Greenbook forecast. That has something to do
with differences about the growth of real disposable income, if I'm
not mistaken. We are concerned about the inflationary impact, not
only of our own forecast but also that of the Greenbook. As you know,
in the Greenbook forecast, inflation averages 4 to 4-1/2 percent, at
least in terms of the fixed-weight deflator; and we are not much
different from that.
But what concerns us is that, in some respects,
the composition of that inflation in our forecast changes rather
dramatically. We are somewhere in a zone close to full employment, at
least according to our staff work, and thus, in our forecast and in
the Greenbook forecast as well, wage costs begin to accelerate. To
the extent that the inflation in 1988 is more a function of what I
would characterize as underlying factors and less a function of some
of the temporary factors that we drew on this year, we think that the
inflation problem will become more persistent.
Finally, I do think
that in some important respects, the risks to the outlook are on the
upside with regard to real growth and perhaps in inflation as well.
My primary concern here centers around government spending because I
think that the assumption of the $25 billion cut used both by us and
in the Greenbook may not materialize. And if it does not, then we are
likely to get more strength from that sector than is included in our
forecast.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Mr. Corrigan.

9/22/87

-17-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the forecast, it has
been true for some time, and it's still true, that our staff work in
New York has the same overall result as the Greenbook forecast but
with an unchanged dollar and a slightly smaller adjustment in real net
exports because we have a scattering of stronger elements of domestic
demand, including inventories.
So, while the aggregate numbers look
very'much the same, what lies beneath them is quite different insofar
as the dollar and real net exports.
Our inflation outlook, despite
the fact that we have the dollar stable, is about the same, or maybe a
shade worse than the Greenbook.
Mr. Boehne raised a question earlier in the discussion about
this overall adjustment process that I'd like to comment on just
briefly, and then turn back. I think, Ed, your question was: can it
work?
Or is the scale of the problem so big that you can't get from
here to there?
When you look at the big three countries--the United
States, Germany, and Japan--the fact of the matter is that by
conventional standards the adjustment is well underway in the sense
that for both 1986 and 1987, and in our forecast for 1988, the growth
in domestic demand in both Germany and Japan is stronger to
In the
significantly stronger than is the growth in their own GNP.
case of the United States, we still had domestic demand stronger than
GNP in 1986; but in 1987, and in our forecast and yours as well-although there are some differences there--you get a widening out such
that GNP growth in the United States is something like a percentage
point greater than growth in domestic demand.
It is true that overall
growth in Germany and Japan is perhaps lower than one would like to
see.
But, the dynamics of the adjustment have set in, in what I think
is not an inconsequential way. Again, the evidence in all three of
the major countries is basically working the way the textbook says it
should. The problem, to some extent, is what Ed touched on earlier,
and that is the scale of the adjustment that we are talking about and
the scale of adjustment that is needed. When you look at it in terms
of the behavior of exports--and this is all relevant to the outlook,
I'm just getting there in a roundabout way--we all know these numbers
are lousy, but the numbers for July 1987 versus July 1986 indicate
that U.S. export growth really has been, I think we can say, almost
spectacular. And it's not confined any more to a handful of products
or a handful of countries; it's pretty much across the board,
including very sharp increases in exports even to Japan. The strength
of those export numbers in the context of the overall dynamics of the
adjustment raises a couple of questions in my mind. What's offsetting
it in part, of course, is imports. Our own imports are still very,
very strong, across the board, with few exceptions--perhaps lumber.
But, by and large, those imports are still humming and a lot of that
is price. Then again, how many J curves do we have to see in terms of
import prices?
That's one of the reasons why I like our forecast--at
least right now--better than I like the Board staff's forecast. But,
when you put it together, it leads me to one or two possible
conclusions. One is that there really is something systematically
wrong with the trade numbers, at least as we see them month to month.
The second is that the domestic economy is, in fact, stronger than we
think it is, or at least than the conventional measures are telling
us. My hunch is that probably both of those things are true: that the
trade numbers are messed up and that the domestic economy, if
anything, is actually a bit stronger than we think it is.

-18-

9/22/87

Partly for the reasons I've just noted, I would certainly
join those who have already said that, in looking at the outlook at
this point in time, the risks are decidedly on the upside.
I find it
hard at this point to ignore the galaxy of numbers in the business
fixed investment areas, industrial production, orders, and labor
markets.
They all seem to be to pointing in that direction, in a
context in which I really do believe that the margin of upside error,
if you will, is really quite slim.
I think you can now make a pretty
good case that actual GNP is brushing up against potential GNP; labor
markets, no matter how you look at them, have to be at least near the
danger zone; and I think it's not hard to visualize at least some
selective bottlenecks beginning to develop, for example, in nondurable
goods areas where we already see that raw and intermediate material
prices are rising. Now, we could get a little help. There is a faint
chance, at least in the near term, that the oil price pressures could
be downward rather than upward.
That would be temporary, but that's
possibly a favorable straw in the wind. But when I put it all
together, it seems to me that both the global picture as well as what
we can derive from our own situation statistically lead me to view
that the risks are on the upside.
Now, on your question about the long-term Treasury rate, Mr.
Chairman, I thought we were framing the question a little differently
than maybe you were. I was prepared to answer this question: what do
I think is driving the rate up?
Is that what you are asking?
I'm not
sure it is the same.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point is that, implicit in that, is
the breakdown of the components.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, the breakdown of the
components to the increment and the breakdown of the components to the
level may not be the same, though. But, let me try to answer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do both.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it were the increment in the
nominal rate, which is the question I thought you were asking, I would
put virtually none of that on volatility, which was the middle factor
you raised. I would put the greater weight on inflation-related
considerations, including the exchange rate of the dollar. But, I do
think there is something real there too; I can't be very precise as to
what. But I'd give zero weight on volatility, certainly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So this is your increment?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
can't be more volatile?

Yes.

It has been volatile; therefore, it

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, but I would say that while I
think the bulk of the increment has been driven by these inflationrelated things, I also would say that the level of the real interest
rate does come out higher. Maybe, just maybe, that's because there is
something happening in terms of the marginal productivity of capital.
It's possible.

9/22/87

-19-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
this time.

But, it's almost impossible to tell at

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, I agree.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard to our view of the economy and
conditions in the District, I think what we are seeing is quite
In general,
consistent with something like the Greenbook forecast.

economic conditions in the District are quite good and have been
improving consistently for some time. The only areas I hear any
reservations about have to do with residential construction, where
reports have tended to be mediocre, and with loan demand, where

bankers say there is no demand to speak of.

Labor markets have

tightened up a good deal, again, in general;

but what is striking in

that regard is that there is not any discernible increase in the rate
at which salaries and wages are rising as yet. Apparently, at this
point, people are just taking the strategy of not filling jobs or
filling them more slowly than they otherwise would in this
environment. With regard to your question about interest rates and so
forth, I guess I would not have a definitive answer either, but I
would start with the dollar. It seems to me that we sometimes talk as
if all declines in the dollar are equal. I don't start with that
position. It seems to me that it matters a heck of a lot why the
dollar is falling. For example, if we had fiscal policy in a position
where budget deficits were declining in a sustainable way over time, I
might predict that real interest rates were going to decline
sustainably and, therefore, the dollar might decline in that
environment. I would say that would be fine; but I don't think that
characterizes the current situation at all. I think we are in a
situation where, in fact, the adjustment is unlikely to come through
fiscal policy. Therefore, particularly in light of the June and July
trade numbers, there are a lot of market participants who seem to feel
the adjustment is going to have to come through other policy steps in
this country. I think this is kind of what Mike and Ted Truman were
talking about earlier--if you are going to get continued improvement
in trade, that requires higher real rates here to damp residential
construction, nonresidential construction, and so forth.
Alternatively, of course, we may at some point get into the situation
where we are not prepared for rates to rise in that fashion so that we
sort of arrest the improvement in trade; that is, we get stronger
domestic demand and stall the improvement in the trade balance. I
think that's the kind of box we are in as long as we have the fiscal
policy outlook that we have. That situation seems to me to be
discouraging, as it has been for quite some time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would start with
the region, by repeating what I said last month--that economic
conditions in the Sixth District are really booming and seem to be
strengthening. The reports that we're getting from our directors and
from other business people are extremely positive at this point and
very optimistic. And, it's fairly much across the board. For
example, we are seeing increasing evidence of improvement in the
tradeable goods areas, certainly in textiles. We are also getting
improvement in apparel production. Paper production and chemicals

9/22/87

also are doing a lot better, and I might say that paper and textile
mills and factories are going just flat out at the moment in our area.
We are now hearing about labor shortages, particularly in the textile
areas, and there are some bottlenecks beginning to appear. For
example, we have had reports of shipments of carpeting being delayed
because of labor shortages.
But having said that, at this point at
least, we have not seen yet any pressures on wages, since labor seems
to be moving from the slower-growth areas into the areas that are
picking up.
So far, the wage pressures have not followed, at least
immediately, from the labor shortages. Even on the commercial
structures side, we are seeing excess supplies of space being absorbed
more rapidly, and that is particularly true in the fast growing states
of Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee.
Construction figures are up also.
We are not only getting absorption; we are getting more construction,
particularly in the hospital and warehouse operations.
Rising
mortgage rates have cut into the housing sector, particularly in the
multifamily area.
In Louisiana--I would single that out because we've
had nothing but bad news for a couple of years in that area--we are
beginning now to get some good news, marginally better news.
The rig
count is up and all of the oil and gas support services are beginning
to come back on line.
Turning to the general forecast, our forecast for the last
half of this year has strengthened a bit in comparison to what we had
a month ago.
Consumption seems to have picked up somewhat more than
we had anticipated and we are seeing investment respond to higher
plant utilization. Looking ahead to 1988, we are marginally lower
than we were at the time of the last meeting, and just about in line
with the Greenbook forecast. The only difference we have with the
staff forecast is in the area of consumption which, of course, I've
mentioned a couple of times before. And, as I indicated earlier, we
don't see quite the level of improvement in net exports that the staff
is seeing. But when you net that out, we are pretty close for 1988.
Also, I think it is significant, as far as our forecast is concerned,
that we did not build into the forecast any tightening of monetary
policy, which apparently the staff did.
On the price side, again,
we're pretty close to the Greenbook forecast. So, when I put all this
together, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the forecast is reasonable
and even a little optimistic.
And I would agree with those who would
put the risk on the upside rather than the downside.
Now with respect to your question, I think there are probably
ingredients of both. At least from where I sit, there is some
inflationary expectation in these higher rates, but to a large extent,
I think they are real. But having said that, it seems to me from the
few market participants that I've talked to, that there may be an
element of irrationality in the way the market is reacting. The
reactions to even minor declines in the value of the dollar are
producing higher rates than might have been called for.
I don't know
how to assess this, really; I'm just talking to a few people in the
market who are sitting in Atlanta and who have made this comment.
They are saying, and I think there may be some validity to it, that
there may be some over-reaction, although some other factors are
involved. Now, if that's true, I think the policy implication is upon
us, because they are going to be reacting perhaps adversely to the
trade numbers for August, which probably will not be very good. We
have just done some work which would indicate that the seasonal
factors that are present in July are probably present in August as

-21-

9/22/87

well.
So, we may get some equally bad trade numbers. And, as the
Gramm-Rudman fiscal policy debate goes on in the Congress and we don't
get anything out of that, I think there's going to be a reaction in
It seems to me that the market is looking
the bond market as well.
for every snippet of bad news that it can find and reacting to that,
rather than trying to find something positive in the scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From a national
perspective, our forecast is really very consistent with the staff
I would say that we have been a little higher throughout
forecast.
the year and, therefore, the last revision by the staff brings it
pretty much in line with our perspective.
With regard to the District, whereas we have been a laggard
throughout this recovery, certainly, at this point we have turned
around. The conditions and the trends in the District I think are
very favorable. Employment, for example, is very consistent with the
Our unemployment is still higher than the national
national numbers.
average, but I do think the employment numbers are coming along quite
well.
I thought I would comment on just a couple of industries that
are important to the District that I think are going through an
First, the steel industry is a
interesting and positive adjustment.
very dramatic example of a shift that is taking place in a very
We have had in the Midwest just a whole host of
troubled industry:
closings, bankruptcies, and near-bankruptcies, and, in addition, some
shutdown of capacity; but those who have survived and those who have
put some money into the plants, and have modernized them, certainly at
this point are doing very well. The decline in the dollar and the
import restrictions have helped tremendously, but the demand for
domestic steel is strong, and as a consequence, the plants are
operating at a much better rate. The demand for steel products seems
to be quite broadly based, and now is as strong as any time since
In getting to a point you raised earlier, many of these
1981.
products are on allocation; the delivery times are clearly moving up
from eight to nine weeks, so there is a slowdown in the delivery
The service centers, as I understand it, are trying to build
process.
inventories but are not able to do it; inventory is going out as fast
as it comes in. And, not surprisingly, there is something of a price
increase going on in the industry and the price increases for the
first time in this cycle may really seem to be sticking. A tangible
sign of an improvement in this industry in the last six or eight
months is that we've had an announcement of two new steel plants in
Indiana: one a joint venture with a Japanese company, which is quite a
significant installation; and the second a stand-alone facility.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
integrated plants?

These are both

[unintelligible]

MR. KEEHN. No, the Japanese one, I think, is fairly
specialized; but they are brand new plants centrally located.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
slab?

Cold-rolling operations?

Or importing

-22-

9/22/87

MR. KEEHN. No, not importing--they are taking slab out of a
Chicago mill and cold-rolling it in Indiana.
So, I do think it's an
industry that has gone through a tremendous transition. The other
industry that is important to the District is heavy duty trucks--Class
8 trucks.
Sales this year, I think, are going to be 13 or 14 percent
higher than last year, and the outlook for next year is another
increase of 3 to 4 percent. These will go up to 125,000 to 130,000
units and this is just a lot higher than what we were experiencing
three or four years ago.
There is still a lot of capacity in that
manufacturing process but, nevertheless, this is a business that seems
to have gotten better. Pricing is still tough, however.
Nevertheless, from the District's perspective, it has been good.
Let me say a quick word about agriculture by adding a little
to what I've said in the past: namely, conditions seem to have
stabilized, albeit at low levels. Land values are beginning to move;
transactions are higher, and in a couple of instances, significantly
higher. But, the point I'd make on what I find to be a new
development is that general business conditions, not just agricultural
conditions, in the area of Iowa seem to be better.
Turning to the price issue, I must say that I find this a
very, very difficult read.
I keep hearing about price increases; I've
commented on steel, but specialized chemicals, paper, paper products,
brass, and copper all seem to be moving up in price.
They don't show
up yet in the CPI numbers. The competitive conditions for finished
products are very tough and people are being squeezed on margins; but,
at some point, you just have to think that this is going to poke
through. On the wage side, I'd add to the comments that we are
hearing about shortages. We were up in Michigan the other day doing a
presentation and some of the people were commenting that they just
can't get enough people to work in some of the operations there.
I
would think that, at some point, we are going to see something of an
increase on wage rates that's beyond what we've had over the last year
or so.

Turning then, Mr. Chairman, to your question on long-term
rates, which is a very, very key issue, like Jerry, I think it is
awfully hard to analyze each part. But, I think that the underlying
rate of economic activity here is pretty good; it may be a little more
rapid than we expected and, therefore, there may be some real pressure
on rates. Also--and I can't analyze what part equals what--on the
inflation side, I think there is growing skepticism out there; there
is concern about inflation, and something in the rate increase that we
have experienced certainly has to relate to that. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I guess it's somebody's turn to
say something not quite as positive as we have been hearing. I guess
it falls to my lot, being from the Eleventh District. I would
characterize our economy in the Eleventh District as still somewhat
sluggish and a little fragile, although there have been tentative
signs of improvement. Businesses around the District that serve a
national or international market all seem to be saying that they are
seeing some improvement. These would be primarily in electronics,
livestock, chemicals, and defense. There is a little more optimism
there. The businesses that serve their own local area or region,

-23-

9/22/87

though, say that their business remains flat; they really have not
seen any signs of improvement. Obviously, there is a correlation in
attitudes and sentiment related to oil prices, since oil is so
important in our region. With the improvement there, and with the
increase in the oil rig count and additional activity going on, there
is more optimism. There is a little more activity in related
businesses; all but construction-related manufacturing are growing.
Agriculture is stabilizing, and cotton and livestock farming are doing
fairly well. Our retail sales remain fairly flat. We continue to
worry somewhat about the condition of our financial institutions.
Pick up a newspaper and you'll still find reports of foreclosures and
bankruptcies continuing. Last week in Austin, which was really the
bright spot for the last several years in Texas, there was the posting
of a foreclosure of a fairly major hotel-office complex that was
pretty new. There were foreclosure postings in Houston, also, of two
or three fairly well known good projects. This doesn't mean the
foreclosures will actually occur; the postings could be part of a
renegotiation. Nevertheless, it is upsetting. We saw a report last
week that Dallas had lost 40,000 jobs over the last year. That seems
awfully high to me, but those are the kinds of reports we are hearing.
Though we hope that we are on a comeback trail--and, if oil prices
hold, I think we will be--I don't think we have seen the bottom of our
commercial real estate problem. I think we probably are going to be
worrying about that for at least two years, possibly three, before we
can work through that.
On the national picture, and possibly I'm somewhat
influenced by our own Eleventh District, we would come out--looking
out through the rest of this year to 1988--a little below where the
Greenbook is this time. Although we moved our own forecast up
slightly, we didn't come as far as the Board staff has in the
Greenbook. On the long-term rate, I don't know that I have any
particularly useful insight into that except that the evident concern
about inflation does not seem to be quite as deep among the people
I've talked to; certainly, in our District, there is not really
[unintelligible] to the problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm afraid I owe some apology for
having discussed my thoughts on the state of the U.S. economy at a
time you wanted to consign to questions. So let me just address that
last question you posed as best I can, which is not very well. I
think you have to look at the negative correlation we have had between
exchange rates and long-term interest rates since the fall of 1986 to
get an answer to that. There are three possible explanations: one is
that this has resulted from still a third factor, which is the rise in
inflationary expectations. A second--and maybe the most popular
explanation of it--is that this decline in the dollar rate has been a
decline in the real rate because of the persistently larger trade
deficits that we have had, and fears that this will be reflected in
higher import prices, which also will spill over into the prices of
goods from those industries that compete with imports. And the third
explanation is that the rates may be high because the market is
responding to what it thinks we are likely to do; but if that is the
case, tightening would clearly be inappropriate because that would
mean, I think, that a large part of that was real. My impression has
been that there really hasn't been that much response at the long end

-24-

9/22/87

to actions that we have taken. For example, the response to what I
thought was a very strong statement via the discount rate increase and
also the raising of the borrowed reserve level was big at the short
end; but we didn't really have all that much response at the long end.
I
So, that suggests to me that some part of this is probably real.
guess I would end up with a view along the lines that Jerry first
outlined, and some others have endorsed, that part of this is real and
I don't know what the mix
part of this is inflationary expectations.
But, I believe both factors are at
is and I guess nobody else does.
work, I'm afraid.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

I wish we knew the answer to this.

I do too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Hendricks.

We
MR. HENDRICKS.
I like the comments made by Ed Boehne.
are experiencing a bullish feeling with respect to business in our
I'm really not sure how much significance, if any, should
District.
be placed on this observation but, at a recent meeting of our
directors we did notice for the first time, perhaps, some concern
about risk on longer-term loans, and some adjustments in their basic
lending policies, at the margin.
With respect to our outlook, it's quite similar to the
staff's Greenbook forecast, but we still continue to see the consumer
in a stronger spending pattern than indicated by the staff. We also
see housing as less of a drag on the economy. We don't believe
exports are going to be quite as strong as projected in the Greenbook.
Despite the sectoral differences in the projections, we come out at
about the same place, with real GNP growing at about the same pace as
the forecast in the Greenbook. We would see that, however, being
accompanied by some pretty strong wage and price pressures.
With respect to your question, I don't know how much I can
add on that, but recent changes in the rates do appear to us to be
related to the rate of interest [needed] to attract foreign savings.
We believe that some of the earlier increases that we saw might have
been tied more closely to inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. First of all, I would say that over the last
year or so, performance in our District has been somewhat stronger
than the national average. Employment has been about in line, retail
sales somewhat stronger, and I guess the most notable area of strength
has been construction, both residential and nonresidential.
Over the
last couple of months, I would say things have slowed a bit,
relatively speaking. We haven't kept pace with the employment gains
nationally either in non-ag employment or manufacturing employment.
Retail sales have held up well, relatively speaking. Residential
construction is in line with the national averages and nonresidential
is still somewhat stronger but growing at a much slower pace than it
was. Anecdotally, we've picked up some evidence of the same thing
that has been mentioned around the table today in terms of labor
shortages.
There was a company with about 90 semi-skilled employees
that was shut down, and another big employer in St. Louis in town

9/22/87

-25-

expected to pick up, I don't know, somewhere on the order of a third
to a half of them. It ended up getting only five of them, because
there were so many other people bidding. You hear that in other areas
as well. One other thing I've heard in that regard is that companies
that have generally been stable in terms of employment, or maybe even
reducing employment here, recently have added employees. There are
some noises about trying to negotiate some of the give-backs that were
I've heard just one example
obtained over the last couple of years.
of that; it's not widespread.
On the broader outlook, while I have been, and continue to
be, in agreement with putting the priority on price stability versus
growth, the projections that come out of our Bank, which are based on
money-driven models, have been showing for some time--and I thought I
would mention it this month--the risk of a sharp slowdown in the
economy in 1988 and even the possibility of a recession. Given the
behavior of velocity and so forth, I think it is hard to evaluate this
exactly, but one of the things that people continue to feel reasonably
strongly about is the effect of a sharp slowing in money in relation
And, it's
to trend, if it is sustained for two or more quarters.
So, that's a
really on that basis that we come up with this forecast.
very different view than previously expressed. I think it's difficult
to evaluate because you can't know the effect of all the liquidity
that was put in over the last couple of years, and whether that might
continue to have a stimulative effect looking forward.
One last point on the interest rate question: I suspect it's
a combination of an increase in inflationary expectations and some
The only other thing I would mention that
increase in the real rate.
hasn't already been mentioned is that we are at, or have passed
through, a major inflection point in terms of the interest rate
outlook that's internalized in, say, the minds of traders and so
forth; and people I would say, as we do, just follow markets quite
closely, very quickly. But, in terms of broad-based behavior, I think
that really gets built into prices over a surprisingly long period of
time.
I think one of the things we are seeing here is people
continuing to adjust portfolios to a different interest rate outlook,
and probably thinner participation in the market, at least on the
buying side, by final investors.
So, I think there's a certain
element of uncertainty associated with this adjustment phenomenon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
In regard to long bond rates, I think what we
are seeing has something to do with the development of an exchange
rate policy that no one thought out that carefully ahead of time.
It's unfortunate that there can't be some median ground between
recognizing that monetary policy needs to be adjusted to take into
consideration foreign exchange developments and trying to pinpoint and
If we had
draw lines in the sand in regard to foreign exchange rates.
been willing to make monetary policy adjustments before we drew the
lines in the sand, we probably would have avoided some of the
difficulties we are now in. Nevertheless, the line got drawn in the
sand.
And when that happens, it is very difficult to unhitch during a
period in which inflation expectations are on the increase-particularly, I think, when you have some commodity price pressures
that would require stable exchange rates in order not to have
commodity prices rise.
So, in that environment, it seems to me that

9/22/87

-26-

long bond buyers are mainly anticipating what monetary policy and
future short-term rates are going to be, and it's kind of a win-win
situation from their perspective, because they think that we might
have to raise rates to support [the dollar in] foreign exchange
markets or we might have to raise rates to resist inflation; and
either one works in the same way. Second, I think the long bond
prices are affected today more strongly than they were ten years ago
by a kind of speculative cycle. That is, at one point in time, long
bond buyers really intended to keep the bonds.
But we have developed
an environment in which we have investors and fund managers whose
success is based upon their performance; and there are times when it
doesn't pay to be owners of bonds and, consequently, you're going to
have long bond rates move a little too far.
In some ways, it doesn't
bother me to see long-term interest rates high.
I think it would
bother the U.S. Congress. I hope it would bother them, and I hope it
would indicate to them how much opportunity there is to help there by
controlling spending.
In regard to the Greenbook forecast, I really have no
significant disagreement over the 1987 forecast. The staff has been
lowering their inflation rates for the second half of 1987, so I don't
see much disagreement there. I do have three areas of difference in
regard to the 1988 forecast.
I disagree, I guess, with Martha and
some others who took one position with regard to real exports.
I'm
taking another position: I believe real exports will maintain a longer
sustained growth path than is assumed in the forecast.
I believe that
we have many producers in the United States who have never learned to
be involved in international markets. But once the United States
became such a huge importer, we began to change the whole nature of
the opportunities that exist.
So, we have many, many small and
medium-size businesses that have never taken that international market
seriously, and now they are learning that they do have to compete in
international marketplaces at home and abroad. And so I think we have
a long learning curve involved here. We have a lot of financial
institutions that have not done very well with regard to recognizing
export lending. But I think that learning curve also will occur.
Therefore, I expect that these present exchange rates will give us a
wonderful opportunity for a long period of export increases.
As for my second disagreement with the 1988 forecast--and I
know that Mike, or maybe Ted, mentioned the GNP deflator and its
strange behavior--I would point out the staff's numbers on the CPI.
In July, the staff had forecast a 60 basis point increase in the CPI
from the third quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988. Now
they are projecting a 150 basis points increase in the CPI.
Now, that
really is making things get worse rather rapidly.
I think that's not
likely, first of all, because businesses have found that the
environment is one in which you do not make profits by being able to
increase your prices but you do it by learning to control costs.
So,
I think we are in a different environment than we were.
Second, we
have already gone through the big oil price increase, which the staff
is telling us should have occurred earlier.
About the second half of
1987 is when it should hit us, and I think that has kind of passed us.
Third, I think foreign exchange rates are not likely to fall by the
amount [indicated in the forecast], because I would presume that the
majority of this Committee would not believe that the inflation
forecast that we have is acceptable and they would be willing to take
the steps that are necessary to not have those inflation rates

-27-

9/22/87

materialize. Consequently, the dollar should behave quite well in
that environment.
The third disagreement [with the forecast] is in regard to
tax receipts.
I think everyone is underestimating the effects of the
It is
Tax Reform Act, which is our first tax reform act since 1963.
the first time we have broadened the base while decreasing the rates.
All the evidence shows that the tax receipts are coming in higher than
anticipated. We are going to have tax receipts that are going to be
the largest percent of GNP in any peace-time year in our history. Not
all that goes away with the one-time capital gains move, so I am
somewhat optimistic in that regard.
I am certainly willing to take
whatever steps are necessary to make certain that the forecast for
1988 isn't correct because, if it is, then it is absolutely essential
that we have policies that would lead to a tremendous slowdown in this
economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will try to be very
brief in view of the coffee being outside! With respect to the Tenth
District, we do see some very, very modest recovery. Looking at
various sectors of the economy, starting with agriculture: commodity
prices are up; red meat prices are very good; government transfer
payments are outstanding; and, as a result, there is some comfort in
the agricultural sector--or at least among those who are still in the
sector. Lastly, I would say that our most recent survey indicates
that agricultural land prices have stabilized, and there is a modest
uptick in those prices as well.
So, agriculture, from a very low
level, has a good outlook for the rest of 1987 and quite likely in
1988, depending upon what the farm subsidy program will be in 1988.
When you look at energy, the same is true: from a very, very low base
it looks a bit better.
In July, for example, there were 373 rigs
working in the Tenth District as opposed to [unintelligible] in June.
That's not much of an uptick, to be sure, and it is only 20 percent of
the level that was achieved in 1982, which was the peak of the energy
boom. So, it is still at a very low level.
[Unintelligible]
supporting a bit.
Commercial real estate has been very depressed in
Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa--those areas that built on
expectations [generated by] the energy and agricultural booms back in
the early 1980s, inflationary expectations, [unintelligible].
There
is a very slow absorption rate of some very nice and new commercial
structures.
In the Kansas City area there has been some damping in
commercial construction, but nonetheless, it still looks very
prosperous.
In some areas, there has been a bit of damping in
residential starts and sales, but activity is still above a year ago
throughout the District in the aggregate. One last point that I would
make with respect to economic activity in the District would be on the
manufacturing sector: the automobile industry is not working at full
production and, as a matter of fact, there continue to be layoffs in
plants, particularly in the Kansas City area, in the GM plants
specifically. There has been a bit of light at the end of the tunnel
in the aircraft industry in the sense that sales most recently have
been up in dollar volume but down in unit sales, largely because the
sales are of jet aircraft as opposed to the smaller units.
Let me just address, then, our view of the staff forecast.
They are a bit more bullish than we are. We look for about 2-3/4

9/22/87

-28-

percent growth not only for the remainder of 1987 but into 1988.
In
trying to look at their forecast in relation to our numbers, I believe
the difference is that they have a buildup in inventories in the
fourth quarter that goes out into 1988.
That may be the difference in
their forecast and ours, but it is such a modest difference that I
don't think there would be a lot to argue about. To be perfectly
I don't feel there is much risk
honest, I hope their forecast occurs.
on the upside, however, of this getting away from us.
Lastly, as to your question on long-term bond rates, I
suspect it is a part of all three of the things that have been
mentioned.
I guess I would come out on the side of giving more weight
to the view that it is an increase in real rates necessary to attract
funds to support this federal budget deficit as opposed to just
inflationary expectations. The uncertainty created by all of this
largely accounts for it; how you disaggregate it, I don't know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Eisenmenger.

MR. EISENMENGER. Turning first to the regional economy, we
may have the strongest regional economy in the nation, and I think a
good monetary policy for the New England region would be an
alternative D. When you get together with our businessmen, all they
can talk about is the labor problem--that they can't get the labor
they need. We hear scattered reports that people are spinning off
their operations in eastern Massachusetts or Connecticut and putting
them in the depressed areas of northern Maine, or they are talking
They are not moving
about putting them in other parts of the country.
However, I don't
their entire operation, but are moving pieces of it.
think New England is typical. We have an overall unemployment rate of
3 percent, and in New Hampshire, it is 2.2 percent. And that is not
So, you can't really look
typical of the nation, which is 6 percent.
at the world through our eyes.
In our view, the Greenbook forecast for the U.S. economy in
the next 15 months is almost the ideal scenario.
If we have a
sufficient guiding system to accomplish what that forecast suggests,
that is almost as good as we can expect, considering the constraints.
It is showing a real growth rate of something like 2-1/2 percent with
the overall employment rates and capacity utilization rates only
slightly different than they are now, which would suggest we would
have only this minor uptick in inflation next year. And that is an
ideal scenario.
So the question is: Can we get there?
At least as we
read it, there is not much risk on the downside any more. The new
orders that are coming in, the industrial production statistics, and
the probable greater strength from foreign orders, suggest that the
dangers of a recession, at least in the next 18 months, are pretty
well washed away. On the upside--the possibility of having something
faster than a 2-1/2 percent real growth rate--we have set in train two
actions just in the last 25 days which provide us some insurance
[against that].
And the staff talks about additional actions during
the next year that--it is our best guess--would provide additional
insurance. Our hope is that we can achieve the forecast that the
Greenbook so optimistically puts forward.
I don't think I have
anything to contribute to what other people have said on the long-term
bond rate.

9/22/87

-29-

MR. JOHNSON.
in New England?

What has the regional inflation rate been doing

MR. EISEMENGER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, wage rates are moving up faster.

But overall, I mean the broader--

MR. EISENMENGER. Well, you would have to talk about pieces.
If you talk about the price of housing, we used to be-MR. JOHNSON.

The Boston CPI?

MR. EISENMENGER. When you talk about rental housing, it
doesn't show up that much. But, in fact, when you're trying to bring
All the businessmen we
in professional people, you can't do it.
talked to say they can't bring in anybody to buy a shack that costs
$250,000; so there is no labor mobility in view of the housing
shortage.
Eventually, we will not have that housing shortage, as we
It may be three years
didn't have it in the long run in California.
away.
So there is not much mobility, despite the fact that we pay
somewhat higher wages, because the real cost of living for someone
moving in and buying a house is almost impossible.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I agree with most of the discussion on
I do think the economy
It has been covered pretty well.
the economy.
has clearly picked up strength, and there is very little downside
[risk] in the economy now. It is clearly in an expansion phase at a
higher level than it was on before, but there's still an outstanding
question--we've already discussed this and Mike went over it very
well--as to how much of this is production-generated by the external
economy and inventory building versus an overall expansion in
I think that is the key to what we would have to do
aggregate demand.
on the monetary policy side. As I said earlier, I think that a lot of
I think there has
Some of it is not.
this seems to be trade-related.
been a buildup in inflationary expectations.
I am fairly pleased at
the moves we have taken; I think they were proper and should have the
effect of eventually moderating aggregate demand to a level consistent
with the forecast. Now, we are hedging against the plausibility of
what kind of velocity number you could expect to go with those
aggregates. Like I say, I think we are close to having the thing
cornered. The lags are long; we may have to go through a few quarters
of some pressure before we see the other side of that. But, I don't
see a lot of room for nominal GNP under the kind of monetary policy we
have now. The numbers don't seem to add up, except for maybe a couple
of exceptional quarters, in the short run.
A couple of other points I
think are interesting: in spite of our concerns about the trade
situation and the deficit--and I agree those are the major fundamental
concerns--we seem to pass over those large deficit items.
I think
that's because we are concerned more about the longer run; but we pass
over the really tremendous improvement in the budget deficit this
fiscal year over the last fiscal year, without a dime's improvement in
the current account.
The amount of pressure that has been taken off
has to be relatively substantial. We have gotten no real reduction in
the current account and a $60 billion dollar reduction in the federal
budget deficit. That has to be an important factor. Now, whether
that continues is another matter.
I think that is the question. But,
if anything, we have relieved pressures on the capital import side.
Maybe we are making up that difference on the domestic growth side and

-30-

9/22/87

the demands of government are shifting more toward the private sector.
But we have seen the dollar come down and we probably have seen net
capital outflows.
In terms of the question of long-term interest rates, I tend
to think that what has happened is mostly inflationary expectations.
I think long rates have gone up primarily due to that. My personal
opinion is they probably overshot, and eventually things will settle
back down a little in the market. As I said, the flattening of the
yield curve from our discount rate change was somewhat comforting;
even though we didn't actually see a decline in long rates, we did see
a flattening. I don't see anything out there that would push up the
real rate dramatically. I think some of that inflationary
expectation--I really don't know how much--is sort of a risk premium,
but that could be put in the inflation expectations category. I don't
see anything that shocked the cost of capital that would, in a way,
raise the real interest rate. In other words, I don't see anything
that has improved real returns on capital investment dramatically. If
anything, the repeal of the investment tax credit in the tax bill has
reduced returns on equipment; and there probably has been an
improvement in terms of inventories because of the lower corporate
rate; but, overall, I don't see any big shock to the cost of capital.
So, I think it is mainly inflationary expectations and, hopefully, it
will run off over time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I still think the hallmark of the recovery is
really a better balance in the economy as a whole. The sectors that
have been strong in the past are not growing quite as rapidly, or are
actually shrinking, and I think that is something that we should keep
in mind. If you look, for instance, at the projections in the
Greenbook for 1987 and 1988, you still see quite a few minus signs.
Durables are contracting this year at a 2.3 percent rate; nondurables
are only up 0.8 percent; nonresidential structures are -2.7 percent;
residential structures are -5.5 percent; and federal spending is -3.2
percent. So, there are quite a few sectors that are certainly not
characterized by boom conditions, while others like agricultural,
business equipment, and so on, are doing quite well. As a result, you
get that better balance. Also, as many speakers pointed out, the
great improvement in federal revenues, together with the restrained
federal spending, really does a lot on the fiscal deficit side and
brings a better balance on that score. I think it would be a mistake
to hold up the dollar with further tightening of monetary policy,
because we would be inviting a slowdown in those sectors that, at the
moment, are really carrying the economy: real estate would be further
depressed, and the capital sector would slow down. And, we also need
the exchange rate change that is projected in the Greenbook in order
to get that improvement in the trade balance that we are all hoping
for.
Turning to the the long-term bond question, I agree with most
of the things that have been said before, but let me add one
additional factor. If you look at the increase in interest rates that
we have had over the last year, you see that there were noticeably
sharper increases in the long-term Treasury bonds than in long-term
mortgage bonds and long-term corporate bonds. I would put a lot of
that, which amounts to 50 to 100 basis points, at the door of the many

9/22/87

-31-

debt moratoriums that we have had, or the nonrenewal of the debt
ceilings, in the last five months. I think there have been four of
those episodes; and that certainly must have a chilling effect,
particularly on foreign investors who are looking at the United States
with a jaundiced eye and putting us in the same league with countries
that can't service their debt. So, that certainly has been a factor
contributing to higher long-term Treasury rates in addition to the
real increase and the high inflationary premium we have had.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. In a prior life, I worked with corporate
planning, so I was just sitting here thinking of that in our
discussion this morning. First of all, when you work with corporate
planning, your bosses are always challenging your forecasts and they
will not allow--at least mine didn't allow--you to utilize a single
forecast. Or, if you did, they were always wondering about where the
weaknesses were and whether or not something might hit them that would
put them out of business. You are not allowed to bet the bank, or bet
the company, on forecasts. So, I just wanted to mention a couple of
things that I think we have to look at as we look ahead. One that I
sort of hinted at it earlier is whether or not we are sufficiently
incorporating the interest moves we have already had into this
forecast. And if we are, are we incorporating the interest moves that
we expect are yet to come? Also, there's the question: what if the
dollar does not, in fact, decline more? So much of 1988 depends upon
the trade turnaround; and if we think a weaker dollar is needed to
produce at least part of that, then I think that is a vulnerability in
this forecast. Also, and this has been mentioned by Wayne Angell and
Bob Heller, I really think we are not paying much attention to the
change in fiscal policy. When you go from a $221 billion deficit to
$160 billion--and I've heard this morning that it might even come in
below $150 billion--that's a major change from one year to the next.
I am not necessarily a Keynesian, but I do think there is such a thing
as fiscal policy, and it certainly works with a lag. I remember the
summer of 1984, sitting around this table with many of the people who
are here today, and it was very easy then to simply project the trends
of early 1984, which looked tremendously strong. And, frankly, we
missed the fact that business was going to slow down; just about the
time we thought it was looking most terrific was when we got the 90degree turn. I hope we are not doing that today.
On the interest rate question, because I am an old lady I
remember being in financial markets before inflation was a big deal,
mainly in the 1960s. And interest rates moved up; one of the reasons
that long governments moved up involved simply the volume of
financing, which is, of course, tied to the deficit. And, as Bob
Heller said, recently we have had these problems with bumping up
against the debt ceiling and postponements of auctions. Then, all of
a sudden, Congress gets religion and takes care of this, and you get
five auctions pushed through in a very short period of time, and this
jerks things around. And yet, if no one was talking about inflation,
It's
I think that would happen. It certainly happened in August.
probably going to happen again in the next couple of weeks. Also,
there is just uncertainty about what's going on, uncertainty about
what we are doing here. I think we could help that problem if we
released the minutes earlier so that people would not have to analyze
every tea leaf to try to figure out what we're up to. I think that

9/22/87

contributes to this situation. Also, there has been improvement in
communications and information flow. If you go back to the 1960s and
1970s, not every person around America and around the world had a CRT
on his or her desk. Now every gunslinger sits there and, whereas they
used to be told that the one thing to watch was M1, now they have been
told that the one thing to watch is the relationship between the
dollar and the yen or the dollar and the mark in the foreign exchange
markets. Most of these people are not economists; they are traders;
and you give them two easy pieces of guidance and that is what they
trade on. So they contribute to this instability, I think, as you get
this transmission from the exchange market into the bond market with
the speed of light almost. There are just a lot more players and I
don't think they are necessarily really weighing what's going on in
the real economy; and neither do I think that they are doing a
thorough analysis of the inflationary forces at work or not at work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me, as
I've listened to the comments made around the table this morning, that
there's a very, very strong centralizing character to the projections
that have been made by everyone--the Greenbook and the District
forecasts. I think that they constitute, in their aggregate wisdom, a
very responsible and good forecast; and I accept it.
I would like to
make this comment: the projections arise, as they must, from
conventional economic analysis and historical experience; and I would
like to suggest that maybe we should be a little open and alert to the
possibility that there are some unconventional and untraditional
things going on. Standing back from the trees and looking at the
forest, I observe that we are about to end the fifth year of what has
been called a recovery. I'm not sure how long you call something a
recovery, but this one is going to be five years old in another couple
of months; and I note that at the end of the fifth year the economy
is, in fact, accelerating and inflation is declining by most measures.
Inflation is projected to increase for some very good reasons, but
right now you've got an economy that is accelerating and inflation
that is decreasing--which is pretty unconventional. Industrial
production is going up at an accelerating rate; unemployment has been
dropping very strongly and is probably now somewhere near its natural
rate. And yet, at the same time, we are seeing very, very small
increases in the unit costs of production and a very flat producer
price index. In fact, last month, the PPI was zero. That seems to be
a little unconventional and untraditional. On the trade balance and
the J curve, we are not getting the effects that would have been
expected. They are stretching out; we still think they are going to
be there, but that has been behaving unconventionally. Governor
Johnson noted a few moments ago the fact that we have taken $60
billion of fiscal stimulus out of the economy, and yet none out of the
trade deficit. And I think a lot of people would have been surprised
ahead of time that those two things could have coexisted.
Incidentally, as the economy is accelerating its growth rate, that is
occurring while $60 billion of fiscal stimulus is, in fact, coming out
of the economy.
I would suggest the possibility that inflation may behave in
an untraditional way also. Maybe that also will stretch out and not
accelerate. I ask myself: What possibility is there that could occur?
I see several possibilities. They are all soft, and I would hate to

9/22/87

-33-

have to try to defend any of them. But, for one thing, I suspect that
we may be undermeasuring our productivity increase. We may be doing
better than we know. I've talked to Mike Prell and some others about
this some. I think we have a much higher level of mobility in this
economy that is helping us deal with imbalances as they show up,
rather than just suffer from them. For instance, instead of just
accepting higher wage costs in Boston, we are moving plants to the
rural regions of New England where wage costs are lower. That's
mobility. A lot of bankers who are out of business in Texas are going
to places where the banking system is stronger. That's mobility.
There's a lot of that going on and that didn't used to be there. I
think we may be in an era of very intense competition from several
different respects. For one, the U.S. is back. I think that our
industry is waking up and beginning to compete. Governor Angell spoke
about that a few minutes ago and I agree with him. Also, there are
many more serious competitors in the world economy than just a few
years ago. They are serious and they are fierce, and I think that is
one thing that is going to tend to impede the advance of inflation. I
spoke at the last meeting of this group about what seem to me to be
basic long-running, underlying deflationary tendencies in the world
economy. I won't go back over that ground but I do think they are
still there. All this is to say that I would not quarrel with the
projection that we have over the next five quarters, but I'd like to
pique a little interest maybe--on the part of some of the research
directors around here, and some others, who are far better at this
sort of analysis than I am--to see whether or not there are some
discontinuities going on that could be favorable discontinuities.
And, I think we should be open to those sorts of possibilities and
alert to them. Meanwhile, I think we definitely have to be ready to
deal with these inflationary expectations and not let that genie out
of the bottle unnecessarily. Thank you, sir.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to Don Kohn.

Thank you, Governor.

Now let's move on

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As it turns out, and
with no coordination ahead of time, I swear, the initial part of my
briefing will deal with the question you asked and the answer will
have no more precision than any [unintelligible].
And then I want to
go on and talk about perhaps some of the implications of any increase
in the interest rates.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much.
almost dinner time, so let's break for coffee!

I think it's

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we better get back to the agenda.
As to the general discussion, I find myself probably about in the
middle of much of what I have been listening to. The point I would
make at the moment is this: while the economy is clearly quite strong,
I think the orders pattern and all the various elements we usually
look at are fairly balanced; to a certain extent the outlook is being
given to us far more concretely than it usually is. This is more
classic than one realizes. I grant what Mike Kelley is saying: that
there is something different. There is always something different;
something that does not look like all the previous ones. There is
never anything identical, and it is always a puzzlement. But there is

9/22/87

-34-

nothing very unusual about this one. And, it seems to have fairly
good momentum. The main issue, however, which I think Governor Angell
mentioned, is that we do not yet have any evidence of actual
inflation. By that I mean as distinct from expected indicators. The
numbers really are remarkably soft.
While we can anticipate the
elements of labor tightening--and I think it is probably quite correct
to say that we would expect wage acceleration to occur and labor costs
to run up--that has not yet happened. And what that suggests to me is
that, while we are tight and are likely to get tighter, we haven't yet
triggered anything.
I think that the time frame in which these events
will occur is often somewhat difficult to pin down, and I mean by that
on both sides.
It is quite conceivable that three weeks from now we
will all of a sudden begin to get some stories of significant wage
patterns emerging. The Wall Street Journal will usually show up on
the front page with a real [unintelligible] of stories about prices,
profits, inflation, and the like, and that could very well be the
first indication that something is happening. The point is that no
one can write that story at the moment; it is not in the numbers.
Consequently, as far as policy is concerned, where we are at
the moment strikes me as quite appropriate to the outlook.
I don't
feel terribly strongly about it, but I would be inclined to start off
merely by assuming that we stay at "B", and that we stay with the $600
million on the borrowing requirement, if for no other reason than it
is not a significant edging higher from where we are currently. There
is very little doubt in my mind that we can do nothing to the extent
of the accumulation of economic activity that is occurring. But I
think it does position us in the appropriate place. Having said that,
I don't see the need to phrase the directive, as we did the last time,
with a tilt toward further tightness.
I think for the moment it is
probably well enough to stay basically where we are.
I don't know
where that will fit me in the rest of this group, but I'd love to
hear.
Mr. Vice Chairman, would you like to voice your opinion?
I'd be completely satisfied with
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
that formulation--that is, staying with $600 million borrowing and
In a nutshell, I think that is where policy
using symmetric language.
should be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In a nutshell, I genuinely think
that is precisely where policy should be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOYKIN.

That's my policy prescription four square.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Governor Angell.

I am with the Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boykin.

Mr. Boehne.

I support your proposition.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would support the proposition.
I would prefer, however, to drop back to the $500 million borrowing

-35-

9/22/87

level. You said it doesn't take us much from where we are currently,
but if, indeed, $100 million equates to about 1/4 percent [on the
federal funds rate] you are looking at least at that amount more yet
to take place that the market has not perceived. And, since the
market doesn't know we have been at $600 million, the $500 million
seems more appropriate to me, and that would be my choice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I fully agree with these last remarks. I think
we are at $500 million and, therefore, we should probably stay around
$500 million rather than do further tightening. Let me make one
further remark: some data that I have just scratched up indicate that,
yes, there have been [similar] episodes before. As a matter of fact,
there is a precise duplication of our current situation as far as the
exchange rate changes are concerned. And that is that Germany and
Japan, between 1980 and 1985, had exactly the same drop in exchange
rates. What was their policy? The discount rate was lowered in Japan
from 7-1/4 percent in 1980 to 5 percent in 1985; in Germany it dropped
from 7-1/2 percent to 4 percent in that period of declining exchange
rates. Interest rates on three-month money dropped from 11 to 6-1/2
percent in Japan and from 9 to 5 percent in Germany. As for the one
thing that we all worry about--inflation--the CPI in 1980 in Japan was
8 percent and in 1985 it was 2 percent; in Germany it went from 5.4 to
2.2 percent. So, I don't think that the exchange rate really should
be driving our policy. And in Germany and Japan, which successfully
navigated that period, the exchange rate certainly wasn't taken as a
cause to tighten monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the time frame you were looking at,
were they down more than we were in real terms in that time?
MR. HELLER.

In real terms what?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, the differential between
U.S. rates and German and Japanese rates in the time frame.
MR. TRUMAN.
that period.
MR. HELLER.
MR. TRUMAN.
that period.

Their long-term rates essentially rose during
They what?
Their long-term real interest rates rose during

MR. HELLER. Real interest rates you are saying?
looked at real rates; so far they have always been--

I haven't

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ours were coming down very significantly
at the same time, so it is really a question of [differentials]-although I don't disagree with you, as you know, on the statement you
made on the exchange rates at this point.
MR. HELLER. So taking that into account--and for me it is
important not to get overly tight on the exchange rate question--I
would go with the $500 million, which is current policy, I would
argue.

-36-

9/22/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I would favor "B" as you specified it, including
the $600 million borrowing target. And I think I would have at least
a mild preference for retaining the current asymmetry in the directive
for two reasons.
One is, as you have pointed out, we really can't
find concrete signs of acceleration of inflation in the price or wage
data yet.
And that, it seems to me, gives us an opportunity to do
perhaps a little better on the inflation side than the Greenbook
suggests--to lower inflation next year, if we are a bit careful here;
and I think that asymmetry in the directive would help on that score.
Also, as I think about the near-term outlook--the next six weeks or
so--it seems to me the risks are still likely to be in terms of dollar
weakness, or some disruptions in the bond market that produce higher
long-term rates [associated with] signs of tightening labor markets
and growing concerns about acceleration of inflation down the road.
The asymmetric directive positions us better should that materialize,
and, as I said, that's more likely to be the risk in the very short
run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you think we'll see it in some of the
data before then or just in qualitative--?
MR. STERN. I doubt that we would see it in the wage or price
data in that time horizon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So it is really a question of the
evidence that emerges before the numbers begin to show?
MR. STERN.
unfolding.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And people's attitudes about what is
Si Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I agree with alternative B, and I have a
preference, at least, for the asymmetrical language as it is
currently. Also, if there were going to be a bias, then I suppose the
best nuance for the bias about borrowing would be up rather than down
from the $600 million level. But I do think changing the fed funds
range from 5 to 9 percent perhaps would accomplish that bias.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So you're going look at "B",
million, and you prefer a tilt upward?
MR. KEEHN.
bias upward.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I would be for "B",

$600

$600 million, and a

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, my preference is to maintain
the current stance of monetary policy and I interpret your formulation
as being somewhat of a tightening, albeit fairly slight.
The reason I
would like to maintain a current stance at the moment is, first of
all, as you've indicated, we don't really see any evidence of
inflation in the numbers.
But, more importantly, as I think I said
earlier, over the next several weeks we are going to get some numbers
that might produce more volatility in the market.
We have this
linkage, apparently, between the foreign exchange market and the bond

-37-

9/22/87

market; if we get a bad trade number again, we probably are going to
see a fall in the dollar, and that will be translated into higher bond
yields. And that suggests to me that, at that point, we may need to
tighten a little; and I would prefer to wait until that time to do
anything. So, my difference with you is fairly slight, I think; my
formulation would be for borrowing at between $500 and $600 million,
with the center of gravity probably in between there, and an
asymmetric directive to take account of what I think is going to
happen and our need to tighten.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
a tilt upward?

You're saying "B" with $500 million but

It's a "B+" with an
MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, a tilt upward.
asymmetric directive. That's called fine tuning.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I must say I'm learning a new vocabulary
sitting in on these meetings.
MR. BOEHNE.

You have only begun, I might say.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We abrogate the English language every
time I come here, it seems.
President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at this meeting, I certainly could
support alternative B, but I do have a preference for alternative C,
for many of the reasons that I mentioned in the go around. The
prospect, in my view, is for growth in aggregate demand at, or above,
long-run potential.
Given the fact that the economy is operating in
the zone of full employment, this strength in demand, in combination
with the declining value of the dollar can be expected to put upward
Also, growth in labor costs, which is part of
pressures on prices.
our forecast and that of the Board staff's as well, should lead to an
underlying inflation rate that is higher in 1988. Moreover, this
inflation prospect could be significantly worsened if the expected
reduction in Federal government spending does not materialize. Given
that it takes a long time for our actions to affect inflation, it is
important, in my view, that we not delay until inflation already shows
signs of becoming more persistent.
Finally, I'd make the point that,
if I read footnote 1 on page 10 correctly, it looks to me like, in the
not too distant future, alternative C is assumed by the Greenbook, as
it is in our forecast.
So when we talk about the economy and its
performance, and particularly the Greenbook forecast, please keep in
mind that that assumes alternative C in the not too distant future.
At least that's the way I read that footnote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The assumption, of course, is that you
agree with that forecast.
Governor Seger.
MS. SEGER.
I am in favor of no change in the reserve
pressure, which I guess is not really a stated option; I am somewhat
between "A" and "B", $500 million borrowing target, and I would prefer
symmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think that in the short run the
risks that we have here in the inflation area are more expectations

9/22/87

-38-

than anything else, and we should maintain a posture against that, and
move against that.
I think the economy can handle the slight
tightening that going on to $600 million in borrowing would imply.
So
I favor "B" with $600 million, and would like to see symmetrical
language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, you might think in view of how I
stressed the unacceptability of the forecast for next year that I
would be advocating "C" as Bob Parry did, but I really think the steps
we have taken already have been pretty strong. In fact, we haven't
even implemented all we agreed to do last time, so I would not favor
anything beyond "B", particularly since I think that there has been a
rise in real rates.
Also, we have had pretty subdued behavior on the
part of the aggregates. But I wouldn't want the symmetrical part of
it because I just don't see the likelihood that we would want to ease
during this period. As a general rule, I'd rather it be symmetrical
because I don't think we usually know; but I think something would be
read into it if we eliminated the asymmetry this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I am sort of caught between the $500 and $600
million, but I am basically comfortable with alternative B with
symmetric language.
I had thought about $500 million with a tilt
toward tightening for the same reasons that Bob Forrestal mentioned;
there is something in that, too.
But I don't feel strongly either
way. I would appeal to Peter, though, that in maintaining $600
borrowing--which I think is fine--we ought to do that as smoothly as
possible, and not give any obvious signals that might confuse the
market into thinking that this is a tightening move.
It is going to
be perceived that way by some anyway, but I think that we ought to try
to do it in as smooth a fashion as possible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I would align myself with Bob Forrestal's
position: "B", with a $500 million borrowings target and asymmetric
language.
The main thing that is influencing me is a longer-term view
and, I guess, trying not to get out of position. And I think Bob
Black said it: any way you look at this--whether you look at rates, at
the provision of reserves, or at the behavior of the aggregates--over
the course of this year, we have taken some significant steps. And I
am not quite sure, as I expressed earlier, what the impact of that is
going to be.
But, being an old market participant, when everybody
thinks the same there's a chance that it won't work out that way.
Sometimes you get a little afraid of a consensus that is apparently
that strong. Having said all that, I could certainly accept "B", with
a $600 million borrowing target and symmetric language. But I have a
slight preference for the position Bob Forrestal mentioned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to comment?

Vice President Hendricks, would you like

MR. HENDRICKS. Our preference would be to line up fairly
closely with Si Keehn's suggestion on the decision. We would go with
$600 million, but would lean on the side of further tightening.

-39-

9/22/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Eisenmenger.

MR. EISENMENGER.
I support you, Mr. Chairman: $600 million
and a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it is clear that there is a fairly
strong consensus here for alternative B, at $600 million on borrowing;
there is a small support amongst the voting members for a tilt toward
something stronger in the language, and something on the other side.
I, personally, would go along with those vague notions of Governor
Johnson on the issue of not fighting the world to try to get $600
million in this maintenance period, because it may be a futile
endeavor. It may, in fact, give signals, which is a point that
Governor Seger raised earlier in this meeting that struck me as a
reason not to specifically fight that number. But, as I read the
instructions that I've just been given, the language apparently should
read: "In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain the degree of pressure on reserve
Somewhat greater or somewhat lesser
positions sought in recent weeks.
reserve restraint would be acceptable depending on indications of
inflationary pressures, strength in the business expansion,
developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior of
This approach is expected to be consistent with
the aggregates.
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from August to December at annual
rates of around 4-1/2 percent and 6 percent, respectively. M1 is
expected to continue to grow relatively slowly. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period before the next
meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of 5 to 9 percent."
MR. HELLER.

Mr. Chairman, did you have symmetric language in

there?
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HELLER.
MR. JOHNSON.

it's in there.
Symmetric language.

I didn't catch it.
It's "would" either way.

MR. HELLER.

Are they both "somewhat"?

MR. KELLEY.

Both "somewhat" and both "would".

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. "Somewhat greater or somewhat lesser
reserve restraint would be acceptable depending on--"
MR. KOHN. My comment, and it's my fault for putting it in
the Bluebook, is that the 4-1/2 percent for M2 sounds excessively
precise to me, given my knowledge of how these forecasts are put
together.
I shouldn't have put it in there, I guess, and I wonder
whether--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You mean you would be precise for us but

for the public you don't choose to be precise?

9/22/87

-40-

MR. KOHN. Yes, I wonder whether growth rates of from 4 to 6
percent or something like that wouldn't-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You mean for both aggregates?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. Yes, wouldn't that capture the spirit?
6 percent would encourage--

Well, 4 to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words you'd say "consistent
with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from August through December
at annual rates of between 4 and 6 percent."
MR. ANGELL.

I like "around" 4 and 6--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, no. "Around" means a number--that
there's only one number there.
MR. JOHNSON.

It says respectively, but you would take--

MR. ANGELL.
I know, but, Don, you have a different number
for M3 than you do for M2, don't you?
MR. KOHN.

Yes, it's 6 percent for M3 and 4-1/2 percent for

M2.
MR. ANGELL.

See, really, around 4, and around 6.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that what you're saying?
MR. JOHNSON.

range;

Oh, I see.

Around 4 and around 6.

Is

Yes.

MR. KOHN. No.
I was actually thinking of 4 to 6, going to a
but around 4, around 6 would be-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

You mean 4 to 6 percent for both?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what I thought you said.

MR. ANGELL. But you're actually anticipating 4-1/2 percent
and you're anticipating 6 percent.
MR. KOHN.

That's correct.

MR. ANGELL.
between 4 and 6.

I still think you could miss quite easily with a

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.

You want to say 4 to 6 percent for the M2?
I just asked him--

Governor Angell's suggestion would be fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What did he say?

-41-

9/22/87

MR. KOHN.
respectively.

Around 4 percent and around 6 percent,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
percent, respectively.

So be it.

Around 4 percent and around 6

MS. SEGER. When the minutes come out do you think a lot
would be made of the fact that the fed funds range has been moved?
I
can just see someone looking at that and saying "Well, clear the decks
for the next big tightening of the screws; batten down the hatches."
SPEAKER(?).

Well, we really didn't.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have set a range that is really
merely plus or minus 2 percent from-MS. SEGER.
I know, but people pick at everything that goes
down here; and I can just see a big deal being made of this move.
MR. ANGELL.
But quite often we really attempt to kind of
keep it centered, don't we?
We don't like-MR. JOHNSON. This is what would have been consistent with
$600 million borrowings, even before, I think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but the interesting issue would be:
if we are now at 7 or 7-1/4 percent and then we came in with the old 5
to 8 percent range, then I think that would really be a big signal.
MR. JOHNSON.

4 to

8.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But 4 to 8 would essentially be saying
that--.
You know, I think this reads perfectly. I think this
basically says we are already here and we are not going anywhere.
MR. KOHN. In the past when we have done this, we have
explained it as a technical adjustment to keep the actual rates more
closely centered around there.
MS. SEGER.
MR. KOHN.

So there will be an explanation?
Yes, there would be some explanatory sentence.

MR. ANGELL. But, I do think it is somewhat important that we
follow that suggestion of easing in to the $600 million so as not to
cause the markets to believe that we have made a policy change at this
meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think the general language on the
actions we are taking basically would indicate that we did nothing at
this meeting.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
we want to be.

As I hear the discussion, that is where

-42-

9/22/87

MR. BLACK. Could we rephrase that and say we did not change
policy rather than we did nothing?
MR. MELZER. Although there will be a perception for a while
that we did, I think, as the $600 million shows through-MR. KELLEY.
MR. JOHNSON.
SPEAKER(?).

Sure.
Well, Peter's skills will take care of that.
Good.

MR. ANGELL. Yes, we have watched him before, and he just
knows how to do that.
MR. KEEHN. Not really
means he will just do it.

[unintelligible]

instructions;

it

MR. GUFFEY. But he hasn't been too well the last two
maintenance periods, have you, Peter?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I haven't been very good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Unless there are further comments can we

vote?
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

END OF MEETING

