Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 7, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 7, 1987, at 10:30 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Morris, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum, Scheld,
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

7/7/87
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Promise1, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Zickler, 1/ Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Brady, 1/ Economist, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Messrs. Hendricks and Stone, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia,
respectively
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis, and
Ms. Tshinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Cleveland,
Kansas City, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. R. Davis, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. McNees and Miller, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Keleher, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Mr. Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of July 7, 1987
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's appropriate to say a word before we
start about Arthur Burns' passing. He sat at this table with many of
us for a good many years. He sat over there about where Bob Black is;
the seating has been rearranged since then. I don't know whether that
had any implication for policy when the Chairman sat over in that
area. But he was a very forceful Chairman who had a great dedication
to the Federal Reserve and to this Committee. I think you have been
notified that there is a memorial service on July 22 at 11:30 in the
morning at the Temple here in Northwest Washington. If people can
make that, I think it would be greatly appreciated. With that, we can
get started and approve the minutes.
MS. SEGER.
approved.

I'll move it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a second. The minutes are
May we have the report on foreign currency operations?
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before we discuss this:
I was so preoccupied with Arthur Burns that I forgot to welcome Mike
Kelley to the table this morning. Sitting there, you're almost
[unintelligible] now as a governor; so, I say welcome. The plan of
attack this morning and tomorrow is that I will interject the
discussion on this report on borrowing that you all have after Mr.
Sternlight gives his report and we have the discussion on the Desk's
operations. That's the logical place to do that. We will break for
lunch at about 1:00 p.m. and discuss extraneous matters informally, as
we usually do, and then go back into session. If we finish this
afternoon, fine; if we don't, we will reconvene tomorrow morning. And
if the discussion proceeds beyond 11:00 tomorrow morning, it will be
without a Chairman, which may be an advantage for some of you. Let's
proceed to the questions or comments on Mr. Cross' report.
MR. BOEHNE. Sam, on this re-emergence of two-way risks,
would you categorize that as a fragile re-emergence or does it look
fairly good to you? How is it categorized?
MR. CROSS. Well, I think it is still somewhat fragile. As I
said, I think the market paid a great deal of attention to, and was
reassured considerably by, the willingness of the Federal Reserve to
snug because of the dollar. Looking ahead, it's not clear that the
market would feel that there will be the same kind of maneuverability
or ability to untighten. I think, for the present, that we have quite
a healthy sense of two-way risks in the market. But there is some
skepticism; there are these feelings out there that some action will
be taken, either in intervention or another area, if the dollar moves
up very far from its present level. And as I said, if that should
happen, I think what the trading community then would start to do with
respect to [unintelligible] on the downside. So, I think we have a
period of stability now, or even firmness, and this may continue for a
period. Looking beyond that, there is still negative sentiment about
the dollar because of the lack of any clear evidence of major
adjustment in our current account position. And I would characterize
the present sense of two-way risks as still rather fragile.

7/7/87

MR. JOHNSON. In discussions yesterday, the staff pointed out
that for the second quarter we could get more negative current account
numbers, which could have some effect on that sentiment.
I take it
the oil-price situation has been driving a lot of the current account;
it has been dominated by that.
Even though non-oil exports have been
rising, the whole thing has been overwhelmed by oil volume, to some
extent.
I take it the second quarter is going to produce a worsening
current account balance number and that might add to some of the
sentiment.
Is there any perception that-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
second quarter right now.
MR. CROSS.

We just have one month of [data for] the

We have one month of trade figures.

MR. TRUMAN. Governor Johnson, I'd note that most of this
deterioration in the current account in the staff forecast is in the
non-trade current account items.
It is true that there's a slight
deterioration in the trade balance, which is based on one month, but
it's essentially flat-MR. CROSS. There's no question that people are talking very,
very intently about what these trade figures will be on the 15th of
July when they come out.
MR. JOHNSON. I take it we're forecasting a worsening on the
current account number?
MR. TRUMAN. That's right.
But the current account number
for the second quarter isn't going to appear until September--even
assuming that we are right.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but that's not that far away.
I'm just
saying that September, assuming we're right, could be the period
you're talking about, then. Right now there is a good healthy two-way
risk on the exchange rate, but I'm just saying that there might be
some numbers in the future that hinge on that; I don't know. If this
is going to be an uneven path on the way to improvement, maybe the
markets recognize that but maybe they don't.
MR. CROSS. Well, I think they recognize that in volume terms
there has been some improvement. But they also recognize that in
nominal terms there has been very little improvement, if any. And
that, of course, is what you have to finance. Sometimes market
participants over-interpret these figures and sometimes they respond
by kind of knee jerk [reactions].
So, I think if we have bad trade
figures next week--really bad trade figures--that could change the
picture from what it is.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. CROSS.

We're getting numbers next week?
On the 15th.

MR. BLACK.
look like?

What is your guess on what those numbers will

MR. CROSS.
billion, I think.

The market is expecting

[a deficit of]

about $14

7/7/87

MR. TRUMAN.
I would say that April was somewhat overinterpreted--that is, as listed in the forecast.
That [deficit]
number on a balance-of-payments basis was something like [an annual
rate of] $140 billion and we have a little over $150 billion for the
quarter as a whole.
We think that May and June will be not as good as
April, but not dramatically different in terms of the monthly figures.
But to the extent that the market has been extrapolating the trend as
the numbers came down in February, March, and April, even a leveling
off [in the trade deficit] might produce some degree of
disappointment.

element
versus,
same as
relieve

MR. KEEHN.
Sam, I suppose it's hard to forecast, but on the
of downside risk, has there been some improvement this time
Is the downside risk about the
say, the past several weeks?
it has been or has there been some fundamental improvement to
that?
MR. CROSS.

I'm not sure I understand.

MR. KEEHN.
Well, at the last few meetings we have
concerned about the precipitous free fall, if you will, [of
dollar.]
There seems to be some improvement in tone, but I
you're questioning that.
And I wonder whether the downside
is as great as it has been.

been very
the
think
risk now

MR. CROSS.
Well, no, in the sense that we are now
comfortable with pressures not moving one way or the other.
At some
of these earlier meetings we had been sitting here with very heavy
downward pressure facing us and the intensification of that raised
much more serious problems.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
We have a lot on this
to be given later, I guess?
SPEAKER(?).

in the presentation

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I suggest we defer these general
discussions of the balance of payments outlook on the dollar until
later.
Are there any more operational comments or questions?
MS. SEGER.
I have one.
When you refer to market sentiment,
since there are obviously many hundreds or thousands of participants
in the foreign exchange markets on any given day, are you talking
primarily about traders that are commercial bankers in this country,
or commercial bankers from abroad, or corporate treasurers, or central
bankers, or all of the above?
I'm just sitting here trying to get a
flavor of what are you basing your sentiment comments on.
MR. CROSS.
You're right that there are probably ten thousand
people out there in this market and nobody can synthesize the view-MS.

SEGER.

Right.

MR. CROSS.

Except that the market

MS.

Yes.

SEGER.

reflects the view.

7/7/87

MR. CROSS. We do talk to large numbers of traders all day
long. We talk to central banks all around the world and get their
assessment of what's going on in their markets and we talk to
commercial bankers and others here. And we try to keep up with what
the economists are saying and absorb these various views to the extent
we can. Now, there are times when a view sort of gets moving and the
markets seem to all act like turkeys and fly in the same direction.
MS. SEGER.

Right.

I sensed that last time.

MR. CROSS.
So one can profess a market view. But I don't
think anybody can profess to be very confident at any one moment about
what all these many different players are thinking. But we do the
best we can by talking to many different kinds of operators.
We also
talk to treasurers of corporations about what they're doing.
MS. SEGER.
Isn't it true that they are more important
players on the scene now than they used to be 5 or 10 years ago?
MR. CROSS.
They're certainly more important than they used
to be.
The market has gotten a lot bigger and a lot more complex; and
it involves a lot larger universe than it did some years ago.
MR. HELLER.
Sam, do you see any changes in the pattern of
the inflows of foreign capital?
MR. CROSS. We can't really tell very much about it, but what
we hear is that it's still fragile. Even if one is buying a long-term
bond, that's not a long-term investment. There is not a lot of
assurance that these present exchange rates are stable enough for one
to be entering into a lot of long-term investments with assurances
that there are not going to be further changes. At least that is what
a lot of people tell us.
MR. HELLER. Well, I meant mainly geographically--the
Japanese versus the Europeans who-MR. CROSS.
The Japanese, of course, are key because they are
such big players.
In the early part of the year, they had long-term
outflows of $10 billion in January and another $10 billion in
February.
In March it fell down to about half that and in April it
disappeared entirely. In May it has come back up and the last reports
were that in June it was even bigger than ever--$13 billion. So the
amounts seem to have come back up to very substantial levels. But the
question is how solid that is now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Japanese long-term rates were going up
in this period when they resumed their investment in the United
States, presumably?
MR. CROSS.
Right.
The Japanese long-term rates have gone up
by about 1/2 point during this period and ours have come down some.
If you want to look at it in terms of differentials, at the beginning
of the year the differential between U.S. and Japanese long-term rates
was about 2-1/4 percentage points.
It went up to as high as 6
percentage points and now it's down to about 4-1/2 points--maybe a
little below that.
So, it's still a lot higher than it was in the

7/7/87

early part of this year, but it's well down from the peak that it
reached in May.
MR. JOHNSON. As long as there's no major downside exchange
rate risk that might be plenty.
MR. CROSS.
equation, yes.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. HELLER.

I think the exchange rate is the key part of the
Yes.
And the stock market in Japan, probably?

MR. CROSS.
The stock market in Japan has declined somewhat.
It got up as high as about 26,000; it's now about 24,000 or so--down
maybe 10 percent, which is substantial. And the Japanese have been
very worried about the liquidity in their whole economy, as reflected
both in the stock market and the real estate market.
It is a very
worrisome and dangerous thing. That's one of the reasons why there
are questions about what they should be doing in terms of their own
longer-term ranges.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We need to ratify the transactions.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS.

SEGER.

Move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Without objection.

Mr. Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?
If not, we will
ratify the transactions; that is all we have to do here.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

So move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Why don't you
introduce this report on borrowing just very briefly, Mr. Kohn?
MR. KOHN. Okay, Mr. Chairman.
The report was requested in
response to some questions that arose over the previous intermeeting
period--and perhaps really since last fall as well--about the kinds of
federal funds rates and pressures on reserve positions we were getting
relative to what the Committee and the Desk had specified. The paper
breaks down the difference between actual federal funds rates and
those that you might have expected to be associated with an intended
level of borrowing into two separate kinds of misses.
One is the miss
that stems from the relationship between actual borrowing and the
funds rate that comes to pass.
We found that that was a pretty loose
relationship. There was a standard error of about 60 basis points;
two-thirds of the time you could expect to be plus or minus 60 basis
points from the mean on that.
There's a lot of short-term noise in
that relationship, having to do with the pattern of reserves shifting,
unusual borrowing that might occur, the pattern of reserve provision,
actual demand--

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Is that on a weekly-average basis?

MR. KOHN. A two-week average. There are also some longerterm shifts in that relationship. One was identified during the
period of the Continental Illinois crisis, when banks obviously became
more reluctant to use the discount window because they were concerned
about being seen as borrowing in that period. More recently, a
smaller shift occurred last year when banks' desire to borrow also
seemed to be less than might have been expected based on the long-term
average.
A second source of misses involves a deviation of actual
borrowing from the borrowing that was intended, that is, the borrowing
level that was put in the path. There we can have misses in excess
reserves and estimates of excess and required reserves. Once again,
the pattern of reserves provision and borrowing in the period can give
I think an important finding in the
rise to these sorts of misses.
paper is that there tend to be some offsets among the different kinds
of errors that can be found in this relationship. So, the looseness
of a piece of the relationship--say, the relationship between
borrowing and the funds rate spread--viewed by itself does not show
through to the differences or the looseness between the actual funds
rate and the funds rate that was anticipated by the Desk. There are
actions by the Desk in supplying reserves and by the market in keeping
the funds rate at levels that it believes consistent with the Desk
projection that tend to reduce quite substantially the standard errors
associated with the difference between realized funds rates and funds
rates anticipated by the Desk. In the end, I think the relationship
looks loose, but not all that loose. The current operating
procedures, and the Desk and market actions that go with them, do
provide an anchor to the federal funds rate.
But there is room for
market forces or for unanticipated misses in reserves to show through
in this relationship.
Sometimes that can occur in desired ways: that
is, the market can push us toward higher or lower funds rates in
anticipation of something we might end up doing; sometimes it could
move the other way.
With regard to the last intermeeting period, the problem was
primarily the difference between the actual borrowing that occurred
and the borrowing that was in the path.
I think there were several
particular problems that built on themselves in that period. One was
the problem with the Treasury balance and the tax payments, which both
built up the required reserves much higher than anyone had thought and
drained more actual reserves than anyone had estimated as the Treasury
balance came through. As a result, through almost the entire period
the Desk found itself fighting reserve shortages, and much larger
reserve shortages, than anyone--the Desk, the New York Fed, the Board,
or the Treasury--was estimating. So it was constantly behind in that
way. Secondly, of course, there were a lot of market expectations at
that time that we would be firming. And the markets tended to push
the federal funds rate up in anticipation of some firming of policy,
given what was happening to the dollar and inflation. In some sense,
I think borrowing rose in response to the market's push of the funds
rate up; there was extra inducement to borrow at the window. So,
there were a number of factors that came together in the intermeeting
period before the May 19th meeting that tended to give much larger
misses between actual and intended borrowing than we ever had
experienced before, except at year-end periods.

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Comments?

First, I want to say that I found this to be a

really outstanding review of the issue and a very good report.

For

our own purposes, it might be useful to go through this exercise every

I
so often to re-address the issue and to feel comfortable with it.
think it was very useful. I don't have any major questions; the study
pretty much explains a lot. But a couple of things struck me as I
read through this that I wanted to bring up today. One is that I
noticed, at least over the period I looked at, that there appeared to
be an upward bias in actual borrowings relative to predicted. This
was only over about a 3-1/2 year period, I think-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Relative to intended?

MR. JOHNSON. Yes--relative to intended. I wonder if you
I think the Chairman
have a good feel for what might be causing that?
mentioned yesterday a very plausible explanation for certain periods:
obviously, when you get to very low frictional levels of borrowing-when you're targeting something like $300 million or less--the bias is
going to be on the upside because there's not a lot of downside
opportunity. But there's a positive bias that appears to occur over a
long period. Chart 2 summarizes the information, and it does tend to
show that when targeted borrowing levels were fairly low, that's when
a lot of positive bias occurred. But I wonder if you went back over a
longer period if you'd still see that positive bias and if it's
related also to periods when targeted borrowings were very high.
MR. KOHN.

I'm not--

MR. JOHNSON. If you look at chart 2 you can see a positive
bias there. I just wonder what you sense there.
MR. KOHN. I think a lot of the bias occurs in 1985,
abstracting from the most recent period, which is a separate subject.
MR. JOHNSON.

Right.

And borrowings were averaging fairly

low.
MR. KOHN. Our findings were that low borrowings versus high
borrowings didn't really affect that funds rate relationship very
much. However, when borrowings are low, there is a tendency to come
in a little high because if something unusual occurs--for example, a
computer breakdown where some bank doesn't receive a wire and does
just a little borrowing, particularly if it happens over a weekend--it
can give a big boost relative to a very low two-week average.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. It just seems to me that that
ought to be factored into the expected borrowings to some extent.
MR. KOHN. We often do that. Peter Sternlight can comment on
this. When we have an unusual amount of borrowings that pushes up
borrowing relative to what we expect, we can't take it into account
ahead of time because by its very nature we don't anticipate it. But
Peter often takes that into account in his intentions through the rest
of the period. I think that's one of the offsets that we get that
As for the 1985 period,
keeps the funds rate close to [expectations].
one thing that was going on then was that excess reserves were rising

7/7/87

through that period more rapidly than we were expecting them to. We
kept writing up the excess reserves numbers incorporated into the
path; but, in some sense, we were lagging a little behind as that was
happening. So I think that period has a particular explanation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the question remains--and you may
not know the answer now--but the one period on this chart when
borrowings were fairly high, which was in 1984, that bias didn't seem
to exist. Is that typical, in fact, of other periods when the target
was $900 million, or $1 billion, or $1-1/2 billion?
MR. KOHN.

I don't know; we can find out.

MR. JOHNSON. It would be interesting to know that. I have
two other questions. One major issue is this: I realize that there's
a standard error plus or minus--I'm talking about borrowings relative
to the funds rate and the standard error you mentioned of about 60
basis points--that creates noise in the system. If so, there's a
certain amount of that noise that we have to accept; but that's plus
or minus. There's a difference between that and the long-term issue
of when we detect some sort of shift. I think the question arises
there [unintelligible] policy shifts, that we're making a monetary
policy adjustment whether we are doing anything or not. And the
question is: If we detect a long-run shift in the borrowing function
should we try and offset that in some way? Otherwise, we really
accept a policy adjustment because nonborrowed reserves are going to
be lower or higher.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

If you equate policy with interest rates.

Well, yes, but nonborrowed reserves would be

affected.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

MR. JOHNSON. Maybe borrowings wouldn't, but the nonborrowed
path would be affected to some extent.
So I don't know-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This question arose in the summer of '84,
for instance. We got a much higher funds rate at a given level of
borrowings than we had anticipated.
MR. JOHNSON. My question is: What do we do about it when we
decide that there has been a long-run shift in the function or when
there's a consensus that that has developed?
I guess it's just
something that ought to be brought before the FOMC, to acknowledge
there's a shift and then-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sure is [unintelligible]
already been that for a while, that's-MR. JOHNSON.

when it has

Sure it has.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
It seems to me that it is the nature of the
Bluebook discussion to bring that kind of shift to the Committee's
attention in a normal way before it's in the--

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

To some degree this question arises at

every meeting.
MR. JOHNSON.

Sometimes, though, we don't have enough

information to decide whether it's just noise or real-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, that's usually the case.

MR. JOHNSON. That's usually the case, yes.
The last
question that I had was about seasonal borrowing.
It seems to me that
there's always been a bit of a question about whether seasonal
borrowing should be included and, if so, to what extent.
MR. KOHN.

Our findings are that seasonal borrowing is

interest sensitive--sensitive to the spread. It's not quite as
interest sensitive as adjustment borrowing but, as I think is pointed
out in the footnote here, when we fit the whole equation--total
seasonal and adjustment borrowing--on the spread, we cannot find a
seasonal influence that is separate from the influence of the spread.
So, from that kind of finding, it would appear that including or not
including seasonal borrowing wouldn't significantly affect-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
seasonal borrowing?

What did you say?

There's no seasonal in

MR. KOHN. Well, there is a seasonal in seasonal borrowing,
but it's not large enough to come through in the overall--. When we
look at seasonal borrowing by itself we find a significant seasonal;
but when we lump it in with adjustment borrowing that seasonal gets
swamped by all the other-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But isn't that because we're aiming at a
total borrowing figure including the seasonal? Otherwise, we offset
the seasonal in the seasonal.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, it's looking at borrowings as they relate
to the spreads. So, what we're looking for is the seasonal in that
relationship, not just in the quantity per se. As Don said, in that
relationship for the total adjustment plus seasonal borrowing we're
not able to pick up statistically significant seasonal effects, though
they do appear in a seasonal borrowing relationship.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say your relationship between the
borrowing total and the funds rate doesn't change seasonally?
MR. LINDSEY.

In a systematic way, that's what we find.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Even though the seasonal total itself is

seasonal?
MR. KOHN. Yes. In effect, we're saying that the seasonal
influence isn't strong enough to push the whole thing around. The
Desk actually has a different view of that. Frequently, they see a
higher seasonal [influence].
MR. JOHNSON. But you're saying whether we include it or not,
it's not really an important--

7/7/87

-10-

MR. KOHN. Clearly, it works in the direction that in the
summer--the seasonal peak is usually in July and August--we would have
less adjustment borrowing and potentially a slightly lower federal
funds rate than we would in the middle of the winter for a given level
of borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forget: How much does the seasonal
borrowing swing in a normal year? Is that [unintelligible] or
something?
MR. KOHN. Yes, close to it. It would have a trough of $100
million and a peak of $300 million, and in a tight year such as 1984,
maybe $400 million.
MR. JOHNSON. So you don't think that taking it out would
have any effect on the standard error?
MR. KOHN. I guess, consistent with the findings, it wouldn't
reduce it very much.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

But I think we did say-But the problem is--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if we got to a lower level of
borrowings that would probably aggravate the problem you were just
talking about before. In other words, there would be less cushion.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

In terms of the overall mechanism.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly don't think it makes much
difference if the level of borrowings is $1 billion or something, but
maybe if it is so low-MR. ANGELL. The problem is that if you take seasonal
borrowing out, it is no longer under control the same way that open
market operations are. You have to ask yourself: Are seasonal
borrowings more like adjustment borrowings or more like open market
supply credit? And I think it's-MR. JOHNSON.

Well, that's what I was--

MR. ANGELL. The answer, it would seem to me, is that it's
more like adjustment borrowing than it is like open market operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

To an extent.

MR. JOHNSON. Well, maybe we should apply some adjustment
factor to it to deal with just the seasonal element. I don't know if
that's possible; but if it is possible, we might be able to correct
the seasonal borrowing for seasonal.
MR. ANGELL. In other words, you'd like to have the seasonal
borrowing have a seasonal influence; thereby, if we had a $500 million
seasonal target, then it might be adjusted seasonally to be $540
million or $470 million?

-11-

7/7/87

MR. JOHNSON. Something like that. I don't know if it's
doable; I'm just saying it's worth thinking about.
MR. ANGELL.

That would tend to give you--

MR. HELLER. Otherwise, you are always counter steering with
your adjustment borrowing and that's the variable that gets squeezed.
MR. JOHNSON.

It's worth thinking about.

MR. KOHN. Okay. One option would be to include the seasonal
in with the extended credit. We could treat it as an exogenous factor
affecting "nonborrowed" reserves. That would be just targeting on
adjustment credit. Our feeling is that the seasonal is sufficiently
responsive to interest rates and, as I think you or the Chairman said,
that its behavior is somewhere in between adjustment and extended
credit, and we've included it with the adjustment credit. I think it
does respond to interest rate spreads; it's not truly seasonal, that's
for sure.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes.

I know.

MR. ANGELL. I think it would be better to leave it in and
put a seasonal factor on it than it would be to take it out and treat
it like extended credit.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Governor Angell put his finger on it in
saying that you need to ask if it is more like the adjustment credit
or more like something that we want to compensate for totally, like
the extended credit. I think it has some elements of both, and
probably is closer to the adjustment credit.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying that you might want to leave it
in, but still make some adjustments to that number.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes, possibly.

MR. HELLER. The question is whether you have enough
confidence in your seasonal factors to do it with any degree of
precision. If you don't, then you're better off-MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
I don't want to send us off on some
frivolous exercise; I'm just saying it might be worth thinking about
if there's a way that you feel comfortable dealing with it.
MR. KOHN. Why don't we look a little more closely at the
relationship with and without the seasonal and see whether we can come
up with a plan if, after looking at that relationship, it looks like
it's worth doing.
MR. HELLER. Is that seasonal borrowing also concentrated in
certain institutions?
MR. KOHN. Well, it's in smaller institutions by policy-Regulation A. It's primarily in agricultural banks, but it's also in
areas that have tourism and in some other areas subject to seasonal--

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you do any study as to how sensitive,
let's say, the federal funds rate is--that is, what kind of
relationship you get with net borrowed reserves or free reserves
instead of borrowings?
MR. KOHN. Yes, we did free reserves, net borrowed reserves,
and it did not improve the relationship; in fact, it was worse in
In the LRR period it was about the same; but in the CRR
recent years.
period the excess reserves have fluctuated and we've made more
adjustments, so the free reserves-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I guess if you're going to follow this
general approach, it's better to target borrowings than free reserves.
MR. KOHN. We do make adjustments in the excess reserve
allowance as those demands change, over time; and that would be
incorporated into a strict reserves-MS. SEGER. What do the relationships look like if you don't
wash out the variations within a maintenance period?
It seems to me
that by averaging that you would knock off quite a bit of the
variation before you do your statistical study.
MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's right.
The daily variation would
be much larger than what we've shown here. We have looked at this in
the past, and we've found that on settlement day over the last few
years we have gotten more variation than we did previous to the
introduction of CRR in 1984. On the other hand, the quarter-ends
(except for the year-ends) seem to be somewhat muted by the two-week
period.
MR. PARRY. Don, your work indicates that the relationship
between the spread and borrowing is linear.
Is it more reasonable to
think of that as a nonlinear relationship, since banks have a tendency
to become more reluctant to borrow as that spread widens?
MR. LINDSEY.
In some earlier work that we did here, in
connection with the evaluation of the new operating procedures in
1980, Peter Tinsley and his colleagues did estimate a borrowing
function that, instead of being linear as we've drawn it, showed that
as borrowings got to higher and higher levels the associated increase
in the funds rate tended to rise faster.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. LINDSEY. On the other hand, there has been some
sentiment among commenters on this memorandum, that perhaps in some of
the more recent data the relationship bends the other way since, after
all, as borrowings increase more and more, each $100 million involves
a smaller percentage change. So, confronted with two alternatives
suggesting the opposite, we took a hard look at these data and just
fit a straight line through them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I react to this along the following
lines.
The whole thing, as a matter of perspective, represents a
series of technical relationships that are the first step in a long,

-13-

7/7/87

long, linkage between what we do and prices and all the things we
really care about. Looked at in that light, I walk away somewhat
Indeed, when you look at the
amazed that it works as well as it does.
net deviations as summarized either on chart 2 or chart 5, I'm hard
pressed to conclude that any of them is likely to have any net effect
Indeed, the
on real economic variables or prices or anything else.
So, it's
deviations are in that sense, I think, astonishingly small.
reassuring to me in that sense. But what is a little troubling about
it to me is that it comes pretty darn close to saying that, despite
all our protestations to the contrary, we're really operating on the
federal funds rate.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I find that troubling because we've
been down that path before; and to the extent we seduce ourselves back
into that I think it could come back to haunt us in the long run.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I didn't read this carefully, but I
came out with the opposite conclusion: that the relationship is so
loose that we're not doing that.
MR. JOHNSON. I guess the point is that even if we are, we
I
still think of the funds rate as a check against the borrowings.
Many times the funds
know that from sitting in on the [daily] call.
rate is used as a check to gauge whether the reserve estimates are
correct.
If the funds rate starts to move off from where we would
have expected, given the reserve estimates, we seem to second guess
our Treasury balance numbers and our excess reserve numbers and
naturally assume that our reserve estimates are off because the funds
Therefore, the Desk tends to do more or less in the
rate is strange.
open market.
In that case, the
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's one thing.
funds rate is being used appropriately, in my judgment, as an
information variable.
MR. JOHNSON.

Right.

Indeed,
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's telling you something.
some of those deviations--which, again, I regard as small in net
terms--ultimately reflect a willingness to let the federal funds rate
at times tell us something. But that's a little different.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree.
And that's a short-term view
versus a longer-term policy issue. But I'm just saying that even if
we were trying to target the funds rate, the question still remains:
Are we targeting the funds rate to affect the aggregates or reserves
or are we just trying to stabilize the funds rate?
In other words, we
could target the funds rate at various levels over short periods that
would affect the aggregates, and I think that's basically what we're
doing, as one means of sort of trying to-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
doing.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes.

That's always what I thought we were

-14-

7/7/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But when I got through reading this
I got a little nervous on the other side of the ledger.
MR. JOHNSON.
If you let the funds rate drift off somewhere,
over the long run it's eventually going to affect the aggregates.
So
you can't really look at one without the other.
MR. BLACK. The most important argument for using the
borrowed reserve target is that it gives us a certain amount of
political insulation so that we can let the federal funds rate move
more than we otherwise would be able to do.
That to me is the
important decision.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are all kinds of interesting
questions and implications toward operating techniques which I will
declare after this discussion will not be acted on at this particular
meeting.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think you're right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I assume that the operating techniques
will remain the same, for this meeting anyway. Let's turn to the
economic situation.
I gaze down at the other end of the table and
note that we have a few other changes.
You are aware that Mr.
Kichline will leave us in a couple of weeks. He has been at that end
of the table during my whole Chairmanship; I don't know how I'm going
to get along without him but I see some able-bodied, capable people
down there to lead me through this meeting anyway.
MR. PRELL.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usual, we've
distributed to you a set of charts; they are entitled "Staff
Presentation".
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it was a comprehensive presentation,
very complete in all senses.
It can now be attacked. Are there any
attackers?
Mr. Parry.
MR. PARRY. I have two questions. With regard to the
inflation assumptions for 1988 and what might be the interest rate
implications: We have a forecast of inflation that is really not very
much different from what you have for 1988. But to achieve that, to
keep a lid on inflation, we had to generate some slack in the economy
and that was done by having short-term rates--in this case the
commercial paper rate--rise a little more than 200 basis points to 9
percent.
In your principal assumptions you referred to an appreciable
rise in interest rates over the projection period.
I wonder if you
could be more specific. What is the extent of that increase in rates
and where would you have the commercial paper rate at the end of 1988?
MR. PRELL. We've made assumptions about both short- and
long-term interest rates. As I indicated, we see Treasury bond rates
moving back above the 9 percent level that we saw just recently. On
the short end we are looking at federal funds trading above 8 percent
by some time in 1988.
That would be a shade less of an increase than
you're talking about but in the same general ballpark.
MR. PARRY.
I see.
The second question is [about inflation.]
Your forecast for 1988 has a slight upward trend in the last three

7/7/87

quarters in the fixed-weight deflator. And, if I remember correctly,
you have import prices rising about 10 percent, the dollar declining
less than 10 percent, and little slack in the economy given that the
If
unemployment rate remains relatively constant around 6.3 percent.
you were to continue your projection beyond 1988, it sounds to me as
though your forecast implies that inflation rates continue to move up
in 1989.
Is that correct?
MR. PRELL. I think the answer is that much would depend on
such things as what happens to the dollar in the latter part of the
Another uncertainty is, of
current projection period and into 1989.
course, what the implication of any unemployment rate level might be
But our forecast certainly hints of
for inflationary pressures.
ongoing pressure on compensation coming from the price increases that
we have forecast and the risk that if the dollar continued to decline
substantially into 1989 there would probably be some further
acceleration in general inflation.
MR. PARRY. But even a decline in the dollar through 1988
would probably have some inflationary impact in 1989.
MR. PRELL.

That's why I mentioned it for the latter part of

MR. PARRY.

Yes.

1988.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Thank you.
Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
Ted, I wonder if you could comment on how you
see the business outlook for some of our major trading partners,
Germany, Japan, England, etc.?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think the answer to your question is not
terribly robust. As that chart that I referred to shows, for those
countries the growth is in the 2 percent range, on average.
Growth in
domestic demand is somewhat faster. The current situation presents a
somewhat mixed picture.
Germany, after a very weak first quarter,
which was partly a seasonal weakness that is not seasonally adjusted
[in the statistics], seems to have moved quite rapidly in the first
couple of months of the second quarter, according to the available
data.
Unfortunately, Germany has shown more strength in their
external accounts than one might want to see from our perspective.
Japan, on the other hand, had a better first quarter and things seem
to have become a little soggier in the second quarter. However, they
have put in place the fiscal package that was announced just after the
last FOMC meeting, and that was somewhat more than we had expected.
That has led us to boost our forecast of growth in Japan for this year
and next year.
So, we have real growth in the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent
range in that country and in the 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent range in
Germany. The somewhat prolonged slowdown in growth in Germany does
seem to be having some effects on the rest of western Europe.
I think
the projection for France also has been marked down in recent months.
The only country in western Europe that seems to be doing quite well
is the United Kingdom. It all depends on how you read these things,
but that in part seems to reflect a boost from the depreciation of the
pound last year and the somewhat easier fiscal policy--they wouldn't
describe it that way--that they seem to have gone into this year.
We
do see some drop-off in growth in 1988, in part reflecting the fact

-16-

7/7/87

that the economy has recovered this year. And as far as Canada is
concerned, we see things largely dependent on [unintelligible]; so you
find growth in the 2 percent area next year. On balance, it's not
much of a favorable picture and [there's] not much scope or
willingness to foster very much [further growth].
We have built into
the forecast some further downward adjustment in the interest rates in
these countries, though I would say it's quite modest, presumably
triggered by a discount [rate cut] or [unintelligible] some exchange
market pressures to bring that about.
Aside from the Japanese fiscal
package, which we assume will pass before the [unintelligible] go into
effect, and the German tax cut that comes in the first quarter of next
year, we really have no other major policy that-MR. BOEHNE. Have you given any thought to what the
implications of the outlook in the United States plus the outlook that
you just gave for Europe and Japan might have on the less developed
countries and their external accounts?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and that has deteriorated noticeably but
not in demand for right now. Since April, for example, we have [been
projecting] a deterioration in the current account next year of
roughly $4 billion for the [unintelligible] of the developing
countries.
That reflects the influence of somewhat weaker growth in
the industrial world and somewhat higher interest rates and slightly
better commodity prices, on average, at least relative to early April
where the [unintelligible] occur. But that effect has been negative-much of it coming from interest rate assumptions. Now, that's not
enough to upset the apple cart, but it could rebalance the apples in
the cart.
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. What surprised me about this forecast was
your projection of real consumption, consumer spending. It's really a
quite low level in 1988.
It seems to me that on the one hand, you're
projecting increased industrial production, which I would have thought
would have increased disposable income, and yet you're not showing any
increase in the saving rate.
I would have thought that you would have
a higher level of consumer expenditures. What am I missing in that
equation?
MR. PRELL. Well, we have some modest growth in manufacturing
employment going with the stronger industrial production but those
gains are not large by any means. We see overall employment growth
slowing from the pace of the last couple of years. Layered on top of
what would be moderate growth in nominal personal income would be more
sizable consumer price increases--not more sizable than we've seen in
the first half of this year but more sizable by far than we had over
the past year or two. And thus, that's eroding real income, labor
income, by a substantial amount.
So, as I pointed out, we have gains
in income and expenditures of a similar magnitude. This is very low
growth in consumption expenditures, particularly in a nonrecession
period. But consumption expenditures have been very high relative to
economic activity. And consumer durables have been growing very
strongly. There's probably much less pent-up demand for consumer
durables than there has been. We think the financial situation on the

-17-

7/7/87

whole is one in which we probably will not see the kind of
aggressiveness of spending relative to income that we've seen over the
past few years. So, that is the story behind our admittedly very weak
projection of consumption expenditures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
point of view. That has to
improvement in the external
doesn't produce very much.

It's a very optimistic projection from one
happen to release the resources for the
account and produce some savings; it
Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. If the dollar were to level off relative to
foreign currencies about where it is now, what do you think that would
do to our real trade position over this forecast period and to the
aggregate forecast that you have?
MR. TRUMAN. It depends a bit on what else goes along with
that, in particular whether the dollar leveling off and presumably a
little less inflationary pressure would lead to the same kind of
interest rate projection or trend or a somewhat easier one. But, an
obviously easier one needs to result in more gain on income.
In terms
of where you would be in the fourth quarter of next year, it would
mean roughly between $20 and $30 billion, depending on which
assumption you make on the real net export side. And it would be
maybe between $5 and $10 billion on the current account side by the
end of the projection period to keep GNP unchanged.
In the worst
case, using the higher number in terms of losses, if you keep GNP
unchanged and you get the $10 billion and $30 billion (nominal and
real)--if you essentially let the tighter policy show through--given
the passage of the exchange rate pressures, you would lose a half
percentage point or so on the level of GNP.
You'll get $5 to $10
billion off-MR. STERN. I guess what bothers me about this forecast is
that you have the dollar going down somewhat further and interest
rates higher than they were the last time we met, and you have taken
something off real growth. The directions are all right but it seems
to me that the adjustment is kind of small.
If things work out that
way, I would think we would be looking at slower growth than you have
here and something that would be approaching a stagflation
environment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms. Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have one question for Ted Truman and one for
Mike Prell. For Ted: How is the rundown you gave of the growth
forecast for these various major economies consistent with our
expectation of a substantial pickup in exports?
I keep thinking our
exports have to go someplace and England isn't going to buy them all.
MR. TRUMAN. First, I think the answer to that question, and
then you can ask Mike of course, is that domestic demand in these
countries is growing faster--by 1/2 percentage point or more--than
production in these countries. And it is the difference between
domestic demand and production that is absorbing the net imports.
It
is generated not so much by relative income effects because of growth
but price effects. To put it more clearly, it's the other side of the
gap we had in the early 1980s between domestic demand and production,
against a background in which domestic demand will be growing more

-18-

7/7/87

slowly. There is less help from income effects; [we're] relying to a
considerable extent on the price effects that produce increases in
exports. And as I noted, one particular problem in that area has to
do with the role of protectionism, in a generalized sense, in
weakening the link between relevant price changes and foreign
exchange. Of course, part of the protectionism thrust comes from a
"soggy" or not terribly dynamic world economy.
MS. SEGER. Well, do you think that there is enough zip or
that it's not so soggy that it will sabotage our interests-MR. TRUMAN. First of all, the growth we are anticipating
over this forecast period is not much different than we've had over
the past four quarters, and we have only a slightly faster pace for
growth of non-agricultural exports, as we are all aware. So we're not
relying a lot on that further pickup in the rate of increase of our
non-agricultural exports.
MS. SEGER. But we were badgering Germany and Japan, I
thought, to stimulate their economies so that there would be-MR. TRUMAN. I believe that we're better off, in some sense,
than if they had chosen for their own reasons not to accelerate the
tax cut in Germany and not to adopt the fiscal stimulus in the case of
Japan. But that's not enough to boost the overall level of production
in those countries; in fact, as I've commented, looking out into 1988
we now see domestic demand slowing a bit further.
MS. SEGER.
MR. TRUMAN.

Okay, but it still makes me nervous.
I share your nervousness.

MS. SEGER. For Mike: In reading the Greenbook and other
materials that were distributed prior to the meeting, there's sort of
an underlying tone of an economy that's about to go into orbit. It's
not stated that way, and maybe I just read it wrong, but the forecast
suggests that private demand suddenly is going to explode and that
there's going to be this inflationary surge. I went through all the
individual numbers and thought it through in my own mind, looking at
the different sectors and so forth, and I must say that I can't find
one that is about to go off in a bit of robustness.
MR. PRELL. Governor Seger, if that was the impression we
left, that was not our intention. As I've noted, we have in fact very
modest growth of domestic spending in the forecast period. We think
things may pick up a bit in the near term on the consumer side, but
only because there are some autos that have to be cleared away before
too long--before we get well into the '88 model year. I suppose the
recent indicators on business fixed investment have been a bit
cheerier and, indeed, if one wanted to be optimistic one could see
some upside potential there relative to our forecast. Certainly, our
forecast is considerably weaker than any of the major surveys-Commerce, McGraw-Hill, and Merrill-Lynch--would suggest for the
remainder of the year. If one became particularly bullish on the
basis of recent stories about the computer industry maybe we could be
on the brink of another resurgence of high-tech spending. But
basically, our thrust is not toward a boldness in the economy such as
you've referred to.

7/7/87

MR. PARRY. What deflator does the Commerce Department use on
their surveys?
Don't they use last year's price experience?
MR. PRELL. Well, I was thinking of the nominal [GNP], but
yes, the Commerce Department takes the experience over the most recent
four quarters and applies that as the deflator for the current
calendar year's spending. That gives us-MR. PARRY.

So they're probably overstating?

MR. PRELL. We're expecting a fairly low inflation in fixed
investment prices this year.
In fact, that computer factor that I
mentioned for the second quarter would put equipment price inflation
at essentially zero in that period.
So it may be that they're not
that far off; but looking at nominal spending, the trajectory implied
to get their annual total is far steeper than we have in the forecast.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I also have a question about the consumption
expenditures, which I think look on the low side, particularly for
1988.
Cross-referencing a bit between [components of] the Greenbook
forecast, specifically for autos, Mike, you are forecasting an
increase in auto sales next year yet durable expenditures seem awfully
soft.
Maybe I missed it but what is your number for autos?
MR. PRELL. Total auto sales next year are a shade over
10-1/2 million units. We have about 10.3 million units for the
current year.
The difference there is something of an artifact of the
bulge that we had in the latter half of 1986 which borrowed some from
1987.
Looking at it in terms of the year from the fourth quarter we
have 10.7 million units in both years; auto sales provide essentially
no contribution to growth for the period from the fourth quarter of
1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988.
I would note that cars are not
the only element of motor vehicle purchases by households at this
time.
The sales of vans and trucks and light trucks are really
running quite strong and may persist; that's not something that should
be ignored. There's little more I can add to what I said earlier
about our consumption forecast.
It's not inconceivable that consumers
will not get over their increased bent for spending and that they will
continue to spend. The short-run income developments, transitory for
May, [could lead consumers to be] very optimistic about the future and
push consumer spending up further. But we think that's not as likely
as what we have forecast; we feel that the strength we've seen has
been, in part, a reflection of those currents of trade movements or
availability of imported [goods] at attractive prices and that has
influenced a shift in the direction.
MR. KEEHN.
If you have a level of doubt about any part of
the forecast is this one area where your doubt level is a little
higher than in others?
MR. PRELL. Oh, I don't know.
I'm always very doubtful about
the part that Ted is most [unintelligible].
But consumer spending is
a very big sector, so a small error in one's thinking about it could
have a big effect on overall GNP.

7/7/87

MR. KEEHN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
The number that I find rather depressing, and I
want to make sure I understand it, is your projection that the Federal
deficit next year is going to be about the same as in fiscal 1987.
After $25 billion of deficit reducing actions and after what I recall
was a fairly sizable increase in the Social Security surplus--which I
assume is in these numbers--we still end up with no change in the
Federal deficit.
And on top of that you're projecting a wiping out of
the state and local government surplus, a low consumer saving rate,
and some decline in the inflow of foreign capital associated with the
reduction of our current account deficit.
To me, all of this adds up
to the possibility that we will see much higher interest rates, as a
consequence of all of these forces, than you have been suggesting.
Now, perhaps you didn't want to scare us but-MR. PRELL.
There is a complex of things involved here.
Clearly, our overall nominal GNP growth is not very rapid relative to
the kind of money that we have built into this forecast.
It doesn't
imply a large amount of interest rate pressure, certainly not more
than we have built in.
On the outlook for the Federal budget, the
situation does look less favorable to us now than it did previously.
In part, that's a result of our ongoing attempts to interpret the
effects of tax reform; the pattern of movement from year-to-year
doesn't look as favorable at this point as it did before.
And, of
course, with the kind of nominal income growth we have, we're not
generating a tremendous growth of Federal revenues.
Our Federal
spending projection is not terribly robust but when we put all these
things together, we come out with 1988 much closer--in fact almost
identical--to what we have for 1987 now.
MR. MORRIS.
I suppose what could really cause us trouble
would be if the improvement in our trade picture should lead to a
larger increase in business investment expenditures than we're
projecting here.
That would put an awful lot of strain on the capital
markets with the government deficit not declining.
MR. PRELL.
Yes, I think that's a possibility.
We have built
into our thinking some stimulus to investment coming from this
improvement in manufacturing, and that's associated with the trade
improvement.
As we said, we think equipment spending will be fairly
strong and we may see some increase in industrial construction, too,
as time passes.
I should note that one other factor that has changed
in our thinking from earlier in the year with respect to the 1988
fiscal year budget is the higher level of interest rates that we have
seen come about.
We have that extended a bit into the fiscal 1988
period, so that is adding to the deficit.
But in a sense that's sort
of an artifact; many people would want to look at the so-called
primary deficit without interest to get a better guide as to what the
underlying movement is.
But it's adding something significant to
these numbers.
MR. MORRIS.
The increase in the Social Security surplus is
not a very big factor for 1988.
Maybe I was--

-21-

7/7/87

MR. PRELL.
Well, I must confess: I don't think we have
specific numbers on the surplus.
It's clear that the trend over the
next decade or more is going to be in that direction; and for the 21st
century I assume it's moving in that direction.
It would be helped by
the increase in Federal taxes that will occur the first of the year.
MR. MORRIS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
Mike, I wanted to pursue your assumptions with
You have very
respect to money growth and your statement earlier.
As you
slow rates of growth of M2 and M3 over the projection period.
mentioned before, I guess that's associated in part with rising
First of all, what's implied
interest rates and increasing velocity.
And secondly, apparently you're
for M1 growth if you looked at that?
comfortable that the liquidity that's being provided, if you will, is
But I
sufficient to sustain the type of expansion you're projecting.
wondered what that implied overall in terms of velocity behavior.
MR. PRELL.

We think there's--

Well, I could say something, but I think
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
we'll get into this later in some more sophistication presumably than
Mr. Prell has indicated.
MR. PRELL.

Don Kohn has an exhibit that he'll be giving for

these--

going to

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I presume that Mr. Kohn's presentation is
revolve around those issues.
MR. MELZER.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

I
Ted, you said something about oil prices.
MR. JOHNSON.
thought you said something about rising oil demand so that we have
But we have a very
potential upside risk on the price level.
depressed level of world demand it seems; I'm wondering where the rise
in oil demand would come from out of this whole picture.
MR. TRUMAN.
All I was trying to suggest was that that's a
There was some further
reason why we don't have prices going up.
secular decline in U.S. production and the leveling off of some of the
production in other non-OPEC sources of supply like the North Seas.
But there was at the same time [unintelligible] on the production side
And given some growth in GNP and production
of the equation ex OPEC.
around the world--it's not bulging but it adds to demand, with the
So the question is
elasticity of something between 3/4 and 1 percent.
whether that differential is going to be absorbed by the substantial
excess capacity in OPEC, in particular in the Middle East, abstracting
If it's going to be
from military installations [unintelligible].
absorbed by Saudi Arabia increasing its revenues by increasing
production--which it clearly has the scope to do if it wants to--that
What happens to [unintelligible] in that way to
is one scenario.
stabilize prices and to not cause the kind of run-up in prices that
would bring a presumption of exploration around the world in non-OPEC

-22-

7/7/87

sources of supply. That is another scenario--a small gradual increase
of 1 million barrels a day roughly in the demand for OPEC oil, which
could easily be accommodated by OPEC itself.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
past year or so?

How much is U.S. production down in the

So far it's down something like 600,000 barrels
MR. TRUMAN.
a day.
The numbers are not great on this.
And we have another couple
of hundred built into the forecast.
MR. JOHNSON.
I also have are a comment on the interest rate
It's true that by your
picture and a word in terms of the deficit.
projection the deficit is not improving in '88 over '87, but you have
I think the deficit-toabout $300 or $400 billion more nominal GNP.
GNP ratio declines by about .3 or .4. So you have a slackening of
In addition to that,
pressure there even with a constant number.
you're estimating the same degree of capital flows.
If I remember
right, there is not a dramatic change in capital flows from abroad.
So, under your forecast there is going to be a still significant
amount of foreign capital inflow [in relation] to the declining
On the state and local front, Frank, your state
deficit-to-GNP ratio.
and local numbers don't count the pension surpluses, which are very
large.
So, I don't see in this scenario big interest rate pressures
coming from the government side. Now, if those capital inflows were
really changing sharply you'd have a different picture. But that's
not the forecast. And the deficit declines as a percent of GNP.
So,
there seems to be an improvement on that side rather than a change in
the other direction.
But if you look at the numbers on a quarterly
MR. PRELL.
basis you would see, for example, that our NIA deficit is moderating
over the forecast period to the end of 1988. We have about $158
billion in the fourth quarter of 1988; and we have a projection of
$187 billion for the current quarter. So there is a perceptible
downward movement.
You are quite right about the surplus of the
social insurance funds in the state and local sector which is running
about $60 billion and edging up in our forecast. That sector as a
whole, at least as measured in the national income accounts, is moving
in the direction of additional net saving to offset some of the
Federal deficit.
MR. MORRIS.
But you do have an absolute decline in the
foreign capital inflows in 1988, right?
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. MORRIS.
terms so that--

Yes, of about $20 billion.
Not only as a percent of GNP but in absolute

MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
It's not dramatic but it's there.
It
doesn't change at all in 1987 I don't think. There is something in
there-MR. MORRIS.
MR. JOHNSON.

No, I'm talking about 1988.
Yes.

-23-

7/7/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What happens, Mike, to the net
domestic savings gap in 1988?
In other words, what happens to the
financing requirements of the government plus the private sector
relative to net domestic savings?
MR. PRELL.
I have to do the arithmetic to get to the net.
Looking at the government sectors combined, as a percent of GNP we
have a 3.3 percent deficit last year moving down to 2.6 percent this
year and then to 2.3 percent next year.
So there's a significant
movement this year and then some modest further movement next year
while net foreign investment declines by 0.7 percent over that period.
That is almost, I'll say, 3/4 of the movement in the government
sector.
In gross terms private saving is about unchanged for 1987 and
1988 in our forecast.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

As a percent of GNP or in absolute

terms?
MR. PRELL.

As a percent of GNP.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
1988 than in 1987.
MR. PRELL.
MR. TRUMAN.

So the net is slightly worse off in

Net, right.
One of the problems is that these statements are

in nominal terms. If you look at the real terms you get a somewhat
different picture because the real adjustment on the external side
is--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

But for financing purposes the

real--

MR. TRUMAN. Right, but the resource allocation implications
of the reallocation exercise are more difficult, in some sense, on the
financial side.
They do get more reshuffling [unintelligible] side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Does anybody else have a question?

MR. MELZER.
I just want to ask: I assume the way you've
stated interest rates as an assumption means they are more or less an
endogenous variable here. Where would this come apart had you not
projected the kind of increase in rates that you have?
MR. PRELL. Well, I think we would have tendencies toward
greater inflation and a weaker dollar. And the kind of acceleration
we would see in the inflation rate next year would be a significant
change from what we had.
I think you would notice it; that up-tilt
would be considerably greater. These are matters of degree. We
haven't changed our interest rate forecast from last time to this
time.
The change is not drastic, really, by comparison to what we
were looking at earlier in the year [but] we have a substantially
greater increase in rates than we anticipated at that time.
MS. SEGER.
Could you just run the numbers by us instead of
just saying appreciable?
I don't know what that means.

-24-

7/7/87

MR. PRELL. Yes.
Maybe you were out of the room when I gave
the numbers earlier. We have federal funds, for example, rising above
We have long-term
8 percent by some time in the latter part of 1988.
Treasury bonds moving noticeably above 9 percent.
MS. SEGER.

How about home mortgages?

MR. PRELL. We have them moving back to the highs--maybe
toward the 11 percent area.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow up on Tom Melzer's question: If
you look at the quarterly pattern of prices measured by the CPI, the
implicit deflator, or otherwise, you really end up 1988 at about the
But I think you may have
same level as the second quarter of 1987.
just answered my question when you said to Tom that the rise in
Is it?
interest rates is what pulls that to about that level.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's clearly an ingredient in the damping
of GNP growth in our forecast. The fiscal side is one factor; but the
financial environment we think will tend to damp domestic demand, and
overall pressures on the labor markets will not increase. And so-MR. GUFFEY. Given the capacity utilization you're
of roughly 80-81 percent and the unemployment rate of about
percent, it could turn out not to show through in prices if
dollar does not fall. We may not need the various interest
you have built into the projection.

projecting
6-1/2
indeed the
rates that

I would just
I can't quarrel with that.
MR. PRELL.
reiterate my statement that there has to be a considerable uncertainty
assigned to one's reading of the implications of a given level of the
unemployment rate. We think it has gotten in the territory where it
There are areas of greater tightness; in
will [unintelligible].
nondurable manufacturing, for example, there are industries right now
that have very high levels of capacity utilization and price pressures
are evident there.
But there's clearly a significant range of
uncertainty around it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have
questions that are contrary on this presentation?
you to present your alternative scenarios, if any,
I don't want to interpret the group as
important.
agreement with the staff. Mr. Parry.

any particular
If not, I would ask
that you think are
all being in full

MR. PARRY. Our forecast really is in agreement with the
broad outlines of the Greenbook forecast. We're expecting growth of
just under 3 percent this year and a slowdown next year, although
perhaps more of a slowdown than is included in the Greenbook. This
greater weakness that we have is in spite of a little faster growth of
consumption. It's a result of a smaller improvement in net exports
than is in the Greenbook forecast and a somewhat weaker housing
sector.
Our inflation forecast for this year and next, as measured by
the fixed-weight deflator is 4-1/2 percent for this year and 4 percent
for next year. And higher import prices are certainly a significant
But I just want to repeat that
contributor to these inflation rates.
the only way we were able to keep inflation to these levels was to

-25-

7/7/87

produce slack in the economy by means of a fairly substantial increase
in short-term interest rates on the order of 200 basis points. And
frankly, I'd be very interested in what types of trade-offs other

members of the Committee ran into as they addressed this issue of the
relationship between their forecast of inflation and its implications
for interest rates in 1988.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think Governor Heller will tell us the

answer to that question.
MR. HELLER. I'm not sure. You asked where we were would
differ with the forecast; let me focus on that. I think the Federal
government deficit number of $168 billion is probably on the
pessimistic side. I would expect that the tax reform which has taken
place, and which is clearly difficult to model as far as econometric
models are concerned, would result in a considerable broadening of the
tax base and, therefore, that the tax revenues would be running higher
than the projections indicate. That would be the one factor that I
would argue would relieve some of the pressure in the financial
markets and thus would yield lower interest rates in an overall
economic environment where there is relatively slow consumption
growth--with which I agree--and a lot of underutilized capacity and,
therefore, lower investment. But the commodity markets still have
quite a bit of excess capacity, on a global basis at least.
I think
that is the framework in which we could see interest rates staying
roughly where they are, or maybe even drifting lower, and not having
that inflation rate surge that would accompany the projections that
the staff has here. Overall, as far as the level of economic activity
is concerned, I'm roughly in agreement with the Greenbook. But as far
as the financial implications are concerned, I'm not as pessimistic;
and therefore, unless we do something to drive interest rates up, I
think we can see probably the same level that prevails now, if not
lower.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, our forecast for this
year is basically in agreement with the Greenbook but we depart
somewhat [for 1988] on both the real growth and the inflation side.
We think that real GNP is going to be more in the neighborhood of 2.8
percent, which is the number we used in our wire to the Board's staff.
That's basically because of our belief that personal consumption is
going to be stronger than the Greenbook indicates. We also think the
investment forecast for 1988 is a little on the sluggish side in the
Board staff's forecast; we think it's going to be a little better than
that. Also, we don't see quite the improvement in the trade situation
that the Greenbook implies and that translates into our forecast for
inflation which we have rising somewhat faster than the Greenbook. In
fact, we put the GNP deflator at 4.3 percent, which is about a half
point higher than the staff expectations. Unlike Governor Heller, if
I understood him correctly, I think the Federal budget deficit
projection is a little on the optimistic side; I think it's perhaps
going to be higher than the $167 billion that the staff is
forecasting. And that might give a little stimulus to the economy as
well. The one place where I think we are in agreement, if I
understood the staff forecast correctly, is that we're likely to get
wage pressures toward the end of this year and out into 1988 simply
because we're operating probably at our potential in the economy at

-26-

7/7/87

the moment. And if the inflation number that I have is right, that
will in turn put some pressures on the wage front.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The New York Bank's Research
Department forecast has basically the same bottom line as the Board
staff's forecast but there are a couple of very important differences
in the assumptions. In the forecast of the New York Research
Department--I distinguish that from my own forecast, because sometimes
they're not the same--they basically have no further change in the
exchange rate over the forecast period from about the levels of the
past month or so. Vis-a-vis the Board staff's forecast that really
constitutes a very large difference because it reflects not just the 9
or 10 percent [decline that is forecast] for next year but also what
happens over the balance of this year. So, the net difference is more
like 13 or 14 percent from where we are right now. Now, because we
don't have that further decline in the dollar we get some spurious
feedbacks from that. For example, in nominal terms, our current
account number for next year is actually better than the staff's
number even though in real terms the opposite might be the case; it's
hard to tell there precisely. But by not getting that further 13 or
14 percent of J-curve effects we actually end up with the spurious
result, at least in the near term, of a better current account
situation in 1988.
The other thing that is true by assumption is that while we
have some build up in interest rates I don't think it is quite as
sharp, by implication, as maybe what you're talking about, Mike. But
we get a different mix: we pick up a little more in terms of domestic
spending and a little less perhaps in real terms on the net export
side. It washes out in terms of GNP to about the same although, as I
said, the current account--which for financial purposes is important-is actually better in 1988. The other thing that is troublesome is
that, notwithstanding the fact that we have by assumption no change in
the dollar, our price numbers are higher, if anything, than the staff
numbers--not by a whole heck of a lot, but they are higher. Indeed,
it seems to me that when you look at all the price forecasts that are
around, certainly the overwhelming consensus of the forecasts, though
not all of them, is for a situation for 1988 in which the deflator
either bumps or passes through 4 percent and the consumer price index
either bumps or passes through 5 percent. And in some cases the
consumer price index gets up into the 5-1/2 percent range. Without
being too precise, I am just thinking of those thresholds of 4 percent
and 5 percent. I'm hard pressed at this point to see what, short of a
recession or some major slowdown in economic growth, will prevent that
from happening. In other words, given labor market conditions, import
prices, and all the rest, that kind of result seems to me to be almost
baked in already. To the extent that developments either in oil
prices or other things work the wrong way, so much the worse. So, I
find it troubling that--and I'm referring to my personal forecast on
this--I end up with such a price outlook, again just focusing on those
4 and 5 percent thresholds, despite a different assumption about the
dollar exchange rate. When looked at it in terms of a growth pattern
of say, 2-3/4 percent, just to pick a number out of the air, that's
telling us that we're at the point where we've got to pay for some of
our past sins. If we have faster growth we're going to have more
inflation and we're going to have less external adjustment. And when

7/7/87

-27-

I look at that growth pattern for next year of, say, 2-3/4 percent, I
think it's about the best we can possibly hope for.
MR. PARRY.
in that forecast?

What kind of interest rate increase do you have

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
don't have the numbers.
MR. PARRY.

It's really quite modest, Bob.

I

Modest?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
That's partly because by
assumption the exchange rate is unchanged.
MR. PARRY.

But the higher inflationary rate doesn't feed

through.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is kind of a mechanical
exercise; not in any material way, no.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Yes.
My comments can be brief, Mr. Chairman,
primarily because for all practical purposes we're right where the
We're slightly less optimistic
staff forecast is--for 1988 at least.
for the remainder of this year; rather than the 3 percent, we see
something more like 2-1/2 percent. We question whether there's quite
that much strength there. We do see a little price pressure for next
On
year--not anything particularly great, but slightly higher prices.
balance, we pretty much agree with the staff forecast that was just
given.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

I want to pick up on Bob Parry's theme, using a
MR. MELZER.
money-driven model and extending the debate about what money is
growing at right now. Just extending the present growth rate--which
for this purpose we assumed to be 8 to 10 percent in M1--into 1988
produced what I would consider unsatisfactory results, with the
deflator getting up to 5-1/2 percent by the fourth quarter of 1988.
So, in coming up with our projections, we assumed a further degree of
restraint in 1988 vis-a-vis 1987, which I guess, Bob, would really
translate into another way of looking at your interest rate
assumption. The net result was that, basically, in 1987 we tend to be
at the high end of the [Committee member's ranges] with a 7-1/4
percent nominal growth rate--3 percent real and 4-1/4 percent
deflator. But then in 1988 we're more in the median area with 7
percent nominal, 2-1/2 percent real and 4-1/2 percent on the deflator.
But we found, really, the same thing using another type of model.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Our outlook is quite similar to the forecast that
Bob Forrestal gave just a moment ago; namely, we're really very much
in sync with the staff with regard to 1987 but our 1988 number is 3
percent. The difference, as I alluded to earlier, is in the
consumption area; in each of the three categories of consumption we
have a higher level of growth than the staff has in its forecast. The

7/7/87

-28-

services number seems awfully low, certainly by comparative standards
with what we've had over the last few years. And we really wonder if
that's realistic. So that's an area of difference. Our inflation
numbers are somewhat higher but not much higher than the staff
forecast, based principally on the export or the trade side.
We feel
that higher import prices are going to work their way through to a
greater extent than in the forecast that the staff gave.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. As far as the real economy and real growth are
concerned, my own view is very similar to the Greenbook numbers; I
think that may be the most likely outlook. But as I suggested
earlier, if I were to use something like Mike's interest rate
assumptions, I think I would get something that would be considerably
weaker.
Indeed, some of our more formal models suggested that that
would be the case as well. On the other side of the coin, and really
sort of putting the dilemma before us, I think the staff has
appropriately raised concerns about the price outlook and inflationary
pressures as the months and quarters pass here. Again, our more
formal models suggested that, if anything, those pressures must come
to fruition more quickly and somewhat more severely than the Greenbook
forecast and my own judgmental view of how things are likely to
unfold.
So, I think we are facing some unpleasant choices.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else feel compelled to say
something?
If not--you feel compelled to say something?
MR. ANGELL.

No, I don't feel compelled.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't want to--

MR. ANGELL.
No, I thought you were stopping the process.
Right now I understand you want to eat lunch.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd rather eat lunch with everybody
having talked on this subject before lunch so we don't return to it
after lunch.
MR. JOHNSON.

Issue complete.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that there's more assuredness, as
I read it, in the 1988 numbers than I quite feel.
I'm somewhat more
optimistic in regard to the rate of wage pattern change than the staff
forecast.
But I hasten to add that I believe that if you wait until
you do get the wage inflation change that accompanies the staff
forecast then it's too late not to have a price impact from that.
So
I have a very strong resistance to creating an environment in which
those wage patterns might develop as the staff and some of the rest of
you seem to be indicating. It seems to me, if you look at the wage
patterns over the entire decade of the 1980s, that you do see a rather
slow, gradual, moderation of wage patterns. And when you look at the
kinds of interest rates and unemployment rates that have existed, it
seems to me that it takes more of a movement of the actual
unemployment rate compared to the assumed natural rate to jar wage
patterns out of the existing mold. So I would expect there to be
somewhat more delay; consequently, it seems to me that there is some
window of opportunity to bring price pressures more in line before a

-29-

7/7/87

wage adjustment takes place. But I am grateful to the staff for
continuing to indicate to me the danger of this because I don't want
it to happen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I don't have too much to add.
The numbers I
had in mind for 1987 and 1988, at least in terms of real and nominal

GNP, and maybe even the deflator, probably are a little more
optimistic. Overall, the [Greenbook] GNP and deflator numbers are
very close to what I had in mind. Like Governor Heller, I had a
slightly different view of the financial implications of that. But
there are so many "ifs" I really don't know the answer at all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a much lower deflator number for
next year if this report is correct.
In fact, you have the lowest.
MR. JOHNSON.
something like that.

Deflator number?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I had 2.7 or 2.8 percent,

Well, 2.6 percent it says here, but-Well, maybe it is.
And you're way down at the bottom on the

rate--

MR. JOHNSON.

All right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes.

Maybe I was thinking more on--

Along with Governor Angell.
Well, what does the staff have for the

deflator?
MESSRS. TRUMAN AND PRELL.

3-3/4 percent.

MR. JOHNSON. 3-3/4 percent? I guess it is different. But
the main issue is that there are so many "ifs" I don't know where to
start. One story that's being told here that I think would alleviate
some of the financial implications is that we're shifting resources
into an area where there's a lot slack in the economy. The whole
trade area that we have growing here is one that has a large degree of
slack. We are shifting from a service base into trade-sensitive
manufacturing areas where capacity utilization rates are extremely
low. I agree that there are some sectors that are doing quite well,
like paper or others like that. But basically, we're shifting
resources out of the service area toward the trade-sensitive areas;
and productivity has been high in those areas. Employment growth has
been very small, and whether employment demands will pick up in the
area, I don't know. But, given the utilization rates and the
productivity rates consistent with those sectors, there's a good
chance that they won't increase labor demand dramatically and that
output will be satisfied otherwise. If that's the case, we're [not]
going to be seeing the kind of wage pressures that one might expect
and we may not see a big reduction in the unemployment rate associated
with the output growth that we're forecasting. So, that's sort of my
expectation; the direction things are shifting would tend to indicate

-30-

7/7/87

that the kind of pressures we might expect would not be as great.
That's just a notion; I don't really know.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know; I would like to believe
And if you look at just goods versus services it sounds right.
that.
But if you look at goods, I wonder whether that is a likely result.
It cannot be resolved today, but if you look at it industry by
Would
industry where is the trade improvement likely to take place?
In some cases yes
you, in fact, find substantial amounts of slack?
and in some cases no, I suspect. But where does the balance lie?
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, I think just as--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You're not going to tell me right away.

MR. JOHNSON. I don't know the answer. But if you just
accept the principle--which I think we've all accepted up to this
point--that the trade-sensitive sectors have been severely damaged by
the changes in the trade imbalances, it seems to me that you have to
accept that there's slack there in reversing it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, there is in some industries; paper,
In lumber I don't know--maybe
for instance, is a leading example.
there is and maybe there isn't.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, maybe it's not true that trade has been

damaged.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been
industries have contracted; and in some
damaged it isn't going to recover. The
different industries than where some of
think. But if we compromise-MR. HELLER.

damaged because some
cases where it has been
recovery is going to be in
the damage took place, I

Yes, but capital goods, autos, that whole area--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, look at it.
you got on autos?
I don't know.
MR. ANGELL.

How much capacity have

Right.

MR. JOHNSON. I'm just saying the total rate is around 79
percent and that's very low. It seems to me that's got to be weighted
toward the trade-sensitive sectors.
I would like to see an analysis after
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If not,
lunch. Does anybody else have anything to say before lunch?
we'll go to lunch.
[Lunch recess]
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a technical question: In 1987 what
growth would be needed in M2 to hit the bottom of the current range
for the year? Arithmetically, what does it take?
MR. KOHN.

About 7-1/2 percent.

7/7/87

-31-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

From June to December.

Yes.
It would be about 6-1/2 percent on a QII-toMR. KOHN.
But given where we are in terms-QIV basis.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
7-1/2 percent brings it into a
[unintelligible] 5-1/4 percent.
MR. KOHN.

That will bring it to 5-1/2

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

5-1/4 percent.

Not

percent.
just for December--

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
One historic question is bound to
What is the record in changing these targets at midyear?

midyear;

We have never changed an M2
MR. KOHN.
we have changed M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

arise.

or M3 target at

We have changed M1.

MR. KOHN.
We have rebased it, we have widened the range, and
we have abandoned the range.
We have done all sorts of things.
We
have never changed the M2 and M3 targets at midyear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Stated another way, we've changed the
target that was the most operative.
MR. JOHNSON.

One down, two to go.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Why don't we concentrate mostly on 1987
now?
Somebody commenting on 1987 might want to say something about
1988 but primarily concentrate on 1987 where the choices are more
limited.
We are running within the debt range, so I presume that
There's some bias
nobody is going to want to change the debt target.
Does anybody want to raise a big
against changing these things.
question about M3?
I just want to see if I can narrow this
Now we might want to say something or leave open
[discussion] at all.
the issue of our willingness to fall short or overshoot, or where we'd
But so far as any formal change
like to be in the range, or whatever.
in the ranges, we are talking about M2.
Who would like to say
something?
Mr. Black.
MR. BLACK.
Mr. Chairman, in reading this discussion of the
alternatives in the Bluebook, I was struck by the difference between

the way some of us used to view these ranges several years ago and the
way in which we are approaching them now, which seems to me to be very
different.
In the past, some of us thought of these aggregates as
intermediate targets and we selected ranges that we felt would be
consistent with progress against inflation in the context of
reasonable economic growth. And, of course, one of the advantages of
this fairly direct relationship was that we made an announcement on
the ranges and it was reasonably clear as a signal to both the public
and Congress of what our intentions were.
This present approach is, I
think, very different from that. What we are doing now, as I think
the Bluebook makes very clear, is projecting a broad path of interest
rates that we think will be consistent with a desirable economic

7/7/87

outcome and then we project the ranges for the aggregates that we
think will be consistent with that interest rate path. Now, I realize
that the increased sensitivity of the aggregates to interest rates
makes this a logical move but I worry that this approach, if we follow
it too slavishly, is going to lead us to deemphasize the aggregates to
such a point that these ranges will cease to be reasonable signals to
the market as any kind of confirmation of our longer-term objectives.
Thus, I would have some reservations about reducing this 1987 range
for M2 even though I recognize that a good case can be made for doing
that on the basis of the prospective behavior of interest rates over
the next 18 months or so.
I think some professionals in the market
would clearly understand what we are trying to do; but I think there
would be a lot of other people who would not understand it.
They
would likely interpret it as a considerable move toward ease in the
short run, which seems to me to be pretty unwise, given the
uncertainties regarding the overall economy and inflation. So I think
a better approach would be to leave that range unchanged and state
explicitly that there is a possibility that it may be appropriate to
come in under the range if the recent trends in velocity continue.
If you want me to go on to 1988 I would say that I would take
alternative II, which would reduce all the ranges.
If we do that,
though, I think we ought to have a sentence, which I would be glad to
suggest if anybody has any sympathy with this, to explain the
rationale behind why we are reducing these ranges--that the further
reductions are going to be required over time if we are going to
extend the recent progress we have made against inflation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Parry.

We can get back to M2 in 1988 in time.

MR. PARRY. Well, I will confine my remarks to 1987 and M2.
I think that there is a compelling reason to reduce that range.
Projections that I have seen, including the Board staff's, would
indicate that the growth is going to be about 4-1/2 to 5 percent.
If
indeed that is what the growth is likely to be, why don't we change
the range?
And 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent makes a lot of sense to me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to stay
with the historical precedent that we have established and not move M2
at midyear. First of all, I am not really concerned very much about
the shortfall in M2 that we have had. The indicators suggest that the
expansion is not really in any kind of jeopardy and our discussion
this morning, I think, confirms that.
Also, it seems to me that to
change the range now would suggest a degree of precision that I don't
think we really have.
So I would not be in favor tinkering with M2 at
this point.
I would rather explain it; and I think it can be
explained in terms of a period of slower growth after a period of more
rapid growth. And perhaps even more importantly, it could also be
said that the growth was too rapid in the past.
So again, I would
leave M2 exactly where it is for 1987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I would favor leaving the target for 1987 the
way it is.
It seems to me that it's better to perceive the targets as

-33-

7/7/87

being what you are trying for and subsequently, if reasons cause you
I would rather explain the miss than have new
to miss, to miss.
targets.
Having a new target almost gives you the notion that it is
more important. And if you choose that new target of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent, it is entirely possible that conditions would be such that
7-1/2 percent would be too fast a growth path. So I think it would be
confusing, non-helpful, and unnecessary.
Let me ask you a
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You confused me a bit.
I don't remember your exact words, but [the thrust was
question.
that] they are real targets and we don't change them but explain if we
are going to miss them. Are you really going to try to make it [into
the range] by not changing them?
MR. ANGELL. No, I would not at this point, unless
developments in the economy gave us a clearer signal than we now have.
I would not try for the 7-1/2 percent [second-half] growth path it
would take to get there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Not try for the 7-1/2 percent?

I would not try.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't really consider it a target in
I am just trying to clarify your view.
that sense.
I would consider it the best target we knew how
MR. ANGELL.
To try to adjust the target
to come up with in February of 1987.
[unintelligible] the targets in my view. It was the best indication
at that time of what we should have. And I think we've learned with
M1 that there are conditions under which one better not try to alter-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
a minimum at this point.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. PARRY.

You are not arguing to make 5-1/2 percent

That is correct.
Do you think that is the best target today?

MR. ANGELL. Well, I would prefer that we would have
something in our language. As you may remember, in March we chose the
We can
words 6 percent or less [for the March through June period].
have a short-run range as an appropriate signal in the market that
does not necessarily have to move growth back within the long-run
target range.
MR. PARRY. But if you thought that the best target was 5-1/2
to 8-1/2 percent before, and now six months later you think that it is
something lower--which I think most people do even though they say
don't change the target--why wouldn't you want to communicate that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The whole issue is--and Mr. Kohn, this is
a question that you can answer--have we ever before said explicitly
that we have this target but we expect to come in below it or above
it?
MR. PRELL.
We did in the early 1980s,
under the M1 range, and probably ended up--

I believe.

We were

-34-

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said the low end or the high
end, or whatever. I am asking have we ever said we expect to end up
above or below the range.
MR. KOHN. That, specifically, I don't know.
last year is an exception.

However, M1

MR. JOHNSON. Let me ask: One would have to look back at the
February record, but I thought we had qualified our target by saying
it was interest sensitive; we said something about the fact that if
certain conditions developed, we might expect a more appropriate range
Maybe I am wrong about that.
to be--.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We simply said it was interest sensitive.
I don't remember the exact words, but we said something about
particularly at the beginning of this year, which I just have no
It bears upon this question of whether we would more
recollection of.
I ought to know; I don't recall.
readily or not change the target.
Finally, I would say if we choose to change the
MR. ANGELL.
It would seem to me at this point
target, why 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent?
I am not
that that might be a higher path than we would want to use.
positive but perhaps a 3-1/2 percent growth path in M2 should be
So, I don't want to change it.
tolerated under certain conditions.
If we changed it now to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent then I would feel
more-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then you would feel more compelled to try
to meet the 4-1/2 which you may not want to meet.
MR. ANGELL.

That is right.

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I am looking back over the M2 and M3
targets, relative to where we were in June when we considered them.
In
There is only one other year in which we were substantially away.
other cases we've been less than a point or so away and very well
could have said something, as Mr. Prell indicated, around-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have often said we expected it to be
higher or lower within the target. But I don't recall offhand our
saying, though we might have-I think we have at times used the word "near"-MR. BOEHNE.
indicating that we expected to be near the upper end or near the
bottom end, with "near" meaning we could be a little out of the range
or a little within.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
substance? Mr. Guffey.

Who else wants to talk about the

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would opt to retain the ranges
In listening to Don Kohn, and if I read the Bluebook
for 1987.
correctly, the reason that we would be at or below the range is the
If interest rates remain
anticipation that interest rates will rise.
at current levels or somewhat lower, then I believe the projection is
that we would come within the ranges established in February. I
don't--

7/7/87

-35-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Is that correct?

MR. KOHN. I think we would just about make it. It makes
about a 2 percentage point difference in our second-half growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

With the current levels of interest rates?

MR. KOHN. At the current levels of interest rates.
It would
be a close call but, at least if we believe the differences in the
models, the interest elasticity in the models say it will be-MR. PARRY.
5-1/2 percent?
MR. KOHN.

You say it will be at 5-1/2 percent or close to
Just around 5-1/2 percent.

MR. GUFFEY. My point is that if we change the ranges now to
lower them, it does imply that we believe interest rates will rise
over the next six months. I am not prepared to make that kind of
assumption.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would not change the ranges here
at midyear; most of the reasons have been given. One other thing does
occur to me: it seems that if we did, say, want to go to alternative
II, it would limit us somewhat as to what we were going to do for
1988. If we do the midyear correction, the change would imply some
precision; I would rather wait and make that judgment. In the final
analysis, looking out to 1988 and given my view of the economy for the
second half of this year, I would not want to do anything that would
give a signal that would imply possibly higher interest rates. So I
would leave it alone.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I would leave it alone. I don't think it's a
big issue. Frankly, I am pretty close and could go either way.
Whether we lower it or keep it the same, I doubt very much that it is
going to have much impact on our policy decisions, because I suspect
that our policy is going to be much more dependent upon foreign
exchange markets and the domestic economy and considerations like that
rather than the range. I would keep it the same and just indicate
that it will be near the bottom and be a little vague as to whether it
could go outside the range or stay in by a margin.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. I have a mild preference for just leaving it at
the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. At this point I am not troubled by
the shortfall. The only other thought I would add is that if, as a
technical matter, we are troubled by the prospective slowing, we might
simply broaden the range to something like 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent on
the grounds that that is all we are doing, broadening it.
It really
has no other significance. It would raise the probability that M2
will come out within it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

-36-

7/7/87

I don't think I would change the range either.
MR. JOHNSON.
I would leave it, mainly because I think it does imply some interest
rate forecast.
If interest rates stay where they are then this target
is probably appropriate. And not knowing exactly what the course [of
interest rates] is going to be at this point--that is more of a series
of short-term policy decisions--I don't see any point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

I agree with
MR. MELZER. I would leave it the same as well.
Ed Boehne, [unintelligible] I don't think it is a particularly good
intermediate policy guide. We know it is not how we are going to run
policy. And looking at it on a long-term basis, it looks to me like
velocity growth has been essentially zero over a long period of time.
That would be consistent with our GNP forecast for the year; it would
fall right about in the middle of a 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range. And
finally, I think this signal effect point that Roger Guffey and Manley
I don't think that this is
Johnson raised is also an important one.
necessarily a time when we want to send a signal that we're somehow
tightening up policy further. The recent actions have gained a lot of
credibility in terms of the willingness of this group to respond to
pressures. Those pressures don't seem to be on the table right now,
so why send that signal and potentially destabilize things?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. For once, I agree with everything that has been
said so far, more or less.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

I don't think this is a world-shaking issue, but
MR. MORRIS.
I have a slight preference for a change to a lower range. We have a
number of times gone before the [Congressional] Committee when we have
been in a little embarrassing position of having the targets,
It seems to me we might pick
particularly M1, running over the top.
up a couple of minor credibility points by revising the M2 guidelines
So I say, why
down.
I don't see any harm that could come from it.
not?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, for all the reasons stated, I am in favor
of maintaining the current range. The only thing I might say that is
slightly different is that I think there is a message effect in all
this.
I think the economic results have been and look to be pretty
good.
A change in the range might imply some kind of policy change
and I don't favor that.
On top of it all, it is an awkward time to be
considering change.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. SEGER.
alternative I.

Governor Seger.

I'll be brief.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I favor maintaining the ranges of

Mr. Corrigan.

-37-

7/7/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I'd keep the range, too.
What I
would be prepared to say is that, in a context in which velocity was
continuing to [rise], I would be willing to tolerate a shortfall.
MR. HENDRICKS.
I would leave it the same for all the reasons
that have been stated and perhaps one that has not quite been stated.
And that is that [given the precedent] of not doing it at midyear in
the past, as I understand it, I think we might confuse the market
unduly and unnecessarily and perhaps send mixed signals that could be
counterproductive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I am not sure I understand the signal
argument.
I think it depends on what we say, not whether we change.
If we said nothing and didn't change the target the presumption in the
market would have to be that we were going to ease.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that seeing the same target
would leave the understanding that at the current level of interest
rates we would get back to the target by the end of the year.
MR. KOHN.

There are some odds on that.

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

That's the best guess.

Less than a 100 percent.

MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, but that is your best guess.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. His best guess is that it's going to be in
some range of outcome that is barely at the bottom of the target and
that to be safe we would reduce the target.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, it all depends.
If the implication is
that we are just reducing the target to respond to interest rate
levels in the past, that is one explanation.
If that is the
explanation then I feel less uncomfortable about it.
But another
plausible explanation is that you expect interest rates to rise in the
future. It would depend on which one of those we would use-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to decide what to say.
I would
not say we are reducing the range because we expect interest rates to
go up.
That would not be suitable.
In fact-MR. JOHNSON.

We expect an increase in velocity.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Over the year as a whole, given what has
happened, given where we are, and so forth-MR. JOHNSON.

I think some people would read through that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we return to this issue of
what we say.
Let's look at the next issue, with a bigger range [of
options] being displayed before us.
MR. JOHNSON. For 1988 I'd select alternative II.
I think it
is important to continue to give the signal that we are adjusting the
ranges to move toward price stability and I think that all of those

-38-

7/7/87

ranges are appropriate for what we expect for nominal GNP next year
with some continued resistance against inflation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You would be explicit. You are saying
No, we haven't set any tentative
alternative II is lower than--.

range.
MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I would say is that I might
favor just a 5 to 8 percent range on M2 instead of a full one point

reduction to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.

I might be a little more

comfortable with 5 to 8 percent rather than 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

5 to 8 percent is alternative II,

isn't it?
MR. ANGELL.

No, alternative II is 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. That's exactly where I would come out, Mr.
Chairman. I think it is very important that we send a message to the
public that we are still committed to the fight against inflation. We
have had that inflation this year and I think the markets need to know
that we are not going to validate that. But having said that, I would
be a little reluctant to send too strong a signal--which alternative
II implies to me--that we would foresee a need to tighten
aggressively. I think the middle ground of reducing it about one half
percentage point, which is typical of what we have done in other
years, would be appropriate. So, I would like to go with 5 to 8
percent.
MR. KEEHN. Could I ask: What is our record of reducing the
ranges over the last few years? Have we tended to move about 1/2
point?
MR. KOHN. Yes. The Committee has reduced them nearly every
In 1984, M1 and M2
year, and more often than not by a half point.
ranges were reduced by one full percentage point, but usually it has
been one half point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I like alternative II as it stands. It is true
that for most recent years we have reduced it by a half point. But I
think this time we have a good technical reason for going to a full
point reduction and I would take advantage of it because some years we
may not be able to reduce it at all.
MR. ANGELL. I'd vote with Governor Johnson and President
Forrestal for the 5 to 8 percent because it does send a signal. And
it does give us a chance in January or February, when we reconsider
this, to come back to the lower number. I would be very happy if
conditions were such next winter that we would want to go ahead and
take the range down another half point. But I would hate to take it
down a full point now and have to bring it back a half point next
winter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

-39-

7/7/87

MR. BOYKIN. Alternative II is where I would be.
I have a
preference for going down the half point, although I am not totally
hung up on it.
I could go with a point, but my preference would be
the half point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY.
I would favor alternative II as it is, mainly
because the kind of growth rates of the aggregates that we see for
next year are consistent with that. As a matter of fact, if one were
to look at the projections more precisely, growth of M2 is at that
lower end of 4-1/2 percent and one could even argue for a slower
growth. I don't know, but perhaps the projections of those who are
supporting 5 to 8 percent do have 6-1/2 percent growth of M2 in their
forecasts.
I just find that difficult to see.
MR. JOHNSON. It all depends.
rates next year, you've got--

If you have stable interest

MR. PARRY. But if you have stable interest rates what
inflation rates do you have?
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. PARRY.

Well, I don't know.

That's sort of the critical question though,

isn't it?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, no.
I think the point, once again, is
that we can't control precisely the mix of nominal GNP.
You have to
have some idea of what kind of nominal it would allow for and hope
that most of that growth shows up in real. Most of the determination
of the mix is structural.
MR. PARRY.
real side as well.

I think that interest rates have an effect on the

MR. JOHNSON. Good.
That's it, stable interest rates; it
depends on what you say about it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On our staff forecast, from February you
would end up with alternative III if you take [unintelligible] as
certain.
MR. KOHN.
If you were to center on the staff's best guess,
alternative III would be more like it.
Our estimates are similar to
President Parry's estimates. We have essentially the same underlying
economic forces at work: a lower dollar, a little more inflation, and
a little higher interest rates.
MR. PARRY. What concerns me is that if one goes to these
higher rates, one is implicitly saying "I am comfortable with the
potential for higher rates of inflation."
MR. JOHNSON.

No, that's not true.

No.

MR. PARRY. Show me the analytic work that leads you to a
different direction.

-40-

7/7/87

MR. JOHNSON.

It depends on your interest rate scenario.

MR. PARRY. But that is not independent of what happens to
inflation. For example, work that the Board staff has done and work
that we have done would suggest that if you don't get those kinds of
increases in interest rates, it has an impact on inflation. Would
your work show that? What if M2 rose 6-1/2 percent or to the midpoint
of the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range? What would happen to inflation?
MR. KOHN.
before about--

I think you essentially asked Mike that question

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. PARRY.
How do you proceed?

There are too many unknowns in this equation.
If there are too many unknowns, what do you do?

MR. JOHNSON. You've got to make some assumptions.
making different assumptions.

We are

MR. HELLER. A lot depends on what happens to your Federal
government deficit, and obviously, the difference between what the
staff has said and what other people say.
MR. PARRY.

I think it is dangerous.

MR. ANGELL. Bob, you see, I just want to leave room for
selecting the range next January. I don't want to do it now. Why not
make the gesture that we have always made, which is a half percent
And then we have room to go further in January. The last
again?
thing I want to do is to go [down] too far and then end up having to
back up.
I might be ready to take the 4 to 7 percent, closer to
alternative III, next January.
MR. JOHNSON.
If interest rates rise as in the staff
projection in the end, in January we'll build that into our M2
forecast for 1988.
I don't think there is any doubt. We are not
saying that we wouldn't support the interest rate rise; it is just a
matter of opinion about how the scenario is going to go.
MR. ANGELL.
I don't want to build in a possibility of an
easing signal that is inappropriate because we got the number too low
now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
I'd also favor alternative II.
I don't feel
strongly between 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent and 5 to 8 percent but I would
have a slight bias for the 5 to 8 percent.
In July, February always
seems like a long time away. But this year it seems like a
particularly long time away. I would be very tentative in the
language for the reasons that Governor Angell has pointed out.
I
would prefer to go to the 5 to 8 percent now, and if there is room to
go to 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent when we get to February, I think that
would be the appropriate direction, as opposed to the alternative
direction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

7/7/87

-41-

MR. STERN. I, too, would favor alternative II with the
modification of 5 to 8 percent on M2.
It seems to me that, in terms
of the signal effect and working toward progress on price stability,
at least at this point in time, alternative II would demonstrate that
concern. The uncertainties in the outlook remain sufficiently large
that I would be a little reluctant to want to overdo it at this point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Our projections follow very closely those of
the Greenbook and as we try to lay that against our forecast, we come
up with the suggestion that interest rates can't stay where they are.
And the alternative that best seems to fit our projection is really
alternative III. So we would suggest that we make that move, whether
we stick with it exactly the way it is put here, 7-1/2 percent or
something in between there. Alternative II would be all right with
us. But alternative III is the one that we would favor over the other
two alternatives.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Well, just to take advantage of the full range of
alternatives, I will vote for alternative I, primarily because the
staff's beautiful forecast failed to convince me that the economy is
as strong as we would like to see it and as they suggested it is.
I
am also less confident about the outlook for the economy. I would
like, of course, to see the strong trade turnaround, and I hope it
takes place; but I am not really convinced that it will to the extent
that they are assuming. So I would prefer to go with 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent again, with the understanding that we have another crack at
this early next year. If I am wrong and the economy is roaring along,
then certainly it can be adjusted and I don't think anything will have
been lost. We'll have plenty of time to send signals to the markets,
in my judgment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II as
is. But if there was something of a consensus to go 5 to 8 percent on
M2, then I would make a formal suggestion that we make the ranges for
both M2 and M3 4 to 8 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

Make it 4 to 8 percent, Jerry, did you say?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My preference is alternative II as
is. What I said is, if there was a consensus to make the M2 range 5
to 8 percent, I would then suggest that we make both M2 and M3 4 to 8
percent.
MR. MELZER. Don, what would you say is the trend velocity in
M2 right now? I threw out zero before as the trend velocity growth.
Is that fair?
MR. KOHN.
MR. MELZER.

I think that is as close as we can estimate.
One of the things that concerns me a little is

that we get down to ranges that embrace trend velocity growth and
factor in what we expect in nominal GNP and the ranges roughly bracket

-42-

7/7/87

that. If we start to take into account short-term velocity behavior
to drop the ranges down even further, that's almost building in the
fact that at some point down the road we are going to have to jack
them back up and move them around. Maybe this is a historical
question in terms of what the tradition is. But I would tend to view
these, particularly for M2 and M3, as much longer-term. I would be
comfortable, therefore, embracing a trend velocity concept together
with a nominal GNP forecast; and that would lead me roughly to the 5
to 8 percent range for M2, which is what I would favor. I think there
is a danger if we get these ranges down so far that, first of all, we
are almost making it necessary to project interest rates to set the
targets because of the sensitivity of velocity to interest rates.
Also, later we might get into the situation Wayne described where just
because we change our outlook and interest rate forecast, we're
jacking them up and sending a false signal.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. I would just like to go on record as saying that
I prefer alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent range on M2 for
basically many of the reasons that I've heard already expressed here;
no others occur to me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I would be hard pressed between alternatives I
and II, but with the 5 to 8 percent modification I would go for
alternative II.
here?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anyone we haven't heard from
Mr. Morris, then Mr. Guffey.

MR. MORRIS. I would go for alternative II as written, Mr.
Chairman. I don't have the concern that Tom Melzer expressed that we
are going to lock ourselves into a range for M2 that is going to be
too low. I can't foresee in the years ahead when we would want
nominal GNP growing faster than 7-1/2 percent. So that doesn't
trouble me.
MR. GUFFEY. I would opt for alternative II with the 5 to 8
percent, simply because I've been persuaded to keep a little of the
powder dry. If indeed in February alternative II of 4-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent looks appropriate, we would have an opportunity to adjust it
at that time. I wouldn't use up all my ammunition in midyear when it
doesn't mean a whole lot for the next year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier at the time I
was talking about 1987 that I would be in favor of alternative II. I
still feel that way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is one peculiarity about ending up
with 5 to 8 percent [for 1988] if we say we are sticking with this
present [1987] target which we expect, with a high degree of
probability, to come in below. Are we saying we expect 1988 to be
higher than 1987? What is the implication of that?

7/7/87

MR. HELLER. We have had that situation many times before in
reverse--where we have overshot and then we still adopted a lower
growth range and there wasn't necessarily any change in policy implied
by that.
I
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm going to make a little case.
think these are too high. What do we want to do? We have an outlook
It is quite
here which is always uncertain in real terms.
satisfactory; it's about the best you could hope for if you believe
the staff analysis of a slow growth domestically and a pickup
externally. Nobody has discussed the point that Mr. Prell made
initially that we had quite slow--people like to call it sluggish-growth and a decline of one half percentage point or more in the
I am not sure we could stand
unemployment rate in the past year.
vigorous growth and a decline of 2 percentage points in the
I don't know how you resolve that
unemployment rate in the next year.
little dilemma.
It seems to me that it is perfectly evident that the forecast
the staff has for prices--though I am not sure that it is right-leaves us in a totally unsatisfactory position a year from now, with
the inevitability of a sizable recession if we are going to have any
chance of restoring price stability. Once that gets built into the
wage outlook, it is just a question of when; it is going to be messy.
I am not sure that is the outlook.
I find it a little difficult to
think that the prices are going to be that high with the wages at the
But certainly, the recent evidence
moment being as good as they are.
is not very good in terms of what is happening in prices despite the
I would agree with what you said, Mike, that
performance on wages.
once it has broken the wages, you're dead. And a lot of hard work
We only have one tool.
will come unwound. What can we do about it?
For one thing, I would play for stability of the dollar, unlike the
staff forecast. And I would not take a further aggravation on the
inflation rate or risk there and hope that a further decline in the
I would
dollar is not needed to produce the uncertain trade effect.
There's not much we can do
certainly work on the budget deficit.
about it, but at least we get some protection on the growth of
domestic consumption as well as on the financial side and interest
I worry about minimum wages and all that stuff. Now, when it
rates.
I think it would be a
comes to monetary policy, I would be cautious.
big mistake not to be cautious. We have talked about a half percent
I think it is
here; it's imagery, but that is where I would come out.
very hard to present a suitably cautious outlook without changing the
I suppose we can decide that we will probably come
range this year.
But we are going to have a higher rate
in low and we are willing to.
next year that encompasses a more or less satisfactory nominal GNP
growth but assumes a totally unsatisfactory price level. That is my
speech for the afternoon.
MR. ANGELL.
If you took one of these--the 1987 or 1988
ranges--and you changed one, which one would you prefer to have lower?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1987 it is so much a matter of the way
we present it; I think it makes very little difference.
If we say we
are not in the practice of changing the range--which isn't quite true
when we are looking at M1--and we are going to keep the range but we
really expect to come in low, Mr. Proxmire will say: "Why the heck
If I were testifying, I would be hard
didn't you change the range?"

-44-

7/7/87

pressed to answer that question.
I would mumble that the Committee
didn't want to but nonetheless we think it is going to come in low and
eventually we would go on to the next question. I can survive that.
I think the way we're sending the message is more in the 1988 ranges
than [unintelligible], providing that we say we are willing to come in
low in 1987.
If we are not going to come in low in 1987 then we are
actually saying--these are going to get quite exaggerated--come hell
or high water, we are going to get it up in the second half of the
year with the implication that that takes a more aggressive easing
stance for which we're going to vote.
But let's suppose there is one chance in five
MR. ANGELL.
that the economy in the third quarter and the fourth quarter will be
lower than our estimate. Now, I don't think that's what is going to
happen. But I don't feel certain enough that I am willing to make a
big stand over a 1988 target range at this point, have the economy
come in weak, and then have to reverse. That is, with 6-1/2 percent
nominal, one can have very modest inflation--less than 4 percent;
that's very plausible.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barely less than 4 percent.
In GNP, I
make an assumption, and maybe its wrong, that you cannot have the
economy grow 3 percent from here on out through the next 18 months,
just based upon recent experience. The unemployment rate is going to
be 4-1/2 to 5 percent, which I think is going [down] too fast on the
unemployment rate in terms of the future stability of the economy.
Therefore, if it can't be 3 percent real and it is 6-1/2 percent
nominal, we are going to see 3-1/2 percent on the GNP deflator and
4-1/2 percent on the consumer price index.
MR. JOHNSON. Once again, it depends upon your view of how
If the growth is in the trade sensitive
this whole scenario develops.
areas where there has been a lot of slack and the employment gains are
not expected to be strong, then there might not be a reduction in the
unemployment range consistent with 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth [in real
To remain
I think that is a perfectly plausible scenario.
GNP].
competitive you want to maintain those productivity gains.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I grant you that; I hope that is what
happens. We can get reasonable growth consistent with sufficiently
less inflation than is in this forecast.
If we can't we're in
trouble.
MR. ANGELL. Paul, I very strongly share your view on what,
in my view, is the most important issue and that is whether or not we
are ready to have the dollar sustained.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's one of the issues.

MR. ANGELL.
Because it seems to me that we will quite likely
have another period in which the testing of that will occur.
But I
would prefer not to have to test the dollar declining in an economy
that is particularly weak. It seems to me that if we have an economy
that is particularly weak and then we have a declining dollar, that is
indeed the worst of all worlds.
And so, I feel strongly and
sympathize with you in regards to the dollar. But I want to be ready
with ammunition to do the job when that needs to be done.
I am not
sure whether this is that significant an issue--

7/7/87

-45-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the next few months, I don't think
this is an issue at all.
That we will get to in a minute.
SPEAKER(?).
Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons I suggested
alternative I was that I thought it would be easier for you to explain
to the public. You are saying to me that for 1987 alternative II, in
your judgment, would be much easier to explain, I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think that is incidental.
It is easier
to explain at first blush, but we can do either one for 1987.
I think
if we've got a real [unintelligible] what we say for 1987.
It's one
thing to say we are staying with the range, but we are perfectly
prepared to come in below it if that is the way things work out.
Or
we say we are sticking to the range and mean it.
MR. BLACK.
If we don't go with alternative II,
need to go with alternative III for 1988.

I think we

MR. ANGELL. I don't want us to lower the ranges for this
year and then say we mean it.
Because then we get into a situation
that requires another move.

year?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying lower the range for this
Or do you mean lower the range now for next year?
MR. ANGELL.

No, I said this year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know what the arithmetic is.
I am
not arguing about it.
I don't much care whether it is lowered this
year; it's a little awkward to explain.
If we didn't lower it this
year, from now to the end of the year at what rate of speed would M2
have to grow to exceed the 7-1/2 percent?
MR. KOHN. To exceed 7-1/2 percent would probably take 11-1/2
percent.
It takes 7-1/2 percent [from now until year end] to get
5-1/2 percent.
I assume it would take about 11-1/2 percent to get
7-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
11-1/2.
I don't think it will exceed the
upper end of the range, whatever we do.
MR. ANGELL.

Of course.

MR. HELLER. There is really no expectation that we should
change the range. The world isn't waiting for us to make a decision
on changing or not changing. We have never changed an M2 or an M3

target.

So, if we let the target--

MR. MORRIS.
Yes, but we have never had an M2 or M3 target
come in this much below, or even above, the range.

MR. PARRY. One thing I don't understand is what you think
the interpretation of not changing it would be. Wouldn't not changing
it indicate-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most people said don't change this year;
that is what everybody [who has a vote] said. Now, what I don't

7/7/87

-46-

know--we have to return to what we mean by that. What do we want the
explanation to be?
We are not changing it this year. We think it is
inappropriate to change in the middle of the year unless there is a
very strong reason. But, given what has happened in the first half of
the year, we anticipate that it is quite likely that we could come in
below the bottom of the range.
I think that is what I heard most
people say.
MR. KEEHN. There is a high level of uncertainty. Our
results so far have been quite different than one might expect; that
level of uncertainty continues and that's how the rest of the year
might play out.
MR. ANGELL.
I would say that the price level pressures
became such that it was appropriate for us to undertake policies that
resulted in coming in under the range because of our high priority on
price level stability.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you put it that way, the next
question would be: What is that level of prices that gives you that?
I would be a little more vague.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I suggest "be prepared to tolerate."
I think that is a little different from saying we expect. We would be
prepared to tolerate it coming in somewhat below.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would start with velocity: If
velocity of M2 continues to [rise], as in the first half of the year-MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that what you want to say is:
given our modest tightening actions to deal with the inflationary
pressures that have built up, interest rates have strengthened some;
that has put some upward pressure on M2 velocity and M2 has weakened
somewhat relative to the targets.
Assuming no further changes, I
don't know what you say about future policy, but [unintelligible] it's
still plausible.
I would want to say it is still plausible that we
will reach the current target.
It is doable.
MR. ANGELL.

"Tolerate" is a good word.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
the target.

"Tolerate" leaves you open to hit

MR. BLACK.
I am not sure that the best choice for 1987 isn't
in part determined by what we do in the short run, because if we are
not going to send a signal of any action there, then it makes it a
little easier to explain no change for 1987.
If we decide to take
some action, I think it becomes a little more difficult to maintain
the status quo for 1987.
MR. ANGELL.
It just seems to me that commodity prices and
the dollar this year might once again be a problem. And in that
circumstance, that 3 percent might be a better growth path for M2 than
any number that we are willing to put out there. I would prefer to
send a signal that we have decided to come down in a systematic
manner--we want to come down a half a point per year.
I would fit

-47-

7/7/87

that in with what Tom Melzer had to say: that that is gradualism
regarding the long run.
In the short run, the short-run variations in
velocity may cause us to tolerate growth occasionally below the rates
in the ranges.
MR. HELLER. Lowering the targets this year, I think, would
be interpreted as a signal that we want to be tighter than we were
before. And with the dollar rising at the present time, I see very
little reason to tighten right now. Why do it at the present
juncture?
MR. PARRY. By lowering it you wouldn't be tightening.
would you be tightening?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. HELLER.
MR. PARRY.

Why

What are we talking about--1987?

1987.
Why would you be tightening?

MR. HELLER. Because now you are saying that I am going to
change my ranges; I am going to be tighter than I intended to be
before.
MR. PARRY. You mean you would adopt a different borrowings
target as a result of that?
MR. FORRESTAL.

It would signal that.

MR. HELLER.

If we suddenly announced lower targets--

MR. KELLEY.

Which we have no history of doing.

MR. HELLER. Which we have never done before, right?
Then we
suddenly give a signal that we want to be tighter than we were before.
MR. KELLEY.
It would seem to me that if we do announce a
reduction to 4-1/2 percent, that would be immediately perceived as
being the target that we are after.
MR. ANGELL. We found with M1, with the interest rate
sensitivity of its velocity, that under non-normal conditions we were
not able to forecast what its target path would be and we had to end
up abandoning it.
It seems to me that we don't want to force
ourselves into this preciseness for M2 that might later cause us to
say: Well, we just can't hit it at all.
MR. BLACK. I am repeating myself, but I really do think this
would come to a head if we would address the short-run target.
I
think it makes the long-run a bit easier because we either send a
signal or we don't and that strengthens or weakens the case for the
most favored alternative.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we need to reopen [unintelligible]
1987.
I need to reopen what we say about it.
There was a
considerable feeling ranging from extremely mild to strong that we
shouldn't change the 1987 range.
That leaves open what we say about
it.
Have people who didn't want to change it before changed their

7/7/87

mind or do I assume that we are going to keep the same 1987 range?
I'm leaving open for right now what we are going to say about it.
SEVERAL.

Keep the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't hear anybody recanting. Now what
are we going to say about it?
We are not going to say at the one
extreme that we are really going to make it period. Nobody is saying
that.
MR. GUFFEY. Do we have to say anything at all about the next
six months and the fact that we are coming in at or near the bottom or
even maybe below the bottom?
I don't think the market perceives that
we are going to take any action at this table to try to come within
the M2 range within the next six months.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think that we can make that clear.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think we've got to say something there.
It will be rather obvious if we say nothing and we are at whatever
level we're at.
MR. JOHNSON. It seems to me that we can say, assuming no
change in current policy, that it is plausible that we could still
come within the M2 target. That is what the staff says.
MR. BOEHNE. Why not say that some of the same velocity
problems that have affected M1 in recent years have spilled over to M2
and that the level of uncertainty is such that we can't be all that
precise and would tolerate being near the bottom of the range?
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay, tolerate.

MR. PARRY. Could I ask a question?
forecast of M2 in February?

Don, what was the

MR. KOHN. About 7 percent, near the midpoint of the range,
assuming no change in interest rates from the levels that prevailed at
that time.
MS.

SEGER.

It was 7 percent for the year?

Is that what you

said?
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

Assuming no changes in interest rates.

MR. MORRIS.
The big capital gains tax payments--was that a
factor in the slow growth of M2 and M3?
MR. KOHN.
If it was, I think it was very, very small.
It
would have had to have been a factor boosting the fourth quarter
level. That is, people realized the capital gains; they put it in the
fourth quarter.
By the time you get to June-MR. BOEHNE. We were high last year; we are low this year.
We have to have a lot of tolerance.
MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that
explaining this is an opportunity for us to say something about the

-49-

7/7/87

recent actions that we took in order to provide for more price level
stability. The dollar was under pressure and that resulted in market
forces taking interest rates higher than they otherwise would have
been. And that increased the probability that we might undershoot the
lower boundary somewhat.
MR. JOHNSON. What did we say at mid-term 1981 on M1? We
were below targets then and we didn't hit the range by the end of the
year.
MR. KOHN. The Committee indicated its expectation that
growth in M1, adjusted for shifts in NOW accounts, over the year as a
whole would be near the lower end of its annual range. Both of the
broader aggregates on the other hand--and this was the instance when
M3 was above the range--had been running at the top or somewhat above
the upper ends of the ranges. Given their behavior the Committee said
their growth might be toward the upper part of their ranges for the
year as a whole.
MR. JOHNSON.

At least M3 is in the range.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We had shift-adjusted M1; that was
the NOW account year with all the controversy. The measured M1 was
actually below the range, but the measure we were using adjusted for
NOW accounts and was within the range as I recall.
MR. JOHNSON. We could use similar language.
didn't change the range on Ml?

Is that why we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What language did you use? I am not quite
clear on what language we are supposed to use at this point. Are we
supposed to say passively that we "may be near" or "tolerate"? And if
we say tolerate, under what conditions?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
to velocity?
MR. BOEHNE.
to be high.

Again, what's wrong with linking it

We're in a situation in which velocity continues

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
until the quarter is over.

The velocity figure that we don't know

MR. BLACK. I think this is a dispute about how we explain
something that we almost all agree on.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not even sure it is a dispute. I
haven't got it clear in my mind as to what should be said at this
point.
MR. ANGELL.
explain it the best.

That is what I was seeking: the way we can

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
what to say at this point?
MR. PRELL.

I am going to ask the staff.

Do they know

We are going to try to reflect the discussion.

7/7/87

-50-

MR. BLACK.

They would eliminate the System!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could say: "The Committee expects
that M2 will come in at or slightly below the bottom of the range.
However, if velocity were to continue to [rise], the Committee also
recognizes that it might tolerate somewhat slower growth."
[Unintelligible] I think there is some language
MR. MORRIS.
on page 16 of the Bluebook that says "The depressing influence of the
previous increase in market rates should begin to wear off reasonably
promptly since offering rates on many components of M2 seem already to
The
have adjusted to the current structure of market rates."
impression is it's a temporary phenomenon or at least is thought to
be.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I don't believe this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Previously someone said that it is pretty
If
clear, or we expected to come in around, about, below or whatever.
that is what you want to say, that is fine.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, that's what I--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Put in some other qualifying words about
what is happening in the real world. I just want to be sure that is
what you want to say.
MR. ANGELL.
That's not too bad.
It doesn't make the
monetarists angry.
It doesn't make anybody angry.
We just need the
I think that is fine.
MR. JOHNSON.
explanation for why it dipped below, which is what happened in the
past.
MR. ANGELL.
I don't know.
I would rather have a word
slightly less emphatic than "substantially"; I'd rather leave
"substantially" out.
Is that page 16?
MR. STERN. Why not be prepared to tolerate M2 growth at or
near, or whatever, the bottom of the range, depending on some of the
things we usually use--like performance of the dollar, the inflation
It seems to me that that's really where we
outlook, the real economy.
are. Assuming those variables more or less behave themselves, we just
are not going to get all that worked up about M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you're really saying is--I just want
to get this right--if it is going to come in around 5-1/2 percent,
that means above or below 5-1/2 percent depending upon all these other
things.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

Say "at or near the bottom of the range."
"Around" is a good word.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
Tentatively I think we
[unintelligible].
Where are we now on the big issue of next year?
We
have lots of people who want 5 to 8 percent for both M2 and M3.
We
have some who want 6 to 9 percent. Are there any different thoughts

-51-

7/7/87

on these ranges?
Anybody on one side or the other who wants to change
their minds?
Mine is closed. Does anybody like Mr. Corrigan's 4 to 8
percent?
MR. KELLEY.
I thought Jerry's suggestion of 4 to 8 percent
was an interesting alternative.
MR. STERN. One virtue of that is it does reflect a somewhat
greater level of uncertainty, which I think is probably appropriate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

Does anybody like this 4 to 8 percent?

I think it is pretty good.

Yes.

MR. KEEHN. Unless broadening the range to 4 percentage
points has some meaning that would make it difficult, I think it is a
good suggestion.
MR. ANGELL.
I would prefer 4 to 8 percent over 4-1/2 to
7-1/2 percent.
It seems to me it gives you more flexibility which
[unintelligible].
And then if we wanted to become more precise in
January, as long as we didn't change the top of it, and I don't think
we will--that is, we may want to increase that bottom range some--I
don't think it would be that damaging.
MR. HELLER.
I think the 4 to 8 percent is really going too
far.
First of all, it's a very, very broad range. Because then we
[unintelligible] just fuzzy things over. We are not giving a real
message there. Talking about the bottom end of the range, I disagree
with the implications of the 4 percent growth for M2, certainly for
next year. Actually, if we use the 4 percent growth as a matter of
If
policy and get an unintended velocity change, where would we be?
we have anywhere near the inflation that is projected, we'd have
either zero or 0.5 percent growth. That is all that's left for the
real economy. So 4 percent growth, I think, would be too tight; 5
percent leaves some room to grow.
MR. ANGELL. But we might have a condition next year, like
this year, in which we might need fuller-MR. JOHNSON. You would have to have 2-1/2 percent velocity
growth in M2, which would be the implication of rising interest rates.
That's what you would have to have to get the kind of splits you're
talking about.
MR. HELLER. Yes; that's really speculative. You're looking
at the M2 velocity as it is projected on those handouts.
It is almost
I
horizontal--just a tiny bit higher for M3, a tiny fall for [M2].
have never seen anybody who can project velocity with any great degree
of confidence.
MR. PARRY. I would like to ask a question about this
uncertainty issue and the 4 percentage point band. Are we suggesting
that there is a greater uncertainty because the analysis that has been
presented by staff and others suggests there is greater uncertainty?
Or are we just trying to widen the band because there is a greater
difference of opinion and we can't fit people within a 3 percentage
point range?
I think there is a big difference.

-52-

7/7/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
was thinking of the analysis.
MR. PARRY.

In making the suggestion earlier, I

Nothing has been said about that.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if I take the arguments that
Mr. Kohn and his colleagues are making about the interest elasticity
of M2 seriously--and I am not sure that I do--but if I did, and if I
had an economic outlook that very much parallels Mr. Prell's economic
outlook, it is not at all difficult for me to envision circumstances
in 1988 in which M2 could be growing at quite a low rate and I would
be very happy. The real economy could be doing just what they are
talking about--growing at 2-3/4 percent.
MR. JOHNSON.

Once again, to do that you have--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Now, I don't think that that is the
likely outcome; but certainly it is quite plausible.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Much lower

[unintelligible].

MR. HELLER. We can ask ourselves whether 5 percent or 4
percent is more appropriate in conjunction with the economic outlook
You are
that we have presented. And push it to a [unintelligible].
really talking about an outlier of an outlier there.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think so, Bob. Again, I
think part of the question to consider is how you judge the outlook in
the first place.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Next year, you're projecting what for M2?

MR. KOHN. Around 5 percent or maybe a little under that-4-1/2 to 5 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether I can get a
[consensus for] 4 to 8 percent. Let's just have a show of hands of
people who like this idea of 4 to 8 percent.
about it?

MR. ANGELL. Let's ask the question to you. How do you feel
Do you feel that 4 to 8 percent helps you much?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a relatively small problem.
the range so large?
I am not so sure about velocity.

Why is

MR. STERN. That seems to me to be one of the things we have
been confronting for the last several years now. It doesn't seem to
me that that would be difficult to explain.
MR. JOHNSON. The only thing I can think of is that Senator
Proxmire might react to that [by saying]: Well you never really
Now you are
widened the range on M2 and M3 before; it was just M1.
focusing on M2 and you are broadening the range on M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, the range has been 2 to
It's a little embarrassing;
2-1/2 points; we got that up to 3 points.
I am not
if you believe in these targets, it is a pretty wide range.

7/7/87

-53-

sure it is wider than, in fact, the outlook has suggested it should
be.
MR. STERN.

It is probably not as wide as the analytics

here--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We had a decline in velocity last year of

what?
MR. KOHN.

It's about 4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

4 percent.

MR. JOHNSON. If I were a Senator sitting on the Banking
Committee, it would look to me like a gradual undermining of the

Humphrey-Hawkins Act.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Senator Proxmire would take that view.

I

don't think the rest care.
MR. ANGELL.

No, I agree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say we are making it 4 to 8
percent now, in July, but the Committee intends to try to narrow the
range next February. That is what we could say to respond to his
question.
MR. ANGELL. Or we could say 5 to 8 percent and the Committee
is going to look at it again in February in terms of possibly lowering
it again. We want to send signals.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have three choices: 4 to 8
percent is being proposed, if that appeals to anybody or most of you;
we have alternative II as written, which has gotten quite a few votes;
and we have alternative II as modified to 5 to 8 for both M2 and M3.
Then there are further subdivisions. We could adopt that last one and
say we were going to look at it hard with the thought or reducing it,
or that we would have some inclination to look at that possibility
next February, to take Mr. Angell's variant of that. Let me just test
the three pure ones and forget about defining the third. How many
prefer 4 to 8?
MR. BLACK.

Which ones?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many members? We haven't got a huge
following for 4 to 8 percent: five. Alternative II as written?
Alternative II with the 5 to 8 percent? Well, that seems to be where
the Committee is; so let's assume that's where we are for the moment.
Let us turn to the short-term.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, do you want to consider the
directive language that would go with that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's return to that after we consider all
the rest. I hear that you got all this new [unintelligible].
For the
short run, the critical variable will be [unintelligible].

-54-

7/7/87

MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I think that we ought to stay
exactly where we are. We have two-way risk again in the foreign
exchange market; we have a diminution in inflationary expectations;
and the real economy is going along reasonably well. And I think we
I would
ought to just take things as they are and not rock the boat.
be speaking of borrowing at $500 million and language saying that we
seek to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can I carry you one step further:
preference] symmetrical on the language?
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. BLACK.

Symmetrical.
With "woulds" or "mights"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.
I'm precisely with Mr. Boehne:

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
and symmetrical.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOYKIN.

MR. JOHNSON.

Mr. Boykin.

Governor Johnson.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KELLEY.

"B"

I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

MR. KEEHN.

is [your

Governor Kelley.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

This is very subtle analysis in terms of

your--

SPEAKER(?).

You've got them all worn out!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.

I agree.

MR. MELZER.

I'll agree.

MR. PARRY.

So will I.

MR. FORRESTAL.

I will not break the pattern; I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
contrary view?
MS. SEGER.

I don't know what to fight about now.

Well, does anybody want to express a

Can we have a different tilt?

7/7/87

-55-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us resolve the language. Where is
this language?
Do you give any alternative here in the directive
paragraph?
MR. KOHN.

No.

SPEAKER(?).
MR. KOHN.

That's good.
Not for the short run.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to say "seeks to
maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions."
Can
we make it symmetric?
"Somewhat greater reserve restraint would or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would..."
Do you want it in that
order or reverse order?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

No, reverse it.

MR. ANGELL. Let's not reverse it.
other subtle signals.

I don't want to send any

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does the sentence otherwise look all
right--to people who want it symmetrical anyway?
I suppose we simply
put in these numbers; we have faith in the staff. Are we
[unintelligible] now?
What they say is 5 and 7-1/2--we sometimes try
to avoid using those fractions.
If you believe the staff we've got to
use different numbers this time; I don't know whether to believe them.
MR. KOHN.

Sorry.

You can say 5 to 7; that would encompass

both.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I guess we have.
MR. BERNARD.
MR. KOHN.

Have we ever used a fraction here before?

Yes.

I guess so, but not recently.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
it's not like-MR. BLACK.

That really

7-1/2 is a nice fraction, though;
[balances]

off very nicely between 5

and 10.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

that's--.

Shall we say 5 and 7-1/2?

MR. ANGELL. That seems to me to be somewhat expansive but
I can imagine circumstances in which 5 to 7-1/2 might be-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, this is a resource--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This follows a very low
let me say.
That's not very expansive.
MR. JOHNSON.

[growth] period,

That's what's inconsistent with alternative II.

7/7/87

-56-

MR. HELLER.
I know--which is [unintelligible] the bottom of
the range, again. Otherwise, you have a hard time explaining why we
would be able to achieve the lower end of the target cone.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 5 percent on M2 isn't going to be in
the lower end of the target.
MR. HELLER. No, you need 7-1/2 percent arithmetically in
order to be able to reach it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7-1/2 percent for 6 months.
If it grew 5
percent for the next 3 months, what would you need for the final 3
months--11 percent or something--to reach the bottom end of the
target?
MR. KOHN. Yes.
Presumably, it would be 10 percent, without
taking account of the compounding.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, it would be 10.

MR. KOHN. Yes, but without knowing the compounding.
percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent--

The 5

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if the 7-1/2 percent is right
forgetting about the compounding, which is limited, it is going to be
10 percent.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

Well, that's 7-1/2;

that's what it says.

Q4 to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, but I think with the 7-1/2 percent for
M2 that we get [unintelligible].
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

5 percent gets you to 4-1/2 percent in September.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It would be a little more than 10 percent
because that's a quarterly figure.
MR. KOHN. It might be less given the higher base.
taking it from September, which is a higher base.

We'll be

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to find out it's going to be
even 12 percent that this implies for the last quarter; I'm not sure.
MR. KOHN.

It's a lot.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And for growth in M1, that's a vague
enough statement. Are we going to leave that the way it is?
"Growth
in M1, while picking up from recent levels" or something--.
Do we
want to put something like that in there?
MR. JOHNSON.

Still running--

MR. KOHN. March to June was 4 percent; and 4 percent is
about what we're projecting for June to September.

7/7/87

-57-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

March to June was low.

MR. KOHN. It certainly picked up from May in June but not
from March to June.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it makes much
difference. If we want to be reassuring to some of our monetarists,
then we could say "growth in M1, while picking up from recent levels"
--which would be May and June. And that was negative?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"M1 is expected to remain well below its

[pace]"--

MR. JOHNSON.

"Of 1986."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Growth during 1986,"
want to put that phrase in there?
MR. ANGELL.

I think.

Do you

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The word "pace" is kind of a funny word
when I see it, but I know what it means.
It was 6 percent last time;
We continue on with
I guess we'll leave it then and use growth rate.
4 to 8 percent.
Does anybody have any further comments?
That's
stating it symmetrically with no change, the numbers or the projection
[provided by the staff], and "while picking up from recent levels"
inserted. Does anybody have any questions about that?
Then we'll be
turning to the other operational paragraphs. We'll go back to page
20.
What's the difference between these variants?
All right. You
have nice language for us here; I might have read that before.
Variant II just has the reduction in the range. Do people like Mr.
Kohn's language?
It's going to save us some trouble.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE.

Good.

It seems pretty good.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Where are you reading from?

The top of page 21.

MR. FORRESTAL. Do we just want to say "the lower ends of the
range" or do we want to indicate that growth might be somewhat below?
MR. BOEHNE.

It sounds like "around".

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "around the lower end of the range"
I guess means that it could be below.
MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. KOHN.

Does it mean that?

Yes.

MR. MORRIS(?).

Sure.

"Around" means both sides.

-58-

7/7/87

MR. BLACK.

Trust him, Bob.

That's Boston--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to say aggregates or growth in
M2--pin it down to one that's around the lower end of the range?
MR. JOHNSON.

They're both going to be "around"--

MR. FORRESTAL.
care of that.

Being around

[unintelligible], which takes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They "will be in the lower halves of their
ranges, particularly M2" or something.
MR. JOHNSON.

That's fine.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I kind of like it the way it is.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. When it comes in, if one falls out
[of the range] we did exactly what we said we were going to do.
Right; one may be above and one below it.

MR. HELLER.

Yes.

MR. ANGELL.

How about that

MR. HELLER.

That's right; put it in there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

[wording within the]

brackets?

That's all right.

I'd rather put a period after "appropriate."
The rest of that explanation sounds all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think whether or not you put a period
after "appropriate" the explanation you'd have to go on is
incorporated in the bottom line of what's there.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?)

I'd leave it.
Is that satisfactory?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, where are we?
On page 22.
Is this a
bit of boiler plate at this point? Have we said this before?
MR. KOHN. Well, we condensed what's in the directive right
now. This is adapted from what the Committee put in at the last
meeting and at the February meeting.
MR. JOHNSON. What do you say to monetarists who have focused
on M1A and tried to take out the highly sensitive interest component
and still find a similar pattern--maybe even a more pronounced

pattern--in M1 growth?
I think you can still use the interest
sensitivity argument, but it seems to me that it may come up in the
hearing; there may be some focus on M1A. Do you say take out the
interest earning accounts and you've still got a pattern like--

-59-

7/7/87

I think the question is likely to come up
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
regardless, since the issue has been raised. We should have had a
little discussion of what's the matter with M1A.
MR. KOHN. I tried to include something in my presentation
about velocity; that's why I had the velocity chart in there. Our
view is that, while less is wrong with M1A than is wrong with M1, it's
It's still interest sensitive; much
still not that good an aggregate.
of the trend in its velocity that's extended beyond the trend in M1
velocity is a combination of offsetting propitious events, including
deregulation and interest rate declines. And in fact, its velocity
So, I think it's useful as a monitor
trend did break in early '85.
and probably more useful than M1; but all our work suggests it's
probably not as useful as M2.
MR. JOHNSON. Would you concentrate even further on
compensating balances of corporations and their growing proportion of
demand deposits?
MR. KOHN. In my view, that's actually what's making this
aggregate increasingly interest sensitive over time.
MR. JOHNSON. I think it might be useful to say that because
that would really take a lot of the wind out of that.
MR. PRELL. We had really good evidence, hard evidence, on
the proportion and lots of input on the growth of bits and pieces of-MR. JOHNSON.

Well, okay.

MR. KOHN. Except that households are a much smaller
proportion than they used to be and businesses obviously are a higher
proportion.
MR. BLACK. We took a look at that Treasury study and
concluded the same thing that the staff did: that M2 is a little
better.
MR. JOHNSON.

I completely buy the staff study and--

MR. BLACK. That's where we came out, quite independently of
what they had done, much to my disappointment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not crazy about this sentence that
finishes with lower growth in M1; it says "the Committee anticipates".
Shouldn't we say that "In the light of what happened last year the
Committee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 this year than
last year"?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the context of continuing economic
expansion given the intensification of price pressures,"--maybe just
leave that there. All this wording about "associated with substantial
downward movement of the dollar...and the abatement of the weakness in
M1 velocity" is saying the same thing as the first part of the
sentence.

-60-

7/7/87

MR. ANGELL.

So you want to take the whole sentence out?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, just the second half.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the second half of that: "The
Committee welcomes substantially slower growth of M1 in 1987 than in
1986 in the context of continuing economic expansion and
I'm not quite crazy about that
intensification of price pressures."

"intensification."

I don't like to admit that the intensificationI don't either.

MR. ANGELL.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say "the continuing economic expansion and
a greater tendency for prices"-"Some evidence of greater prices"--

MR. MELZER.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Some evidence of greater inflationary
pressures." How about that?
MR. ANGELL.

That's better.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Say greater--

Or inflationary expectations.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes. The only thing I can think of is that the
monetarists would say that there's a lag and that to look at
contemporaneous inflation and to adjust monetary policy is chasing the
tail.
Milton Freidman predicted an explosion of

MR. MORRIS.
inflation in 1984.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

This is a vague sentence.

Oh, I realize that, but I'm just saying that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this says is that substantially slower
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 with a [unintelligible] that ought
to be-MR. JOHNSON.
MR. MELZER.
after "prevailing".
MR. KOHN.

That's fine with me.
It seems to me the last sentence could be ended

Well, that's taken from before.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any preferences?

I'm--

MR. HELLER. Are we really planning to do that still?
in the second half of the year. Are we really going to start
targeting Ml?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the year?

We're

Is this exactly what we said earlier in

7/7/87

-61-

MR. KOHN.

This last sentence is exactly, which is--

MR. HELLER.

We may as well drop the whole sentence.

MR. ANGELL.

No, but--.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I think we might.

I don't think we should.

MR. ANGELL. I think there might be some circumstance in
which we would want to bring it back.
good one.

MR. STERN. I think Tom Melzer's suggestion is probably a
I don't know why we would be particularly--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we actually should do is this. I'll
make a more accurate sentence: "The Committee in reaching operational
decisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth in
M1, and at some point in time, in the light of circumstances then
prevailing if the Committee..."--

MR. ANGELL.

That's better, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The Committee in reaching operational
decisions over the balance of the year will take account of growth in
M1 in the light of circumstances then prevailing," [unintelligible]
and all that business. The issue is if it's too low, we'll be a
little easier than we otherwise would be. Now we get to 1988. We
have 5 to 8 percent as the Bluebook number for M2 and M3, right?
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Leave this sentence about M1 just in--

Apparently, we could put M1 back in tentatively.

MS. SEGER.

I'm not sure it would fit.

MR. BOYKIN. I think we need it because we address it for
1987 and now we're talking about 1988.
MR. ANGELL.

Tentatively.

MR. BOYKIN.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON.

All you need is that one sentence: "The issues

involved in establishing a target range for M1 would be carefully

reappraised."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
nothing about the targets.
pattern?

Well, this is awfully thin. It says
Did we write this sentence in the past

It says we established the ranges for M2 and M3 and doesn't

say another word about them.
MR. KOHN.

It goes on to a little baloney about M1.

I think that is the past pattern for the tentative

ranges.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

-62-

7/7/87

MR. ANGELL.

But I think we might have some language--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I was wondering about is this
discussion of M1. Why shouldn't it all be combined in that one
With respect to M1 and so
So what would we change?
paragraph on M1?
Then, "because of its sensitivity the Committee
forth [as shown].
decided not to [target it] over 1987 and has established no tentative
range for 1988."
And then start with "currently the appropriateness,"
and then add this last sentence saying "issues involved with
establishing a target range for M1 will be carefully reappraised in
I think
I would make M1 all one sentence.
the beginning of 1988."
it's a little more straightforward that way.
MR. ANGELL.
I just wonder what, tentatively, we might think
about. Although we may not want to put it in, what would we have in
mind?
If at this stage you had to suggest M1 ranges for 1988 what
would you suggest, Don?
MR. KOHN. Our projections, of course, are keyed to the
And in that case we have pretty
prospects of rising interest rates.
low M1 growth--on the order of 4 percent. Without those rising
interest rates, we'd probably have growth for 1988 in the 5 or 6
percent range.
MR. ANGELL.
points wide?
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.

So, you'd want a range at least 3 percentage

Well, with-Or more?

MR. KOHN. More than 3 percentage points wide would be my
recommendation. If you had 3 percentage points on M2, a comparable
[M1] range that would encompass the same kinds of possible outcomes, I
think, would be close to 6 percentage points.
MR. ANGELL.

So, you think 3 to 8 percent would be--

SPEAKER(?).

3 to 15!

MR. ANGELL.

3 to 9?

MR. JOHNSON. There's a lot of uncertainty about the interest
rate scenario that goes with these nominal GNP numbers.
MR. ANGELL.
I know, but I just want to have some notion in
case we're going to discuss this seriously in January. I want to have
some notion about how well we might do between now and then as to
whether or not we will be able to redo it. Otherwise, I don't want to
say we're going to discuss it seriously. You think it would take 3 to
9 percent?
MR. KOHN. Right now, if you asked me, I'd say 3 to 9
percent, or 2 to 8 percent, or something along that line.
MR. ANGELL.

Then it would be--

7/7/87

-63-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This doesn't say we're going to establish
a target range. All it says is that we are thinking of it; it just
says we're going to reexamine whether we want one at all.
I don't
think it commits you to anything.
MR. JOHNSON.

That's the same kind of range we were saying we

had-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, that just leaves it where we are.

Yes, but it just doesn't--

MR. JOHNSON. We have to have a target so we would--.
Obviously, we wouldn't at all.
MR. ANGELL.
I'm just suggesting that sometime we will run
out of ability to continue to say that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. SEGER.

I agree with that.

We've always said that.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

We've run out of some other things,

too.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just [review].
Logically, I think
this M1 sentence would come after both of them, then.
The M1
paragraph would be as it is with a small change in the middle of the
paragraph: "The Committee again decided not to establish a specific
target for growth in M1 over the remainder of 1987 and no tentative
range has been set for 1988.
The appropriateness of changes in M1
this year will continue to be evaluated," etc.
Then right at the end
bring up that other sentence: "The issues involved for establishing a
target range for M1 will be carefully reappraised at the beginning of
1988."
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I would be--

MR. ANGELL. You know, ironically, we took away M1 the year
that we would have hit the target range if we had set one.
MR. BLACK.

I've been telling them they were playing with

fire.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would depend upon [unintelligible].
Well, this leaves us one sentence for the long-term ranges for 1988.
Is that all right?
It says "the range is _ to _ percent;" it
doesn't say anything about [unintelligible].
MR. KOHN.

The one you had last July.

MR. PRELL.

what?

That also was the last one, August.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes. We have a range on debt, which is
Is debt 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent?
MR. JOHNSON.

That's what I get:

7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.

-64-

7/7/87

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We start out with no change in the range
this year but we agree that growth in the aggregates around the lower
end of the ranges may be appropriate in light of developments with
respect to velocity and signs of underlying inflationary pressures,
provided that economic activity is expanding at an acceptable pace.
We will vote separately on these things. That is the pattern, right?
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are we prepared to vote on 1987 ranges?
Unchanged ranges with that sentence-MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

*--[Note: Mr. Boehne was out of the room at the time of this vote.
indicated below, Mr. Boehne voted 'yes' when he returned.]

As

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we move to 1988. We have two
sentences: one saying 5 to 8 percent and one saying 7-1/2 to 10
percent on the associated range for debt.
But we also have this
sentence or paragraph on M1.
MR. JOHNSON.

Say that again.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All it says is "5 to 8 percent for M2 and
M3 and 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 for the associated range for domestic
nonfinancial debt."
It's two sentences. Then this paragraph on M1-MR. STERN.
it in the past?
MR. JOHNSON.

Can we establish that that's the way we've done
Move toward price stability.

MR. STERN. Or Governor Angell's thought about maybe looking
at it again with a bias toward-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

You can get a vote from Mr. Boehne

now.
MR. KOHN. Last July we simply had a paragraph that gave the
tentative ranges with a little extra verbiage about M1.
MR. JOHNSON.
I would prefer to have at least that sentence
about why we're ratcheting the range down, saying-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
not ratcheting it down enough.

I prefer to have one on why we are

-65-

7/7/87

MR. ANGELL.
period of time--

But we want to continue to ratchet a longer

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
explanation.

Well, I think we've got to say that in the

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that operational language
It has been in the other part of the
has always been that stark.
policy record and in the testimony that we had all the verbiage and
the hallelujahs and hosannas.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have 5 to 8 percent, 7-1/2 to 10-1/2
percent and the paragraph on M1 for the record. Does anybody need
I will read it to you. Are you ready?
that read to them?
MR. BERNARD.

Can we pick up President Boehne on 1987?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BERNARD.
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes.

President Boehne on the 1987 ranges?
What was the number?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

5-1/2 to--

Unchanged.

MR. ANGELL.

Just vote no.

MR. BOEHNE.

I vote yes.

MR. BERNARD. For 1988:
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we get down to the operational
paragraph. Just to remind you: It is "maintain"; same language as
last time, but totally symmetrical with "woulds"; 5 and 7-1/2 percent,
respectively, for M2 and M3; growth in M1 while picking up from recent
levels is expected to remain well below the pace in 1986; and 4 to 8
percent for the federal funds rate.
MR. ANGELL.

In other words, just like last time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Please call the roll.

-66-

7/7/87

MR. BERNARD.

Chairman Volcker

Yes

Vice

Yes

Chairman Corrigan

Governor Angell

Yes

President Boehne

Yes

President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything else to discuss? We can just
quit. If any members have changes in their projections, Mr. Prell
would like to receive them by noon on Thursday.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd like for the record to show, if
I may, that of the other occasions to [unintelligible] us, in this
particular case I think we have to acknowledge, at least I would do
so, that this will be the Chairman's last Open Market Committee
meeting, hopefully.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How do you know?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Hopefully. But it has been, I
think, 12 years and something like 119 or 120 consecutive--I don't
think he's ever missed one--meetings of the Committee as a member and
as Chairman. We've all come to learn the subtleties of "mights" and
"woulds" and "snugs" and "oozes." But I think we've learned a lot
more sensible things and I think that we should acknowledge this
particular occasion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] come back and bite you in
August with another meeting where you could go off on your own
"woulds" and "mights" and stuff. I appreciate the cooperation of all,
in these recent years in particular. This is a wild and woolly
venture sometimes, with so many people. But it works and I trust it
will continue with all your intelligent and forceful efforts. Thank
you.
END OF MEETING

