Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 15-16, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, December 15, 1987, at 3:15 p.m.,
and continuing on Wednesday, December 16, 1987, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn 1
Kelley
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, 2 Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld,1
Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

1/

Present for Wednesday session; participated in Tuesday session via telephone
conference from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

2/

Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held on
November 3, 1987.

12/15-16/87
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, 1 Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Small, 1 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Guynn, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,
and Ms. Tschinkel, 2 Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,
Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Atlanta,
respectively
Messrs. Fryd1 and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of New York and Boston, respectively
Mr. Guentner, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Ms. Rosenbaum, 3 Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta

1/

Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday.

2/

Attended Wednesday session only.

3/

Attended Tuesday session only.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
December 15-16, 1987

December 15, 1987--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we are all present, with the
exception of Frank Morris who, hopefully, is on his way from the
airport and Si Keehn, who never was able to make it.
I trust you're

on the other end of the wire, Si.
MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'm here with Karl Scheld and I
hope you can hear us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We can hear you quite well.

I'd like to

alter the order of the agenda and ask our Managers to report tomorrow
morning rather than today and use this afternoon for the more generic
discussions. I hope and I trust that Messrs. Kohn, Sternlight, and
Lindsey are prepared. Is that okay? Without objection, I will
request a motion to approve the minutes of the November 3rd meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No objection. The first topic of
discussion, item number 4 on the agenda, is a discussion of borrowings
and the federal funds rate as guides to open market operations. Mr.
Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
anything to that?

[Statement--see

Mr. Sternlight, would you like to add

MR. STERNLIGHT. I have very little to add to either what was
in the memorandum or what Don has just outlined. Maybe the one point
is that, as Don just mentioned in his comments, the market is fairly
well aware of this current emphasis on the funds rate in the
implementation of policy, with greater weight placed on day-to-day
funds rates. From comments that I hear, the market seems to be fairly
understanding of it.
Some of the people I regard as more thoughtful
observers in the market would be troubled, I think, if they thought
there was a long-term reversion to something that could be called
"pegging of the funds rate."
That's exaggerated, but I think that's
what it would tend to become to be known as. That carries with it the
baggage of a past association with periods of what many regarded as
inadequate policy responses in times of excessive money growth. I
don't think that argues that one has to go back immediately to what
was being done--particularly since in the very near term, we will have
all the uncertainties associated with the year-end period--but it is
something to keep in mind as we look a little further at it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Kohn or Mr. Sternlight?

Are there any questions for either Mr.

12/15-16/87

MR. HOSKINS.
In your opinion, if we were to make a change,
is the tenor in the market a lot different now than it was, say, right
after October 19th?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think the market has calmed down
considerably from the extremely turbulent and nervous state of late
October.
I would hesitate to say it's totally back to normal.
I
think there is still some background nervousness and we are getting
into a period when there's a lot of uncertainty anyway, just because
of the possibility of pressures associated with the year-end.
MR. PARRY. Well, that has been true in certain markets but
in terms of demand for borrowing, things are still very different from
the pre-October 19th period. In fact, it looks as though that
difference now may be as great as it ever has been. Isn't that
correct?
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I agree with Bob on that. Borrowings
actually have declined under the same spread, or even a wider spread
for a while.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Borrowing has been very light, and we have
scratched our heads about what the reasons for that might be. We do
hear some comments to the effect that some banks are saving their
recourse to the discount window, perhaps anticipating pressures around
year-end.
There may be some who just want to take extra pains to
avoid the window because they are concerned that their own credit
ratings could be coming under some review, and they just don't want to
subject themselves to any additional attention that might come from
using the window. Seasonal borrowing is just about at its low point.
I know it doesn't stand up all that well in the correlations, but I
still think that some-MR. JOHNSON. Just a technical question: Based on the
research, which has a larger variance in normal times--borrowed
reserves or the funds rate?
MR. KOHN. Do you mean under which circumstance would the
funds rate vary more?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, assuming that we're targeting borrowed
reserves, is there more noise around borrowed reserves or the funds
rate?
MR. KOHN.
is basis points.

It's hard to compare them; one is dollars and one

MR. JOHNSON. I know that, but I mean in terms of the
percentage variation or standard error.
MR. STERNLIGHT. You can get a good deal of variation even
when you're following a borrowings target more closely, just because
one incident can bring banks in for some special reason and you have
to make allowance for that.
Even on a borrowings target, I have often
had to report to the Committee that borrowing was considerably higher
for this or that particular reason. But--

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not even sure that you could get an
answer without adjusting for the fact that there is not a unitary
elasticity between the change in the funds rate on the one hand and
I think it is mainly the case
the change in borrowings on the other.
that a percentage change in borrowings would be a lot larger unless
you normalize it to the-I'm trying to think of some way to normalize it
MR. JOHNSON.
and I can't; I'm thinking apples and oranges but I'm just simply-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the answer is self-evident, if
It is feasible to peg the funds rate, but there
you think about it.
is no possibility of pegging borrowing.
MR. JOHNSON. If we are trying to hit a borrowings target,
I'm just asking whether we get as much variation around that target as
we get around the funds rate that results out of that borrowings
I don't know whether there is any information there, but I
target.
still think it might be interesting to know.
MR. KOHN. Okay. The standard deviation of borrowings around
the path assumption from early 1984 through mid-1987 has been about
$170 million; excluding the year-end periods, it has been about $160
million. The root mean square error of the funds rate around what the
Desk thought it ought to be was about 20 basis points over that same
period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
answer that question.

Unless you have [unintelligible]

to

I don't know how you compare the two, but it
MR. JOHNSON.
sounds like similar magnitudes of variations.
[You could] use coefficients of variation, but
MR. ANGELL.
it would seem to be smaller for the funds rate.
I guess what I'm saying is
MR. JOHNSON. The funds rate?
that if you could hit your borrowings exactly, it's really a loose way
There's only a certain band in which the
of targeting the funds rate.
funds rate is going to vary under a borrowings target. And I guess
the question is: Can you pursue the same goals by a lot of adjustments
in the funds rate versus a few adjustments in the borrowings target?
MR. BOEHNE. You can, although pegging--or whatever word one
uses--the funds rate is much more addictive than the borrowing because
there is much less-MR. JOHNSON.

Well, the political risks are fairly--

MR. BOEHNE. But even in the decision-making process of the
Committee, there is much less emotional attachment to a given
borrowing level than there is to the funds rate, so it gives you a
little more flexibility in the process.
You're right, theoretically,
that you can do it either way. But the way the decisions are made and
carried out and perceived, you end up with more flexibility to change
policy through this borrowing procedure than through the funds rate-not in theory but in practice.

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Don, there was one thing that surprised me.
It
seemed to me that after the first few weeks following October 19th
banks would have had some excess reserves which they could carry over
to the next period. But with $150 million to $250 million, I would
presume that quite a few banks were running very heavy excess reserves
and that the carry-over period for those excess reserves is lapsing,
so that it's a financial cost.
Is that true?
MR. KOHN. I think that was true in only one reserve period-right after the reserve period in late October and early November-when there were more excess reserves than could be carried into the
new period.
Since then, we have not observed that. Excess reserves
have varied over a wide range, but on average--mostly because of the
carry-ins and carry-outs--they have not really differed substantially
from what we might have expected over time. But we can't see a real
effect on excess reserves, and I don't think we see banks losing.
MR. ANGELL. So behavior will not necessarily be modified from
these very low levels of adjustment plus seasonal borrowings then.
MR. KOHN. Of course, we have tried to estimate the excess
reserves that banks want to hold and have built that into the path or
made allowance for it in putting out nonborrowed reserves.
So, in
some sense, we are trying to compensate for this phenomenon that you
are trying to identify. But the excess reserve behavior has not been
unusual even though the borrowing behavior has.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

MR. HELLER. Well, I found it a very interesting paper and
helpful to have the options in front of us, some of which we haven't
discussed for the last year, at least.
The current period clearly is
a very important period as we are coming off pegging the funds rate.
It is the same sort of thing as taking off wage-price controls. You
have to ask: Where do we go from here?
I was wondering why you didn't
give consideration to a broader array of options such as targeting
total reserves, or targeting nonborrowed reserves, or other techniques
that have been used in the past. Maybe you did and you rejected them.
In particular, I'm wondering about this because during the last three
quarters of the year--I think at virtually every FOMC meeting--we have
had projections for increased reserve growth and we have had
projections for increased M1 growth and in virtually all of those
So, maybe there is something
cases the projections haven't come true.
in our operating technique that doesn't get us where we want to go.
I
was wondering whether the other techniques might be more suitable to
get us to the targets that we actually want to reach. Obviously, a
lot of people here have been through the periods when targeting total
reserves or nonborrowed reserves was the technique and, being new to
the game, I was wondering why you rejected them.
MR. KOHN. A decision to go to nonborrowed or total reserve
targeting presupposes the decision to target the aggregates very
closely and to accept very wide swings in interest rates, as we had
from 1979 to 1982, as a result of allowing overshoots or undershoots
in required reserves to be absorbed in the borrowing to keep on a
nonborrowed reserve objective. We didn't have a sense that that's

12/15-16/87

what the Committee wanted to do; that was our presumption in writing
the paper. Perhaps that can be discussed in item number 6 on the
agenda. In discussing that item, if the Committee decided it wanted
to target monetary aggregates very closely, we could come up with that
kind of alternative. But an alternative of nonborrowed or total
reserve targeting presupposes that you really want to hit the
aggregates and you're willing to accept very wide swings in interest
rates.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

It assumes you know a lot about money demand.

Yes.

MR. HELLER. Not necessarily. You can also argue that your
general path for nonborrowed reserves might be 5 percent, say, but you
would be willing to tolerate quite a bit of variation to mitigate
interest rates swings that would be implied in following it week by
One probably can make compromises along
week right down to the "T."
that line, too, but it brings in the broader issue of the HumphreyHawkins testimony and setting targets. Why do we go through the
motions if it isn't something that we take seriously?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the question that Governor
Johnson raised before, it does follow that if you use borrowings as
the operational target, you will see more variability in the funds
rate than you would see, obviously, if you target the funds rate. But
from my perspective, that's a desirable result for two reasons. One
reason is that the short-run variability in the funds rate often has
very valuable informational content. It may be telling you something
that you don't know or can't find out if you literally have the funds
rate pegged. The second reason I think it's desirable is something of
an extension of Ed Boehne's point: not only does pegging the federal
funds rate tend to result in people being more inhibited about moving
it than they perhaps otherwise would be, but neither borrowings nor
the funds rate is what we are ultimately concerned with. What we are
ultimately concerned with is the economy. The experience of the
1970s--a period that was much more tranquil in many respects than the
1980s--leaves me at least with a very bitter taste in my mouth,
because the implication of an approach to policy that seeks to peg
interest rates is that, in fact, we can do that with great precision.
But we end up with an economic result that is far, far removed from
what we are after.
MR. JOHNSON. No, my view would be that you'd only want to
do that if you had the flexibility to adjust it very often in a way
that met your larger goals. I think the problem before was that the
interest rate got so politicized that the Federal Reserve didn't
really feel it had a political-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think it's more than being
politicized. First of all, as I said, I think there is an inhibition
to changing the federal funds rate, quite apart from the political
side of it, but there shouldn't be. And Peter touched on this: once
the market knows that that's what you are doing that's what the
federal funds rate is going to be. It simply loses--

12/15-16/87

MR. JOHNSON. But I think that's true of the funds rate under
the borrowing target. Once the market knows the borrowing target, the
funds rate is going to move in a narrow range. It's only when you
miss that borrowing target that you get a lot of variation in the
funds rate.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well--

MR. JOHNSON. If you set a borrowing target, your ability to
hit it depends on how good your estimates of other reserves are; if
your other reserve estimates are off, then you're going to get a lot
of variation in the funds rate, which is going to affect your
borrowing and throw your borrowing off.
MR. ANGELL.
information in it.

But that reserve estimate being off can have

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

It can be off for a lot of reasons.

MR. JOHNSON. Well, that's right, it can be off. One of the
vulnerabilities to targeting borrowed reserves is that you have to
estimate so many things in order to decide what your open market
operation should be for the day. So you use the funds rate as
information that your reserve estimates may be a little off.
MR. HELLER. But, the other way around would work, too. I'm
not arguing for it, but if you fix the fed funds rate and then you see
the borrowing fluctuating, that also gives you information.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, you can do it either way.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I don't think so.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, Vice Chairman Corrigan expressed
it just exactly the way I would. If there is, as I sense, a desire to
return to a borrowing target, then it seems to me that the question
is: How do we best get away from this situation in which the market is
in danger of interpreting our actions as pegging the fed funds rate?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not "in danger of".
making that judgment. Now the real danger is-MR. ANGELL.

They are

Of course they are.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

--how do you get off of it without

creating--

MR. ANGELL. Having them think that means that getting off of
it is somewhat problematic because, in the period following this
meeting, if we begin to read things differently they may assume that
we have made a policy change when we don't think we have made a policy
change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's always the case.

MR. JOHNSON. Well, to even consider getting back to
targeting borrowing, which I think is just as good an approach as
targeting the funds rate, you have to have a predictable relationship

12/15-16/87

between borrowings and the funds rate. You don't have that now.
can't take any given spread right now and predict the level of
borrowing that is going to result.

You

MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me it has been very predictable;
borrowings have been very close to a $200 - $250 million range and in
these weeks we have had a federal funds rate very close to 6-3/4
percent.
So, it seems to me, it is somewhat predictable.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, let's ask the experts.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

Not from the context of the past.

Not from what I've seen.

MR. STERNLIGHT. These last few weeks borrowing has diverged
from what we would have predicted based on experience, looking back a
few quarters.
MR. PARRY.

Borrowing would have been $400 million.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Tom Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Don or Peter, the question I want to ask is
this: Other than the experience in the marketplace, do we have any
evidence of a shift in the borrowings function?
I think we have to
look at that.
The reason I'm asking is that in the most recent
reserve period we missed by roughly $80 million, I believe.
Isn't
$220 million where borrowings came in?
MR. KOHN.

Right, relative to the $300 million

[in the path].

MR. MELZER. Okay.
If we had forced the target at $300
million, that would have meant only $1 billion to $1-1/2 billion in
borrowings on the last Wednesday; I don't know that that would have
produced disastrous results, being the end of a two-week statement
period. Even if we had forced that level of borrowings on a Wednesday
and had had that measure of volatility, generally over that period the
equilibrium funds rate might still have been perceived to be 6-3/4 to
6-7/8 percent. My question about evidence stems from this: I asked
our discount officer whether he had seen anything unexpected in our
District, and he hadn't in terms of unwillingness to borrow. But the
issue came up, I guess, at a recent meeting of the discount officers
that you might have attended. They have seen a shift in the
borrowings function, but it's not really associated with October 19th
in particular; it has been going on for a much longer period of time.
So, we are talking about an operating procedure here that was based on
the response to October 19th, and I don't think the shift we are
looking at was necessarily associated with that.
I should give Don a
chance to respond, but I have one final comment.
If we were to go
back [to a borrowing target], I think year-end would be an ideal time
to go back because there will be seasonal pressures, as there often
are at the end of a quarter.
In fact, if we didn't, and we stabilized
the funds rate through the year-end, we might encounter some serious
technical problems in getting those reserves back out.
MR. KOHN. Let me address this question of the shift in the
borrowing function. As I heard the reports from that discount

12/15-16/87

officers' meeting, they were discussing a kind of trend since passage
of the Monetary Control Act in the way they have been administering
the window over a period of time, rather than anything that had
happened very recently. When our staff came back from that meeting we
ran some equations trying to detect that trend and it was difficult to
find. We also responded to their concerns and what we heard by trying
to reinforce in their minds that there has been no change in
Regulation A and that any tightening up on the supply side was
inappropriate. This is a theme that we play constantly from this end.
I think the most recent shift has been very large, as Governor Johnson
said, relative to the $400 million to $450 million we might have
expected. That really seems to have occurred very recently.
I don't
know if I can pinpoint October 19th, but I don't think it is related
to anything that the discount officers were discussing at their
meeting.
In terms of what we hear or see in the data, Peter has heard
anecdotally from at least one large institution and they in turn
thought they knew of other large institutions that were staying out of
the market and saving up their chips for year-end. Secondly, in the
data, we do see that the lack of borrowing is very much at the large
institutions with deposits over $3 billion. At small- and mediumsized institutions, regional institutions, the borrowing may have
dropped a little but not nearly so much as you might expect, given
That led me
what seems to have happened with the large institutions.
to think that it's not just the stock market decline, but the whole
atmosphere around banks--uncertainties about their credit, quality of
assets, and other such things--that has been making them be very, very
careful.
It's not related necessarily to the stock market; that just
came in on top of a situation that was already bad.
MR. BOYKIN.

That's also what we hear.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I was just thinking that it certainly would be
very desirable to get back to where we were, with the emphasis on
borrowing, but it seems to me that as long as we have the demand for
borrowings along its current track that will be extremely difficult to
do. With the relationship between the discount rate and market rates
at its present level, we are so close to frictional levels, your
alternative (4) probably ought to be deferred until we see something
that would be more of a traditional relationship in terms of demand
for borrowing.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Higher interest rates.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think there are two key questions
here that we need to consider. One is whether or not the funds rate
gives us the right signals if we target borrowed reserves, which has
been addressed by the staff. The other is whether or not it's really
easier--from a political standpoint, or to follow up on Jerry
Corrigan's point, because of inertia--to [make a policy] move under
the borrowed reserve procedure. Generally, the federal funds rate
probably does move in the right direction to give the correct signal
when we are using a borrowed reserve target. But there are times when

12/15-16/87

it doesn't. For example, in 1984, around the time of the Continental
Illinois Bank crisis, Chuck Partee had to reassure the markets through
an article in The New York Times that we were targeting borrowed
reserves and that the rise in the federal funds rate did stem from
banks' unwillingness to borrow--that it really didn't have anything to
do with a tightening of policy at that particular time. Also, right
before the market crash on the 19th, I think there was a perception in
the market that we probably would tighten at a time when we really
didn't want that to happen. In general, a borrowing target probably
works [to give the right signal] but it doesn't always work that way.
There's a lot to Jerry's argument that there is inertia when
operating under a federal funds target; the Committee, just because it
doesn't know where the funds rate ought to go, is less apt to move.
There is also some substance, I think, to the political argument that
it gives us a certain degree of protection if we can say we really
don't control the federal funds rate, we control borrowed reserves.
At least at one time I think that did alleviate some of the concerns
of Congress and gave us some protection. I'm not sure that's the case
much anymore, except maybe in the case of some Congressmen. The
market seems to look through this and be reasonably certain that we
have in mind a certain level or range for the federal funds rate.
Moreover, if the borrowing really doesn't change and the federal funds
rate does change, they tend to think that's really what we want. So,
I would be inclined to do something like alternative (3), which is to
go back to borrowed reserve targeting but pay a little more attention
to the federal funds rate when it is not behaving in the way we think
it ought to, and deal with it on an ad hoc basis. But my real hope is
that we can do what Bob Heller suggested--if we can ever get the
aggregates behaving more normally--and that is, make some
institutional changes and move toward a nonborrowed reserve target,
which would have certain desirable automatic features that would
enable us to ease or tighten without having to take discretionary
actions. I would hope that at some point we can move in that
direction because now what the market gets is largely demanddetermined and I think there ought to be a larger element of supplydetermined in there than we have now because of the misbehavior of the
aggregates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I'd like to think of this in two stages. One is
what I think is useful in normal or typical times, if there are such
things. In those times, I'm perfectly willing to support an approach
that emphasizes a borrowings target, even though I have learned that
because we don't have nice stable relationships, we cannot predict
exactly what a certain level of borrowings will produce in the way of
fed funds rates. But there are times when conditions are more unusual
and abnormal, and I personally believe we are still in one of those
modes at the moment. And in times like these, I think that we ought
to pay a lot more attention to fed funds because the markets are very,
very nervous and skittish--not as much as they were October 20th
through October 26th or 28th or whatever, but I don't think it's back
to normal. I would hate to see us give the message inadvertently that
we were tightening or engineering a major policy change because fed
funds rates shot up at the end of the year when we really didn't want
to give that message. I don't think that everybody out there in the
real economy and in the markets is that comfortable with what's going

-10-

12/15-16/87

on.
Therefore, I would just urge us in the next few weeks to be
triply sensitive, even though in two months or so we may go back to
what we were doing prior to October 19th, emphasizing the borrowing
targets. But I personally wouldn't feel comfortable with going back
to business as usual starting tomorrow.
MR. ANGELL.
If banks are saving up to have free access to
the window, would they be most likely to choose the two-week period
ending the 30th or would they choose that [next] four-day period?
MR. STERNLIGHT. The particular comment that I heard related
to just that four-day period beginning the 31st.
MR. ANGELL. So, if that's the case, then you might expect a
very large jump in borrowing-MR. STERNLIGHT.

That could be.

MR. ANGELL. That might also mean that borrowing could be at
lower numbers during the period that begins the day after tomorrow.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

MR. PARRY.
I think it's important to know that banks have
been very poor at making estimates of what their demands would be at
the end of the year. Typically, it has been almost a perfect,
Last year
opposite indicator of what the demands were going to be.
there was a large demand that some people said was associated with the
new tax legislation. To assume that that's going to carry on into
1987, I think requires some-MR. ANGELL. But, Bob, people in the marketplace are making
that assumption and have been positioning themselves for over a month.
MR. PARRY. Well, the mere fact that they are positioning
themselves, for example, in the CD market to go out beyond year-end
probably-MR. ANGELL.

That's right.

MR. PARRY. It probably indicates that you won't get the
borrowing at the end of the year. That's what I'm saying.
MR. JOHNSON.

That's right.

MR. STERN. But if you do, it should not come as any big
surprise. This is certainly one of the most well advertised potential
events in a long time.
MR. ANGELL. Then, the fed funds rate would tend to drop
rather dramatically in that period.
That's why I'm saying that,
MR. JOHNSON. I agree with that.
with all these instabilities, we probably need to continue to focus on
the funds rate for a while until we feel more satisfied that we are
back to normal.
I favor going back to a borrowed reserve target when
we feel more confident about the relationship between the funds rate
and the discount rate spread and borrowings. But I just don't see any

-11-

12/15-16/87

evidence that we are there, and it certainly seems to me that we are
not going to get any closer to it between now and the end of the year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think a useful way to look at this question of
whether you want to go back is, as Martha pointed out, to look at
where you want to get to. There probably is general agreement, and I
share that view, that we ought to get back to a borrowing objective.
It's a question of when and how. My sense is that the longer we wait,
the more difficult it's going to be. It may be a long time before we
get back to normal times. While there clearly are still unusual
pressures, I think the longer we wait the more difficult it will be to
get back. And we have more at stake here than just the technical side
of how we operate. Clearly, there are technical difficulties because
it's hard to measure the demand and the relationships. But beyond
that, there is this credibility issue in the marketplace; and my sense
is that the longer we stay with this procedure, the more the
credibility issue is going to come to the fore. Also, I think it's
just good to have some specific kinds of goals, internally. So, I
think we ought to begin the shift back and do something along the
lines of alternative (3), which still gives a fair amount of emphasis
to the funds rate but sets us on a path back toward where we want to
be. That is where I come out on this for now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right. In fact, I think
we're already beginning to see the problem emerge. I have been rather
struck that in the last two or three days the funds rate all of a
sudden has been locked.
MR. ANGELL.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

It hasn't budged at all.

It's the 1970s all over again.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's an extraordinary thing to watch the
screen and see high: 6-3/4 percent; low: 6-3/4 percent; last: 6-3/4
percent. I know that the markets are not functioning. I think the
more interesting question is the one that Ed Boehne has raised-namely, that the longer you wait to effect the transition back to
something else, invariably, the greater the jolt. What we have to
think about is not only the question of do we, as I suspect everyone
does, want to get off this procedure at some point, but also we have
to figure out how we do it. If we have this very large "add factor"
in our equations between the funds rate on the one hand and borrowing
requirements on the other, the implication of shifting back before
things have returned to normal is that we know what the phase-down of
that add factor is going to be--unless Tom Melzer is right that this
is really just a long-term trend and it's never going to go back.
But, right at the moment, if we were to shift and not have the cover
of the year-end period, the actual transition mechanism would have to
be very subtle. And the longer we wait, the greater the length of the
transition. I guess I come down pretty much where Governor Johnson
does.
I get the impression that we are not there yet; in other words,
I think abnormal yield spreads are still there and skittishness is
still there. But, frankly, I think we are now getting to the point
where whatever benefits we are getting out of this funds rate

-12-

12/15-16/87

procedure are rapidly falling relative to the benefits of the
stability it's creating. I think it has been very effective; it has
created a great deal of stability in the market. But, very shortly,
it's going to start to become counterproductive. The only question is
when.
MR. JOHNSON. What would you try to do as a first step?
Would you try to take current borrowings and the result from the
current funds rate-discount rate spread and try to target that unless
something really changes dramatically? Or what?
MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's where I'd start.
It depends
on the Committee's decision tomorrow. Suppose, for the sake of
argument, that the Committee wanted to maintain something like current
reserve conditions. I don't know what the outcome of this current
two-week period will be, but I'd be tempted to write down something on
the order of $250 million of borrowings, or maybe a little lower-perhaps $225 or $200 million--and then be alert to see how things were
coming in. That's very low, and I would expect it to be higher after
the new year. I think you're right, Governor Johnson, that there's a
lot of uncertainty; but I also think that we can interpret incoming
information and adjust the borrowing objective if it looks like we are
wrong. Now, there's a very fine line between that and [focusing on
the] federal funds rate.
MR. JOHNSON. I guess I'd worry that what Bob Parry is saying
is right--that everybody has gone to the CD market to lock up their
funds and that all of a sudden, if there is no willingness whatsoever
to borrow toward the year-end, we could get extreme funds rate
pressures out of that scenario.
MR. PARRY. One of the interesting things, of course, is that
30-day CD rates are about 25 basis points higher than the 90-day
rates.
MR. KOHN.

Definitely.

MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, that's right.

MR. BLACK. Unless the uncertainty is completely behind us, I
think if we were to try to go in that direction, we'd have to make a
public announcement that we thought enough of the uncertainty was
behind us that we were going back to a borrowed reserve target. We
should do that so the swings in the federal funds rate that would
probably result would not be misinterpreted.
MR. PARRY.
pretty quickly?

Don't you think the market will figure that out

MR. BLACK. Yes, pretty quickly; but the first two or three
days they would read all sorts of changes in policy into that, I would
think.
MR. ANGELL. Well, this market is going to get just as
fragile as we cause it to be: and the longer we cause it to believe
that the fed funds rate is 6-3/4 percent, the more fragile it's going
to be about getting away from there. It seems to me that we
[unintelligible] variance in the fed funds rate and yet have a 50

12/15-16/87

-13-

basis point limit on it if we want.
If we would like to have a 50
basis point limit on it this week, and we want it to be in a range of
6-1/2 to 7 percent, then we could do that. But at least we would get

the market used to some variation. Then when we get to the first of
the year the transition is not going to be nearly so abrupt.
MR. MELZER. I think you can use the cover of year-end, as I
alluded to before. I think it would be a mistake to start right after
the FOMC meeting; that's how you would get the misinterpretation that
Bob's afraid of.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I agree that the longer we wait, the more
difficult it is. I agree with going to alternative (3), which I would
interpret as a gradual move back, but certainly one with enough
latitude to back off if we're not getting the right reaction. With
respect to how to do it, I don't know that we can be this precise--and
maybe this is an oversimplification--but I would say go for
alternative (3) but postpone it until after year-end. I would stay
where we are for the next couple of weeks, or certainly through the
year-end, and then start the gradual move. At that point, there would
be enough flexibility that we could back off if we're not getting the
reactions in the market that we're anticipating.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As to the fundamental
question of whether to stay with the federal funds rate or go to a
nonborrowed or a borrowed reserve target, I think I would be one of
only three or four here who sat around this table when we targeted
federal funds back in the 1970s. And I can tell you that our
experience was not very good, as everybody knows. There was a lot of
tugging and pulling to go an eighth of a point on the federal funds
rate. As a matter of fact, we even got to the point of setting a zone
of indifference where the federal funds could move a quarter of a
point between two established points. And the fact is that the
information that came from that procedure was well behind the facts
and got us into trouble, in my view. I think we have to move back to
a procedure of targeting nonborrowed reserves. Also, I would join Tom
Melzer in his proposal to do it, first of all, as quickly as possible,
and secondly, under the umbrella of uncertainty that surrounds the
year-end. I would opt for alternative (3) in the sense that we
shouldn't totally ignore the federal funds rate over this next threeto four-week period. But I think the focus should be on the borrowing
level and--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you mean that?

Well, you said nonborrowed reserves. Did

MR. GUFFEY. No, no, I beg your pardon, I didn't. I should
not have said that; I meant a borrowing target. And I'd do it under
the umbrella, or the smokescreen, of the year-end uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It seems to me that nobody in the
marketplace would expect the Federal Reserve literally to seek to

-14-

12/15-16/87

target the federal funds rate on an hour-by-hour basis over this yearI felt that we
end period.
I think that would be a terrible mistake.
did too much even last year, in terms of the situation. So I would
associate myself very strongly with Tom Melzer's suggestion that,
given that people expect some movement in this period, we should take
advantage of it.
As I've mentioned to you before, it seems to me that
one way or another we are probably going to have to remind people, no
matter what we do with policy, that we are coming into a period in
which we could see rather extraordinary amounts of churning and
I don't think we should ever get
volatility in the money market.
ourselves to the point where we literally are going to run policy so
as to avoid that kind of working of the marketplace, which I consider
healthy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
table for that.

I don't sense any desire around this

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, if you say you're going to
continue literally day-in and day-out to target the federal funds rate
over the next three weeks that's what you're saying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, I don't know if we physically do

that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. STERN.

Well, my point is--

Pumping a lot of reserves in there.

MR. JOHNSON. We don't really know. We could see the funds
rate collapse at year-end just as easily as we could see it soar.
MR. ANGELL.

That's right.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It doesn't seem to me that we would
want to overreact in those circumstances either. There is at least a
50/50 chance that at some point over this interval, one way or the
I don't know which side
other, a very large aberration will set in.
it will be on, but regardless, I don't think that the operating policy
of the Federal Reserve should be to try to offset it literally dollarfor-dollar. But if we say that the funds rate is going to be at
6-3/4 percent, period, that's what we are saying, in effect.
MR. ANGELL. Today is the next to the last day of a two-week
reserve maintenance period, and the fed funds rate is locked on 6-3/4
If it locks on 6-3/4 percent through tomorrow, I think we
percent.
would have told everyone that's where we are.
MS. SEGER.
MR. ANGELL.

What if it comes in at 9-1/8 percent?
It comes in at 9-1/8 percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Everyone will say it's the last day.

People then say, well, it's the last day.

MS. SEGER. Yes, but having something like that in the
context of having had flat reserves since April, a declining M1 in

-15-

12/15-16/87

December, and missing our M2 targets--.
it as the whole ball and not just--

I think you have to look at

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but suppose it comes in at 2
percent; substitute 2 percent for 9 percent-MS. SEGER.

Yes.

MR. ANGELL.
If you don't want to go to 9 percent, then put a
ceiling of 7-1/2 percent on it: or put a floor if you want to.
I just
want to have more variance than we have been getting.
MR. GUFFEY.

That would be the zone of indifference.

MR. ANGELL. That's alternative number
back to where we want to be.

(3) as a transition

MR. JOHNSON.
It seems to me that we are arguing about pretty
trivial issues.
If you take a borrowing target and the possible
variations of the funds rate around that--I don't know, maybe Don can
help me--except in very extreme circumstances, where we grossly miss
reserve estimates or something, there can't be much variation of the
funds rate around that borrowing target.
MR. KOHN.

20 basis points is what we--

MR. JOHNSON.
basis points.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Don has quoted you the standard error:

20

There are some possibilities in it.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I'm just saying we're talking about
angels on the head of a pin here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as Governor Angell was talking
about the federal funds rate being what the market thought we wanted
it to be, I remembered a day back in the early 1960s, which was before
Peter Sternlight was Manager, when the open market wire said, in
effect, that the federal funds rate was hanging at around 2-7/8
percent, or whatever it was at the time, out of respect for what the
market thinks the Federal Reserve System's intentions are.
That has
always stuck in my mind and I think there is some of that right now.
MR. ANGELL. Well, of course.
It is because people out there
are saying, "My goodness, 6-3/4 percent is the rate.
I guess maybe
I'll sell funds.
I'm not going to sell for less than that if that's
what the rate is."
MR. BLACK.
MR. ANGELL.

And I'm not going to get more.
I'm not going to get more.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
this issue?

Si Keehn, do you have any thoughts on

-16-

12/15-16/87

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I think I hear a consensus for
moving away from what we are currently doing and in the direction of
alternative (3), and I certainly would favor that; but in my mind,
I'm a little uncertain as to how
it's really a question of timing.
the rest of the year is going to play out and what kind of pressures
will be emerging. Rather than using the year-end as a blind, if you
will, to accomplish a change, I'd favor going through that period, and
then as soon thereafter as possible, begin to implement the change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that was one of the
Yes, that after the first of the
recommendations--is that right?
year, coming off the instability of year-end, is an ideal time to
phase in, if we're going to do that.
MR. KEEHN.
I'd be in favor of that--in other words,
Or more precisely, I guess, I favor alternative (1)
alternative (1).
for now, but moving to (3) as rapidly as we can after the turn of the
year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

It seems to me that we are struggling with the
MR. HOSKINS.
Perhaps one way to
issue of trying to tell the markets where we are.
do it--and I think Jerry has already referred to it--is simply to
indicate that we are returning to an operating procedure that is more
normal. There are a couple of reasons for doing that. We are trying
not to give a miscue with respect to two things, it seems to me:
first, whether or not we have tightened or eased policy; and secondly,
whether or not we have moved to a different kind of interest rate
policy. Because we don't want misconceptions out there about those
two issues, it seems to me we're better off providing more information
Now, Peter did that before by protesting--by coming
rather than less.
I'm not sure he can
in early--and the market caught on very quickly.
So, I guess to some extent I would support Jerry.
do that in reverse.
I'm not sure I caught the gist of his comments correctly, but
[unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions or issues that any
If not, why don't we move on
one wants to discuss on this question?
to item 5 on the agenda, the definition of the borrowing objective and
the appropriate discussion. Mr. Lindsey.
MS.

SEGER.

What was the decision on the first?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

None.

I just wanted to make sure I understood what we

decided.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the point is that there is no need
Essentially, that will be part of our
to make a decision on this.
decision tomorrow.
MS.

SEGER.

Okay.

[No transcript record exists of Mr. Lindsey's
MR. LINDSEY.
remarks, in which he summarized a memorandum (circulated to the FOMC

-17-

12/15-16/87

on October 29, 1987) that he co-authored with Mr. Gillum. See
appendix for the memorandum and a covering note from Mr. Kohn.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Sternlight, would you like to add

anything?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I don't think so.

MR. JOHNSON. I understand what you said, but the only
question I have is: If there is a seasonal component to seasonal
borrowing of any sort, why have it in there?
If it has no effect
whatsoever on the variation, what is the point of having it in there
unless it's just more confusing or more complicated at this stage to
pull it out?
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. KOHN.

Don, do you--

Well, I think there is a certain amount of

inertia.
SPEAKER(?).

Well, it's a certain amount in a series.

MR. KOHN. Dave commented on the original reason it was in
there: It was felt that seasonal borrowing behaved a lot like
adjustment borrowing in that it was sensitive to interest rates.
If
you have more seasonal borrowing, other things equal, then you're
going to have a little more pressure in the funds market.
[Unintelligible] seemed to be just as good.
So, given that you had
something else that was also related to the funds-rate/discount-rate
spread, why not include it in the target variable?
Right now-MR. JOHNSON. To me, that implies that you have decided that
there is more of that [interest-sensitive] component to it than there
is seasonal.
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON.
If there is more of a seasonal nature to
seasonal borrowing, it seems to me that you'd want to leave it out
just because it's seasonal.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, well--

MR. JOHNSON. There's a large seasonal component and whether
it has any effect on the-MR. LINDSEY. Given the results, my view would be that the
[borrowing] relationships have been just as close under the current
procedure as they would have been taking it out completely.
It seems
to me that there is a presumption on the part of those who would
advocate taking it out that the [statistical] results actually
suggested it would improve things to take it out.
Since the results
don't show that, I think the inertia you referred to--having to do
with the market misunderstanding, that they've gotten used to what
we're doing, and so on--would argue for just standing pat.
MR. JOHNSON. Okay, I buy it.
I think a good argument for
not taking it out is that it might be confusing to Fed watchers who

12/15-16/87

have gotten used to it being done this way. But that's the only
argument I can think of for not taking it out.
MR. KOHN. Obviously, it could be done easily; but if it were
out, our reserve projectors would then have an interest-sensitive
factor that-they would be projecting every week. It would become part
of "nonborrowed reserves" the same way extended credit is. Generally,
those factors affecting nonborrowed reserves aren't interest
sensitive; they are market factors. Now, we would be putting a little
interest-sensitive element in there and we would still end up
estimating that seasonal relationship in order to help the reserve
projectors make the right projections. So, I'm not sure how much
you'd gain. Perhaps that's why there is no improvement on reserve
things.
MR. JOHNSON.

Another vote for funds rate targeting!

MR. HELLER. Well, in view of the fact that we are funds rate
targeting anyhow, we can't possibly confuse the market by changing our
procedure right now. So I think that argument doesn't hold at the
present time. David, I read the paper a long, long time ago. You
said it targeted only adjustment borrowing and there was no
significant difference in the fed funds rate. Now, I know it wasn't
significant, but which direction was it actually moving?
MR. LINDSEY. Well, actually it moved a little in favor of
the present procedure. If you look on Table B-3 of the memorandum,
using the spread as the variable the equation tries to explain, the R
square is a little higher--.75 versus .70; and the standard error of
estimate is a little lower--32 basis points using adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing versus, say, 35 basis points using adjustment
borrowing alone. You could argue that that only comes about because
we were examining a regime that had been generated under the current
procedure. You could argue that if we really had switched some years
ago to using only adjustment borrowing, then there might be reason to
think that result might have reversed and adjustment borrowing alone
might have shown up better. But that's pretty speculative and I'm not
sure it would be true. I would view these as little to choose
between, really.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Are there any advantages in your mind to making
it more difficult for the market to understand the significance of the
In other words, would there be any disadvantages to
borrowing levels?
publishing a special situation borrowing number?
MR. KOHN. Only if it were known that only one or two
institutions were in the discount window and, therefore, we would be
telling the public what those institutions were borrowing. It is our
policy not to do that.
MR. MORRIS.
two institutions?

But how would they know there are only one or

MR. KOHN. Well, they might know that a particular bank in
New York had a wire problem or that a particular bank in Oklahoma or
Texas had just come in to the window. The [unintelligible] banks

-19-

12/15-16/87

would know. If there were a lot of banks involved, it wouldn't be a
problem; but if a special situation involved one bank or another, I
could see a confidentiality problem.
MR. MORRIS.

I see.

I can tell you, Frank, having had several of
MR. GUFFEY.
these special situations, that the market knows about as early as the
Federal Reserve does that a bank is in for special borrowing. They do
discount it, in a sense, I think.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. GUFFEY.

Much of it got into extended credit.

Pardon me?

STERNLIGHT(?).

When it gets to--

MR. GUFFEY. Before it gets to extended credit, it's fairly
But suggesting
well known and the banks are fairly well identified.
that we would actually-MR. MORRIS.
In that case, it doesn't make any difference
whether we publish it or not.
MR. KOHN.
MR. GUFFEY.

They don't know the amounts.
Yes, the dollars--

MR. BLACK. Well, a New York press officer does announce that
there is a special situation borrowing in there without giving an
exact amount.
So-called seasonal borrowing, it seems to me, is
MR. ANGELL.
simply adjustment borrowing without a time limit on it for those
It has all the characteristics of
institutions that qualify.
adjustment borrowing and it's not taken unless there is an ability to
That is, if banks could lock up that seasonal
utilize the funds.
borrowing and sell it in the fed funds market, then it would be like
extended credit.
So, it seems to me, it's more like adjustment
borrowing, as the statistical tests suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Anybody else on this subject?

Governor

Seger.
MS. SEGER. I just have one question as I sit here listening
to comments about why bankers borrow on a seasonal basis.
Do we not
administer the discount window in regard to requests for seasonal
borrowing in the same hardnosed manner that we do for adjustment
borrowing?
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.
MS. SEGER.

that their--

No, no.
No.
Maybe we should.

That's the answer to make sure

-20-

12/15-16/87

MR. MORRIS. Well, it's hardnosed in the sense that we have
certain standards that they have to meet.
MR. KOHN. They have to demonstrate a seasonal swing in the
difference between their loans and deposits over the previous two
years. And, on that basis-MR. BOYKIN. It's one situation where we go out once a year
and advertise come on in and see if you can qualify.
MS. SEGER.

I'm surprised.

MR. STERN. Well, if I recall, the origins of that were that
it was precisely to try to get-MR. ANGELL.
MR. STERN.
forth.

"Get"--that's right.
--to get at banks that had these seasonals and so

That was very much an "eyes open"--

MR. ANGELL.

Just a bit of populism peeking out.

MR. BLACK. It was in the days of trying to sell membership
and this was one of the-MR. BOYKIN.

Also, we don't have very many takers on

MR. ANGELL.

That's right.

MR. GUFFEY.

Some of you don't.

seasonal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Si Keehn, do you have any comments on

this?
MR. KEEHN. No. I very much agree with Governor Angell that
it has all the characteristics of adjustment borrowing, and that being
the case, it's appropriate to include it. But this certainly would be
an inappropriate time to be making a change.
MR. JOHNSON. One last trivial comment: I agree that this is
not the time to make a change, but is it too complicated to try to
separate out the adjustment versus the seasonal component of seasonal
borrowing?
MR. ANGELL.

How many Johnsons on the head of a pin?

MR. LINDSEY. Actually, in a sense, we have estimated
seasonal factors for the seasonal borrowing. Presumably then, one
would call that the seasonal component with the rest being the
adjustment component. That's what we adjusted the total for in the
tests I referred to earlier.
MR. JOHNSON.

Oh, that's what you--

MR. LINDSEY. That, literally, is what we did. And when we
did that, it didn't make a dime's worth of difference in the results

-21-

12/15-16/87

in terms of the predictability of the funds rate.
made a stab at doing that.
MR. JOHNSON.

So, we actually

Okay.

If not,
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else on this subject?
let's move on to agenda item 6, with discussion of the monetary
Mr. Kohn.
aggregates as long-range policy objectives in 1988.
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
he was that definitive!

Questions of Mr. Kohn?

I can't believe

MR. PARRY. Don, I was trying to remember a discussion that
we had last February. My recollection is that the econometric work
that was done by your staff, and obviously some of the other staffs,
would have supported setting targets which were somewhat lower than
the ones we did set and would have indicated a distinction between M2
and M3 growth of perhaps a percentage point. And, of course, that's
But, the complicating factor is that
the way things have worked out.
the economy has changed a bit since we were looking at it at that
Nominal growth in the economy has been higher; probably, if we
time.
had had that nominal growth when we did the analytic work, we would
have expected faster growth in the aggregates. But I don't remember
what we were assuming about interest rates.
MR. KOHN. I don't think we were assuming they would rise
that rapidly. My memory of the February exercise was that we said
that M2 would grow within its range, but in the lower part of it.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

Right.

MR. KOHN. Then, in July, I think we tried to make a strong
case to the Committee that at that point there was a distinct danger
that even without a further increase in interest rates the aggregates
could well fall short of their ranges. And if interest rates rose-which, in fact, they have--the chances were pretty good of their
So, perhaps the point here is that the
falling [below the ranges].
models are not perfect, but they generally catch the drift. And they
are not bad in that they can explain most of the deceleration in M2
and most of the deceleration in M1.
So, we have a reasonably good,
though not perfect, fix on the demand side; but the problem is that in
order to target an aggregate, you have to know where interest rates
and income are going--particularly interest rates. And, if it
requires much higher or lower interest rates at the beginning of the
year than you think, then you anticipate that in order to get the
income growth you desire, you're going to have much lower or higher
monetary aggregates consistent with that income growth.
MR. PARRY. Well, the point I wanted to make here is that the
aggregates--or at least M2, in this case--are well below their current
target ranges, but I don't fault our analysis.
I think our analysis
was leading us down the right track, but we were in some ways
reluctant to make that kind of a change in the targets--at least in
February and to some extent in July--because we thought that might be
telegraphing to the markets greater restrictiveness than, in fact, we
were trying to accomplish. Do you agree with that to some extent?

-22-

12/15-16/87

MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.

Yes, to some extent.
Good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. First of all, in view of all this impressive
evidence, I was wondering how people used to conduct monetary policy
before we had all these high-speed computers.
MR. KOHN.

Targeting the federal funds rate,

I think.

MR. HELLER.
Right.
I'm looking at your chart 18, which in a
way talks about what you can call the efficiency with which you know
of the various measures.
Especially for the first year or two, or the
first six to eight quarters after your shock, M1A seems to be so much
more superior to M2 than M1.
MR. KOHN.

This

follows page 16

in the thick memo.

MR. HELLER.
Yes.
One could argue that that is a very
powerful argument in favor of M1A, especially over a horizon of a year
or two.
I was wondering, first of all, why you don't give a lot of
emphasis to that particular measure.
And, second, would you address
the argument that the narrow aggregates are more closely under our
control and therefore particularly suited as targets, rather than as
broader indicators of what is going on in the economy?
MR. KOHN. Okay.
With regard first to M1A, I guess we
haven't given it more emphasis because we really didn't trust the
results.
This is derived from results over the 1970s into the very
early 1980s and is specific to the model; that is the period over
which the model is fit.
Over that period, we find that the income
elasticity of demand deposits, M1A--which was M1 for much of that
period in any case--was very high relative to the interest elasticity.
When we extend the models out to the last few years, we find fairly
large misses in the demand deposit model.
Furthermore, those misses
seem to be correlated with interest rates--that is, we had much more
growth in demand deposits in 1985 and 1986 than the model that
generated this chart would have predicted.
And we had much less
growth in 1987 than the model that generated this chart would have
said we should have.
Our conclusion was that this ratio didn't
represent reality in 1987--that interest elasticities were probably
much higher than in the time period that went into this modeling
exercise and the historic relationships it represented.
That's why we
didn't put more weight on it.
In addition, we did look at a more
complete exercise in which we ran the whole quarterly model assuming a
certain path for money growth.
And that helps; that puts in some of
the errors in the equation that feed back into that modeling process,
more so than just comparing elasticities.
And that showed M1A as
better than M1 or M2, but the superiority was not nearly as clear as
this.
So, even within the period of fit, the errors in the M1A
equation are larger, and it looks like the out-of-sample errors are
even larger.
That's why we didn't put so much weight on it.
In terms of controllability, it seems to me that we have a
tradeoff here in terms of what we can control versus what is related
to income.
Obviously, we can control currency and reserves very

-23-

12/15-16/87

closely, but the question is whether they have a reliable relationship
to income. What we are finding is that the narrow aggregates, which I
agree we can control more closely, are less well related to income.
They seem to be more interest elastic than the broader aggregates,
which I agree are more difficult to control. But, I do think that
over a targeting period of a year, we could have hit our M2 target if
we had wanted to. That is, if we had come to the middle of the year,
and M2 was at the bottom or below its range and the Committee had said
to Mr. Sternlight, "Operate to hit your M2 target", he could have done
it. Interest rates would have been a lot lower. The whole world
would have looked different, but we could have operated to control
that aggregate if that's what the Committee had wanted to do, even
though it doesn't fit with reserves very closely.
MR. PARRY.

Are you saying that--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Don, I think you made an excellent case for not
targeting M1A or Ml for the coming year. Do you entertain any hope,
as I do--although it's becoming a lingering hope, I guess--that at
some point depository institutions are going to alter their pricing
procedures on NOW accounts and OCDs so that they will reduce the
interest elasticity of M1 and make it a better target? Or is there
hope that the demand for M1 will become more stable as this adjustment
process to deregulation goes further?
MR. KOHN. Yes, but I guess the honest answer is that a year
ago, I had more hopes than I have now. We have had a year of
additional experience with NOW account adjustments and part of what
has happened is that they continue to be very sluggish. I harbored
the same hope that you did a year or so ago. And, in fact, the Super
NOW accounts used to adjust more rapidly; but now those accounts
behave as one big lump and tend to adjust more slowly. It could get
more rapid. Or if we do get into a noninflationary situation, or back
into a situation in which interest rates fluctuate over a narrower
range around a lower level, then you might have a situation in which
these interest elasticities are less important. But if we have swings
in rates of the sort we have had over the last 7 or 8 years, then I
think we would have huge movements in velocity as a result. I haven't
given up hope entirely, but I have to confess I'm less hopeful than I
was.

MR. BLACK. I will confess to this group that, with
considerable pain, I share that feeling.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
equations too, right?

Governor Johnson.

You used the wealth variable in your demand

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In M2.

MR. KOHN. In the M2 demand equation that was used in this
paper, which is not the same one that is used in the quarterly model,
we used wealth only as a short-run adjustment kind of thing--that is,
a big change in wealth will cause velocity to deviate for a short
period of time from its long-run equilibrium. And, in fact, the

-24-

12/15-16/87

wealth variable that fit best here was one that didn't include stock
market wealth. Now, in the quarterly model equation, which hasn't
done as well as the one reported here, it builds up from M1 and adds
the non-M1 part of M2 and then wealth comes into play more directly as
the scale variable rather than income as the scale variable. But we
have found the one reported here to be much more successful over the
last few years.
MR. JOHNSON. What wealth variable did you use?
one without the stock market?

What was the

MR. KOHN. I think it was household wealth excluding land and
stock market [holdings].
MR. JOHNSON.

What kind of coefficient is on that?

MR. KOHN. It's a very low coefficient; it's not very
significant and it's very transitory in its effect.
MR. JOHNSON.

I see.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

But, it had-That includes M2, then?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And if you take the stock values out
that would not be an insignificant part of the wealth variable.
MR. KOHN. You would have homes and consumer durables; I
think that probably dominates the levels of the series.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But that means [unintelligible] taking
the M2 out before you do the-MR. KOHN.
MR. SMALL.
MR. KOHN.

I'm not aware of-We have to find that.
Excuse me, the model

[expert] is here.

MR. SMALL. I believe that's right; M2 is still in that
wealth variable as it exists in the model. We have tried excluding it
and leaving in the stock market in some of our equations.
[Unintelligible.]
I would add that that wealth variable is a little
problematic, as was pointed out. It's something we would prefer not
to have hanging around the edges of this equation. But, it has come
in significantly [in the regressions] and until we can figure out how
to handle it in a better way, in a structural sense, and figure out,
for example, what is really determining money demand that isn't
captured in services, food, [and other expenditures], it makes a lot
of sense to leave it in and sort of-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I have a couple of comments that I'd like your
reaction to. As I understand what you're saying, one of the reasons

-25-

12/15-16/87

you're uncomfortable with the narrow aggregates is that this
relatively high interest elasticity makes them, in some sense, not
very good as automatic stabilizers.
MR. KOHN.
MR. STERN.

That's correct.
But I guess I would ask: What is the alternative?

It still seems to me that these aggregates are preferable to targeting
interest rates, for example, and trying to adjust interest rates if
you get a positive or negative spending shock. Secondly, I agree that
the body of evidence you have here doesn't demonstrate very convincing

superiority of M1A or M1 relative to M2, but I think you can turn that
statement around: I don't think it demonstrates the superiority of M2
versus M1 or M1A either. In fact, I view all this as somewhat of a
tossup. I was a little surprised at Bob Black's negative reaction to
this because I don't see any very strong reason for preferring one to
the other on the basis of all we have here.
MR. KOHN. M1 does lose most of the horse races, however they
are handicapped. But so far as M1A and M2 are concerned, I have to
agree with you--there isn't much to choose from there. But the issue
is whether the Committee wants to view this as a question of "Should
I think
we target interest rates or should we target the aggregates?"
the exercise really [addresses the issue of] what weight we want to
put on any one thing, given that we're looking at a whole array of
things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, if [unintelligible] implicit in
both M1 and M1A is the required projection of the growth rate, which
is a much larger number than in M2. Can you hear me?
MR. KOHN.

Yes, of the growth rate, you said.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

In other words, the trend.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If one is dealing with a trend value of
say 1 percent, or something like that, versus 0.2 or something close
to 0 with M2, one should at least intuitively argue that the potential
variation in any particular period in the trend value is more likely
to be mis-estimated with the narrower monetary aggregates than a
broader one. At least that's what history seems to suggest.
I wasn't
aware in the memorandum that that element was brought into the horse
race evaluation.
MR. KOHN. It was indirectly, in the sense that the way the
horse races were run, to the extent that the trend embodied in the
equation was wrong, that would show up in the error. So we simply
discussed--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unfortunately, the problem is that you
can't pick that up with the particular history you are dealing with.
MR. KOHN. I don't know that it would necessarily be the case
a priori that one would have more confidence in a trend of 0 than in a
trend of 1 or a trend of 1-1/2. I think in this case--

-26-

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I would.

MR. KOHN. In this case, it's true because the nature of the
narrow aggregates has been changing, with the addition of OCDs into M1
and the deletion of those deposits that used to be in demand deposits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It has.

MR. KOHN. So, because of the changing character of the
aggregates, I think you're right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think what is relevant here is
the time frame.
If I would tell you 20 years, clearly the argument
would have to be that it's more likely that the M2 trend would be more
projectable than the M1A or the M1 trend. Therefore, if it's true
with 20 years, then the argument really gets down to what time frame
you're talking about. Well, I've always been worried about that
because I was convinced that at some point or other, we would project
and find out it went in the other direction. Bob Parry.
MR. PARRY. Don, when you were talking about chart 18, you
made the comment that you thought the current interest elasticity on
M1A was probably greater than what showed up in that statistical
exercise. That's probably also true of the other aggregates as well,
isn't it? My question is: What has happened to the relative
elasticities of the three aggregates and do you have conclusions on
that?

the

MR. KOHN.
I think M2 is less of a concern because a lot of
[unintelligible] we are talking about are within M2.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. Surprisingly to me--and I think it's perhaps a
touch of luck here--we haven't done all that badly projecting the OCD
component of the M1 equation, considering that it has swung around by
10 to 20 percentage points in growth rates over the last few years.
If I look at the errors in the equation, the largest ones are in the
demand deposit portion of the equation.
MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.

The biggest change would be in M1A?
That would be my conclusion.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Well, I have another idea that I want to lay on
the table. Would this be an appropriate time?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
matter or not.
MR. MELZER.

It depends if it's on this subject

Well, it has to do with aggregate targets.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's about it.

MR. MELZER.
I have two comments about the environment we're
dealing in.
First of all, there is a lot of uncertainty about exactly

12/15-16/87

-27-

how policy is being conducted in the long run. It's not unusual, but
I think this is one of those times when there are those kinds of
questions in the marketplace. And the kind of discussion we are
having right now is very, very healthy in terms of talking about
different approaches. But, on top of the uncertainty that I perceive
in the marketplace and some of the difficulties with the aggregates
and with interest rate targeting that we have talked about, I'd say
that we are now in a period--and I think it will be exacerbated--when
there is going to be a conflict between the pressures we face
domestically and the pressures we face internationally in terms of how
policy is conducted. And, I think there would be no better time to
have some kind of an intermediate target or guide.
What I wanted to put on the table was the idea that had been
mentioned earlier of looking at a monetary base target of some sort.
There is no question that we can control that, and I think it's a good
indicator of the thrust of policy. I don't have any delusions about
the ability to pick a specific growth rate of the base and say we
therefore expect nominal GNP to do "Y". Some of the work we have done
on the base and income relationships would indicate that the
relationship is no worse than M2, for example. But, that's not really
what I have in mind. I think it is possible to select a relatively
narrow channel in terms of possible growth rates for the base that in
the long run would be consistent with satisfactory economic
performance and, at the same time, preserve in the short run the
latitude to react to all the various types of incoming data that we
react to now. In other words, this approach I'm describing would
allow for discretion in the short-run conduct of policy but at the
same time--assuming we were to stick with it --it would take away some
of the extremes in possible policy results in either direction: that
is, very simply, either too tight a monetary policy, or too easy a
monetary policy.
Right now, I don't think we have a lot of confidence in the
other aggregates and I don't think the marketplace pays that much
attention to them. If we were to substitute some kind of a base
target, first of all, I think the announcement of that would carry
with it a considerable positive impact just because the market would
know in general what policymakers are going to be looking at in the
conduct of policy. And this channel that I have talked about would
tend to eliminate uncertainty and increase credibility. I think the
existence of a target like that--if I'm right about the type of
environment that we are in and that we're apt to be in next year in an
even more important way--could be used to diffuse domestic and
international pressures, to do something in the short-run conduct of
policy, particularly to influence rates. And in the long run, if
pursued religiously, I think it would tend to result in more stable
and more balanced economic results. So, I guess what I wanted to do
was put the idea on the table. We've done some work, and I think we
have to do a lot more work, but if there were any support for that
kind of idea, maybe with more background work done it's something that
could be discussed more thoroughly at the February meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would anyone like to comment on that?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I share Tom's longing for something
like that that we can anchor our decisions to; otherwise we have
nothing but a series of ad hoc decisions that are disconnected to a

-28-

12/15-16/87

certain degree. I feel very uncomfortable with that because I don't
think we're really smart enough to do it. If there is something we
can hang our hats on, I sure would feel a lot better. That's why I'm
so disappointed that M1 has lost some of that value that it once had.
I would encourage experimentation along these lines. There has to be
something out there that we can hang our hats on.
MR. JOHNSON.

I'd like to comment on that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead.

MR. JOHNSON. I think that's right.
[It would be desirable]
to have a sense of credibility that we could set a target and hit it
consistently. But the problem is that I don't think the base velocity
has done much better than the velocity of other aggregates. So, if we
consistently hit a target set on the base, we certainly would have
credibility in hitting the target, but would that credibility extend
to economic performance? There is still the question of where to set
the target, and whether or not the target is accurately set relative
to what we want to achieve in terms of the desired results for the
economy. And I think there is still a big problem with a base target
from that point of view.
MR. MELZER. Well, just to repeat one thing I said:
obviously, you would not use it in the short run to operate policy.
But I think you probably could pick a band of something like 2
percentage points or so --just looking at data for the 1980s, for
example--that you could argue would give you plenty of latitude in
either direction to get satisfactory economic results, to meet your
long-term objectives.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, one of the problems is that the base is
so dominated by currency; it's two-thirds of the base. We have a
period right now where there's a big surge in currency; and to hit a
base target, even with some variation [allowed], we probably would
have to drain a substantial amount of reserves.
MR. MELZER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, this is an extraordinary time.
Yes.

MR. MELZER. It may be one of those times when we wouldn't
stick with the target. But we would have to announce that and we
could explain it very straightforwardly; it doesn't come down to
explanations like, "Well, velocity changed", which is not all that
credible after a while.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But you don't know what part of that
currency item is drug money or what. That used to be a joke, but I
suspect that it's probably getting to be something that would require
some--

MR. JOHNSON. Would you believe it? I heard something on the
radio that's just incredible: that samples of currency were taken and
9 out of 10 of them had traces of cocaine on them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is that right?

-29-

12/15-16/87

MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
Did you hear that report?
It's just
incredible that you can find significant traces of cocaine on 90
percent of the currency.
MS. SEGER.

See, I told you Wayne, it's too dirty!

MR. PARRY.

That was in Berkeley.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A long time ago, before Tom dropped his
bombshell, Governor Seger wanted to say something. Did we distract
you or-MS. SEGER.

No, I just had a question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
get back on track?

Go ahead.

Why don't you raise it so we

MS. SEGER.
I just wanted to ask Don what would happen if all
of a sudden Congress saw the light and allowed interest to be paid on
demand deposits.
Individuals can go into NOW accounts and, in effect,
receive interest on checkable accounts, but corporations or businesses
can't.
It seems to me that part of the problem is having these two
groups treated in a different way.
MR. KOHN. I presume there would be a surge in demand
deposits at that time.
Interest is paid implicitly now, to the extent
that firms get credits for their compensating balances in terms of
services they receive. But, it is also the case that they don't get
any credits for excess balances any more; and there are a lot of zero
balance accounts, where the excess is put into RPs or whatever. The
incentive to engage in that kind of deposit-minimizing behavior
obviously would be very much reduced if interest were paid on demand
deposits.
MR. MORRIS. Also, the Treasury doesn't collect any revenue
when balances buy services.
MR. PARRY.
wouldn't it?

But that would raise the interest elasticity,

MS. SEGER. Secondly, didn't you say--I read so much for
this meeting I may have just dreamed it--that within the demand
deposit category most of that is, in fact, business accounts?
If
that's the case, then I think the interpretation ought to be
different, because I've never met a big business or small business
that decides to buy a new dump truck or put an addition on a building
because they have more money in their checking account.
I just don't
think they operate that way. Maybe I would as an individual, or my
cousin would, but I think we have to look at how we interpret these
things because of the change in the ownership of the accounts.
MR. KOHN. I think only about 26 percent of demand deposits
now are household deposits; and before the advent of NOW accounts, it
was closer to 40 percent.
So, the composition has changed and I think
that accounts for some of the change in interest elasticity.
I guess
I was never a fan of that real balance effect--that you throw money at
people and they automatically spend it.
It seems to me that for
households as well as businesses it was part of a complex process in

-30-

12/15-16/87

which the Federal Reserve changed the liquidity in the economy, and
that changed interest rates, incentives for spending and saving, and
exchange rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I'd like to speak to Mr. Melzer's
suggestion. I would have great difficulty with anything even remotely
resembling a monetary base operating procedure in the immediate time
frame.
MR. GUFFEY.

Could you speak up a little, Jerry, please?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm saying, Roger, that in the
immediate time frame I would have great difficulty with anything even
approaching a monetary base operating target.
I say that for several
reasons.
First of all, I have never understood the base to begin
with.
I have read all the great work that has been done in St. Louis
and every place else.
But, to me, the thing itself is kind of a pigin-a-poke. And since I don't really know what it is, I'm not about to
put too much reliance on it as a steering mechanism for monetary
policy. More importantly, in the current circumstances, I'm very
skeptical that the market reaction would be the one that you are
suggesting. Having said that, I certainly share the frustrations
associated with the current approaches to policy. But, given all that
has happened in the last few years, especially with any formulation of
monetarism that I'm familiar with, including a base formulation, I
think the reaction of the marketplace to a policy approach like that
would be, "Oh no!
This ensures a renewed and high degree of
instability in interest rates."
And I suspect that people would take
to the hills rather than raise the flag, because of fears of a great
deal of instability and volatility in interest rates that we haven't
seen in many years.
Finally--I keep coming back to this--I, too, am frustrated by
the lack of a nice firm handle for monetary policy. But let's not
lose sight of the fact that despite all the limitations, the
performance of the economy over the past several years has hardly been
something we need to apologize for.
I think economic performance, all
things considered, has probably been as good as it reasonably could
have been. Again, that does not mean that I am insensitive to the
frustration that you're speaking from, Tom; I share that completely.
But I'm very dubious that the base is a way out.
MR. MELZER. Jerry, the only thing I would say is that if you
look back over the experience--and I just eyeballed it, this isn't
econometric analysis--at the points in time where there were
inflection points in policy in one direction or another, this sort of
approach I have outlined would have been consistent with what I said.
That indicates to me that, at the extremes, something like this could
be helpful.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that's, in part, because you
have an identification problem. One of the reasons you see that
commonality in inflection points, of course, is that when you look at
the base, or at least part of the base, you are looking at the same
things that people were looking at anyway--reservable deposits, as
they have changed over time.
I could almost argue that what you

-31-

12/15-16/87

really should do is go to the opposite extreme.
I don't really
believe this, but to overstate it a bit, I could make a respectable
argument that something like debt--to go the Frank Morris or Ben
Friedman route--actually has been more useful in many respects than
any of the other money or credit aggregates in recent years.
I don't
really believe that, but certainly I could make a point of argument
out of that.
In other words, if anything--forget about debt--it
should be going in the direction of something broader rather than
something narrower. As I said, the big worry I have is the market
reaction. I really do think that if we went out and told the markets
tomorrow, "Guys, come hell or high water, we're going to make the base
grow by 5 to 7 percent, or 3 to 5 percent, or 4 to 6 percent" the
marketplace would batten down the hatches.
MR. MELZER.
have a base target?

Jerry, how about the European central banks that

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Germany, it's different; it's not
Germany as a case in point, right
target in a very systematic way.
MR. JOHNSON.

First of all, in the notable case of
the same thing.
Second, if you take
now of course, they are missing the
That is part of their problem.

You can argue that they hated it being a miss.

MR. HELLER. Yes, but I think Tom wouldn't argue that you
would stick to the target in the German situation right now. He would
say that if circumstances make you believe that the demand for money
has increased, you would be willing to go above the target.
You would
set a series of short-range targets so that you would accommodate that
increased demand for money--an increase in demand for central bank
money, in that particular case.
I think that's what I heard Tom say:
to handle it not in a rigid way by saying
"here's the target and you
are playing along with it", but to adjust it in the light of
circumstances as you see the economy and prices evolving, and so on.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what we're doing right now
with the monetary aggregate targets.
MR. JOHNSON.
It's the same problem: base velocity and
monetary velocity itself.
MR. HELLER. Except that he says that some of that we can
control more readily than the broader numbers.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but if it's not reliably related to income,
the fact that you can control it is not very relevant to policy.
I've
been sitting around this table for 19 years now, and I've concluded
that the search for an indicator for monetary policy that will
overcome this yearning is a complete waste of time.
I think history
shows that there is no suitable indicator for monetary policy that is
going to give you reliable nominal GNP results.
It's a waste of time
to look: the world is too complicated; the world is just too
complicated. What we really have to do is go back to the kind of
thinking that was around the table when I first came to the Federal
Reserve under Bill Martin, and that is leaning against the wind.
And
I think the-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Then the wind becomes the target.

-32-

12/15-16/87

MR. MORRIS.
Really, leaning against the known wind when
nominal GNP is really the target, except we don't want to admit that
in public for very good reasons.
MR. ANGELL.

I hope you wouldn't let the public know!

MR. JOHNSON. But it's the same problem. If you don't know
You have the
how velocities behave, you still can't hit nominal GNP.
same problem.
But you know what direction you want monetary
MR. MORRIS.
policy to move. The amplitude is where the problem of judgment comes
in.
MR. BLACK. But, if this is as unreliable as you say, suppose
nominal GNP is not growing fast enough and you push interest rates
down and the money supply slows down. You really haven't necessarily
moved in the right direction, even though-MR. MORRIS. Well, if interest rates are going down, you're
going to have an expansionary movement in the economy regardless of
what your money supply does.
MR. BLACK.

Sometimes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Roger Guffey has been trying to get a

word in.
I've forgotten what I was going to say. Well,
MR. GUFFEY.
given the fact that we have to set growth targets for something under
the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, what has come out of this paper, it seems to
me at least, is that M2 is perhaps the best of what may be bad
choices. M1A may be about the same, but given the fact that M2 is
better understood by the public and the markets, I would continue with
There's one other aspect--and I'm not quite sure that this is
M2.
correct, but my recollection is that Canada has in recent years set a
target over a longer horizon than one year. I think perhaps it's a
two-year target with a moving base and they use that merely for the
purpose of determining whether they are above or below the trend line
That has some attractiveness
of growth that they were shooting for.
to me, and I think that may be what we should be doing with M2 over a
I think Canada abandoned that, simply because
longer-term horizon.
they determined that it was more important for them in current times
to focus on exchange rates, relative to the dollar principally, rather
So, it seems
than to hit a monetary target, however they defined it.
to me that we are talking about two different things. One is how we
would manage monetary policy in the very short run through these
intermediate periods; the other is what we should be focusing on, and
that is a horizon, and probably for M2, over a one-year or two-year
period.
MR. TRUMAN. With respect to the Canadians, part of what you
They didn't
said is certainly correct: they had a longer time period.
adjust [each year]; they didn't always go from fourth quarter to
fourth quarter.
MR. GUFFEY.

Sure.

-33-

12/15-16/87

MR. TRUMAN. That is correct.
They abandoned the target
partly for exchange rate reasons, because it was so sensitive, but
there also was the conflict between the relationship of the monetary
aggregates to the economy relative to what they were [unintelligible]
the exchange rates.
The main reason they abandoned it was because the
relationship between the aggregates and nominal GNP broke down for
financial deregulation reasons. And, in fact-MR. GUFFEY.

And, in the short run--

MR. TRUMAN. Well, for a long period of time.
They
abandoned it in 1982, five years ago.
I don't know if they can go
back, particularly to something like an M2 target, because they have
this financial deregulation in mind to play with.
It is true that
they had a somewhat longer horizon, though I don't think you described
it exactly the way-MR. CROSS.
They were hitting the target, but nothing else
was happening right.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. CROSS.

Because of deregulation?
Probably.

MR. TRUMAN. They had different base points. And sometimes
they extended the targets longer into a year, until they changed the
base, and then they went back and picked up a new base.
I think it
would be rather difficult for us to do that, given the structure of
Humphrey-Hawkins; I suppose it might be more difficult to do it for
Humphrey-Hawkins. Also, the base period could be varied--like taking
the base in the second quarter and projecting up to the end of 1988.
That would put you partly in the Canadian-Japanese [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, after hearing all those positive
contributions, you may want to think about it and write a memorandum
or something like that for circulation. Perhaps we could discuss it
at the luncheon meeting the next time or something.
MR. MELZER.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think Frank Morris is right in that
it's a futile exercise, but I don't think-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
If you could rationalize--and this
is a big if--the whole structure of reserve requirements and all the
rest of it, that would make a base measure at least more
understandable.
In other words,-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's the currency that's bothering you?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's partly the currency, but
it's also the crazy quilt pattern of the relationship between reserves
and other things because of a crazy tiering of reserve requirements,
and the reserves on nonpersonal deposits and certain Euro-liabilities,
and all the rest.
If you had a clean, plain-vanilla kind of structure
of reserve requirements that would help a bit, because one problem you
get into here that complicates it further--beyond the currency

12/15-16/87

problem--is the so-called multiplier between the reserve component of
the base and "money".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course--because of the huge
differences in the reserve requirements on the various different
elements.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's what I mean by the crazy
quilt structure of reserve requirements.
MR. MORRIS. But it was a politically determined structure of
reserve requirements.
MR. STERN. I wouldn't want to dismiss the base too quickly,
though. We have done some of these horse races in the last several
months as well; and somewhat to my surprise, in terms of the stability
of the relationship to income, the base tends to win, though not by
wide margins.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, but all horses lose.

Yes, right.
Some are better than--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Some lose.

MR. STERN. I think Frank is right: we are not going to find
one variable. On the other hand, if we're looking at a range of
variables, I think the base deserves some consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
I guess this has been a nice trip back through
I think the only term I
Federal Reserve policy in the last 10 years.
Do you
Some of you may remember that one.
haven't heard was RPDs.
remember that?
That [unintelligible] when I left the Federal Reserve
System the last time. So, it was a fascinating trip, and the debate
about the base certainly brings back the old fervor for everybody.
But I don't think Tom's suggestion was that we ought to install the
base as a target and use it right now.
I think the suggestion was
that we ought to take a look at it and maybe get the Board staff to
take a look at it, too, since some new work has been done. We just
had a paper presented at the Cleveland Bank by Ben McCallum that you
might want to take a look at.
From my point of view, policy has been
wise for five years, but the inflation rate has not been down for five
years. Not that the base is going to cure that, but if we're looking
for a long-term message or consensus on inflation, then we may want to
take a look at something like the base to help us get there, not as
the end-all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the important thing that has
been mentioned here is that even if we don't find something to stay
with forever, it is certainly true--and we all recognize it--that
price levels and inflation do have some long-run relationship to the
money stock, however we define it.
And I guess that's why I would

-35-

12/15-16/87

depart a bit from Frank's observations. It seems to me that it makes
some sense to stay with some [unintelligible].
I get a feeling that
the monetary base reflects a lot of the other, but it has a little of
a true believer element to it and it may not be all that helpful at
this point. The question I want to direct to Don would be this: Since
the Humphrey-Hawkins Act does require, in a sense, that we think there
is a long-run relationship, those long-run income and price level
elasticities were very impressive, I thought.
MR. KOHN. Well, that's partly by assumption.
completely up front about this. In the--

I am

MR. ANGELL. Well, there's just no doubt; I think everyone
accepts the fact that in the long run the rate of growth of the money
stock is related to the rate of change of the price level.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. ANGELL. And that is important. The Humphrey-Hawkins
Act, as Roger Guffey mentioned, does not require us to target M3, and
we have not been talking about M3 here, yet we continue to target M3.
If we are going to target two aggregates, would we be better off
targeting M1A and M2 or would you suggest targeting M1A, M2, and M3?
What is there to be said for targeting M3 over targeting M1A?
MR. KOHN. We haven't done as much work from the demand side
on M3, which is a good reason why it doesn't get the emphasis here.
That's because we consider M3 to be primarily a supply-determined
aggregate [unintelligible] to the growth of bank and thrift credit.
But to the extent that that credit has some relationship to underlying
activity, then M3 would have some-MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm not all that impressed by the fact
that we can hit it; I'm more impressed with the fact that if we have a
money stock target that we are aiming for and we miss it, we ought to
be able to explain why we are missing in the direction we are missing.
I suppose commodity prices might help to explain some of that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And you miss [unintelligible].

Bob

Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take issue
with Jerry Corrigan a little about the reserve requirement system
being irrational. It is rational if you think M1 is the thing that
you ought to control because all the requirements are lagged except
those against M1 deposits. So, if M1 were really what you wanted to
control, you would figure out how much you needed in reserves for
those other types of deposits, supply that, and anything else you put
out would be used to support M1 and only M1.
If M1 is your target,
the only thing that would be more rational, I think, would be to have
0 percent requirements against everything that wasn't in M1; but, if
M1 is of no value anymore--although I think it once was--then it is
irrational. The reserve requirement system was set up that way
because at that time the prevailing feeling was that M1 was really the
best of the targets. And I think it was.
MR. MORRIS. I don't think that's the reason. The reason was
that, in order to get the thrifts to sign onto the Monetary Control

-36-

12/15-16/87

Act, we had to have a system that didn't generate [unintelligible]
with reserve requirements on the thrifts.
And, that's the reason for
the structure. It had nothing to do with-MR. BLACK. No, I'm talking about the fact that we lag some
reserve requirements and don't lag the others.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
first place.

That wasn't my point, though, in the

MR. BLACK. Okay.
I thought I finally understood something
and now I find out I haven't understood that either!
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's only one part of my point.
My point simply is that the relationship between the reserve component
of the monetary base and anything else, whether it's an M, or GNP, or
whatever, is itself subject to a lot of distortion because of what I
call the overall crazy quilt--not necessarily irrational--pattern of
the structure of reserve requirements.
MR. BLACK.
I agree with that on the monetary base. And
when I said I had sympathy with Tom, it wasn't that I was favoring a
monetary base.
I meant that I had sympathy for some kind of an anchor
to hang policy on, and if he could demonstrate [unintelligible]-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Unintelligible] of the reserve
requirements are on demand deposits. And hence, we assume that the
required reserves are a proxy for demand deposits and currency in use.
We have some noise, but substantially what we have now is reserves on
M1A plus some reserve requirements on large CDs and a variety of other
reserves on other things.
It's interesting, when you take a look at
the monetary base, to subtract those elements out and see whether, in
fact, you're getting the M1A effect that Don was getting, or whether
there is something independent there.
MR. MORRIS.
The weight of currency is much higher in the
monetary base and that's-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MORRIS.

Of course, sure.

That's a major difference.

MR. BLACK. Well, I don't think the use of the base as a
target will necessarily imply a steady rate of growth in that. You
would figure out what non-monetary liabilities were using up in the
way of reserves, supply that and then supply the amount you thought
was necessary to support whatever kinds of monetary aggregates you
wanted. That doesn't say to me that it has to be a steady rate.
MR. MELZER.

I think that's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Si Keehn, have you any thoughts on this
that you'd like to express to your colleagues?
MR. BLACK.
to sleep!

You might not want to ask him; he may have gone

-37-

12/15-16/87

MR. KEEHN. At this point, I have nothing to add to the
discussion that hasn't already been said a couple of times at least.
But, hearing the conversations and reading the paper, I don't find any
compelling reason to shift to M1A or to add it as a target. I would
not be in favor of targeting a narrow aggregate. Jerry Corrigan made
the point earlier that I think is very appropriate: whatever we are
doing, we are doing pretty well. I think the economic results have
been good. Utilizing, say, M2 and M3 in the way that we have has been
an appropriate way to do it; the results have been good, and we ought
to continue with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anyone else have anything more to say on
Si, are you going to be able to make it tomorrow?
this subject?
MR. KEEHN. Well, while this conversation has been going on,
we were told that it is snowing again and both airports are again
closed. But, we're a bit hopeful that we can get out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We wish you well.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. HELLER.
MR. KEEHN.

It sounds like M1.

Si, are you counting on me to come in tomorrow?
I'm counting on you, Bob!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do this? On the
presumption that Si will be able to make it, why don't we adjourn the
meeting as of now and reschedule for 9:00 a.m. Eastern time tomorrow
morning, if that's okay with you. I don't know whether or not that
makes it more difficult for you, Si.
MR. KEEHN. We'll work with it. It's either going to work
for us both or not. And if it doesn't, if we could again participate
on the phone tomorrow, I'd appreciate that. I'm not going to know for
another hour or so whether or not we can make it out. I'll let Norm
Bernard know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, 9:00 a.m. it is.

[Meeting recessed]

Thank you.

-38-

12/15-16/87

December

16,

1987--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In reconvening the meeting, the first
order of business is Mr. Cross on foreign currency operations.
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr.

Cross?

MR. GUFFEY.
I would just ask Sam: How much do we have--I am
talking about the System and the Exchange Stabilization Fund--as a
cache of marks and yen that we can draw upon in the future without
swap arrangements?
MR. CROSS.
We have far more marks than we have yen for the
Federal Reserve and the Treasury combined.
We have about $11.6
billion worth of marks, but only about $1.6 billion worth of yen.
MR. GUFFEY.
purchases of dollars]
use our swaps.

That means, if we were to continue [intervention
for a very long period of time, we would have to

MR. CROSS.
We would have to get some more yen from
someplace; $1.6 billion is not all that big.
The fact is, for
example, that we did $1.6 billion in all currencies in the past six
weeks.
SPEAKER(?).
Sam, if the official intervention dries up--I
don't mean totally dries up, but if it shrinks--what dynamics does
that set in motion?
The market still has to clear.
Does it clear at
a lower level by sucking in more private sources or-MR. CROSS.
I assume it tries to suck in some financing from
some source.
But that raises the question of on what terms and
whether the dollar would have to become more attractive both through
stability and through interest rates to attract any funds, official or
private.
We still have a pretty big deficit; we're predicting a $135
billion deficit for next year in the current account.
So, if you look
ex ante and ask people how much they plan to increase their exposure
to dollars next year, I doubt that it would come anywhere close to
that number.
Ex post, undoubtedly, somehow or other our current
account deficit will get financed.
It's a question of how.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

One of the reasons we haven't had a faster

turnaround in our current account deficit is that the fall in the
value of the dollar has not even come close to being matched in terms
of increasing import prices.
It seems to me that exporters to the

United States can have shrinking profit margins and try to hang on to
market share, but with the kinds of shrinkages in margins that are at
least implicit in this kind of drop in the dollar-import price
relationship, I think a lot of these exporters to the U.S. have to be
hurting pretty badly.
I don't know how one measures that--whether
there's any anecdotal evidence or any evidence whatsoever. But do we
have any sense that we might be seeing more of this dollar shrinkage
showing up or coming through more in higher import prices?

12/15-16/87

-39-

MR. CROSS. Well, I'm sure everybody has his own experience
on all of this. There are these factors: obviously, people who have
markets don't give them up very easily; also, a country like Japan has
a big import component in a lot of its exports and, therefore, the
exchange rate can affect both sides of the equation. I agree with you
that when a currency falls by 50 percent--and we're just about at 50
percent of the level of the mark and the yen--that can't be absorbed
through lower profit margins. The people we talked to on the export
side seemed to be sounding a lot better. Now, another problem is that
some of the deficit is shifting, or is covered by countries such as
Taiwan. Taiwan has a surplus of $25 billion all by itself, and it's a
tiny economy relative to that size surplus. So some of this deficit
is coming from countries that have not had anything like that kind of
change in the exchange rate vis-a-vis the dollar.
MR. TRUMAN. We have taken a look at this question recently
in trying to get a better handle on domestic production costs and how
they have been moving in some of these countries over the last several
years. The work that we've done suggests that there probably has been
more saving on domestic production costs than aggregate measures of
prices in some of these countries would suggest. That, in turn, would
suggest that there has been less of a [decline in] profit margins than
a 50 percent decline in the dollar would lead one to think initially,
though all things working together do produce the results that you'd
like, President Boehne. As a consequence, we have had less price
increase and less decrease in quantity on the import side, though most
of the aggregate equations have price elasticities that are close to
1. So, in terms of the trade balance and what you have to finance, it
washes out. You get less price and, therefore, you get less quantity
adjustment. Anyhow, the mix is a little different. As far as our
forecast is concerned, partly based upon these considerations and
perhaps some reluctance to project these trends in the future, as well
as some factors like the rise in commodity prices, which have
increased more over the last eighteen months than over the previous
eighteen months, we have projected a much more rapid rise in import
prices in the forecast period than we've had to date.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

told me last
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman,
week that their new problem loan area is in loans to
which suggests that maybe some of these countries are beginning to
hurt in trying to maintain their market share in the U.S. market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
information.

That's a very interesting piece of new

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Of course, a lot of those
manufacturing and export companies, up until recently, were making up
for their income losses in exports by their activities in the
financial sector. There's no question that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
part of the picture.

That's a euphemism; speculating is all

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's no question about that.
That works in the same direction, of course--and land.

-40-

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Mr. Cross?

Si?

MR. KEEHN. Sam, lacking intervention, what's the comment in
the market with regard to the lowest level that the market would
expect against the mark and the yen?
How much more [decline] can we
get here?
MR. CROSS.
In what terms? Market pressures are down, and
every time you pick up a newspaper, you have more economists talking
about the need for x, y, z, including some who say it needs another 10
percent; while it was 12 and 15 percent they had been saying the same
thing.
I think the market people are pretty agnostic about this sort
of thing. They look at these trade deficits, which are enormous; and
they look at the government policies, which are ambiguous in this
regard.
They see the pressures and the consequences are pretty clear.
MR. TRUMAN. My sense is that the forecasts, essentially,
[unintelligible].
If anything, the prognostications are for an
increasing rate of decline. Last year you might have seen something
projected in the 3 to 5 percent range; now you frequently are seeing
it built into the international component of a blue chip business.
They are talking about an expected 10 percent decline through the end
of 1988, or whatever point they set, whereas a year ago they were
saying in the 5 percent range. Forecasters were wrong about the
turning point.
If anything, in that part of the market they are
projecting a more rapid decline than they had been before by maybe-MR. PARRY.
yen and the mark?

Ted, what is the futures market saying about the

MR. TRUMAN. The rate of decline against the G-10 countries
is something on the order of 1 or 2 percent over the next year.
If
you look at just the yen market, it's on the order of three or four
percent.
So that's not anything like this.
Essentially, that's where
we have been for the last 2-1/2 years.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have one comment and one question.
In the last
ten days, I've been at two different embassies for dinners and the
dinner table talk among business people involved how they thought the
dollar had actually become undervalued vis-a-vis European currencies.
Now, they were not talking [unintelligible], which I thought was
interesting, because it wasn't a central banking group; it was a
mixture of business people and embassy personnel. My second point is
a question. You mentioned the Taiwan case and their gigantic trade
surplus, etc.
I'm mystified as to the process of getting some of
those devils to adjust their currencies. What does it take?
Does the
Treasury have to lock them in a room?
Does it take legislation or
does it take negotiation of some sort?
I honestly don't know the
process.
MR. CROSS. Well, the Treasury has been working on it.
I
think the Treasury so far has used all of the above: they've locked
them in a room and they've tried everything. There has been some
movement.

-41-

12/15-16/87

MS. SEGER.
compare it to--

But, it has been pretty pathetic, when you

MR. CROSS.

This will make it 20 percent in the past year.

MS. SEGER.

What has Hong Kong's movement been then?

Zero.
But, if you look at it in terms of the
MR. CROSS.
surplus, Taiwan stands alone as having the largest imbalance. And, in
The three largest
fact as everybody knows, they have a large reserve.
reserves are Germany, Japan, and Taiwan; and I think Taiwan's is
higher-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CROSS.
number two.

Not necessarily in that order.

No, not in that order.

Taiwan, I think, is

Isn't it true, Sam, that the dollar did not
MR. JOHNSON.
appreciate against those currencies very much?
MR. CROSS.
That is true, it did not go up as much as they
Again, we are generalizing, but in
claim; it didn't [unintelligible].
terms of the Taiwanese dollar it did not appreciate as much when it
But the surpluses have grown really unbelievably large.
was going up.
Meanwhile, there are these reports out there now that their dollar
holdings have gotten to be so large that the governor of their central
bank has been under enormous political pressure to get rid of these
depreciating dollars and get some D-marks and so forth; and he seems
So, that's not a very encouraging sign at all.
to be doing that.
MR. PARRY. Isn't the decline since the beginning of the year
of the Taiwanese dollar-MR. CROSS.
but it's-MR. TRUMAN.

Twenty-two percent is the figure I have in mind,
A little less than 10 percent against the yen.

I still think that the trade statistics suggest
MS. SEGER.
that something has to be done about those currencies if we really are
going to improve the situation with regard to imports without building
walls.
MR. CROSS.

Well, the Treasury is working on it.

MR. TRUMAN.
Including the question of [unintelligible], the
closest thing to getting legislation without legislation.
[Unintelligible] that Taiwan in particular enjoys, [unintelligible]
all the events you have cited [unintelligible] legislation.
MS. SEGER.
MR. TRUMAN.

I can send them some alley toughs from Detroit.
[Unintelligible]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Volcker's speech.

President Hoskins.

12/15-16/87

MR. HOSKINS.

-42-

You used the number of $100 billion spent for

six months of this year by G-10 countries.
MR. CROSS. No, so far [this year]--11 months. That doesn't
include Taiwan which is another
and a lot of other
countries. It includes only those that are on our concentration
network, which is the G-10 plus some assorted European countries.
MR. HOSKINS. I'm just curious:
Has anybody speculated as to
what we bought with that $100 billion and where we would be had we not
spent it? And, secondly, you described a situation that seems to me
to be indicating some strains amongst the G-10 countries regarding the
notion of further intervention. Does that imply that we are going to
alter fundamentally some monetary and fiscal policies? In other
words, are we not going to sterilize?
MR. CROSS. What I was saying was that it's not going to be
as easy, looking forward, as it has been in the past. Everybody has
substantially higher dollar balances; countries are under pressure;
there are public commentaries. For example, in London in the
Financial Times, there's an article by Sam Britton asking why the
British are holding all of these weak and depreciating dollars, and
saying they should be moving into marks [unintelligible] in this
story. There undoubtedly are going to be pressures on a lot of
countries to be a lot more reluctant than they have been to add to
their dollar holdings.
MR. BLACK. Has this switching to diversified portfolios had
much downward effect on the dollar?
MR. CROSS. Well, it is one of the elements. I don't know
how widespread it is. We hear reports of a few countries here and
there.
MR. TRUMAN. President Black, President Hoskins' question is
that if the intervention has no effect, then the switching from
dollars to DM also has no effect, other than the effect on psychology.
Essentially, if it doesn't work, it doesn't work.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, if intervention doesn't work, to me it's
obvious, then, that you can draw any conclusion you want to.
MR. BLACK. I would say switching had to have had some
effect, even though I'm not much of an interventionist.
MR. HOSKINS. I'm sure it has. To my mind, it certainly has
an effect. It has an effect as one country sees another country
shifting away. Every time we get into periods like this, certainly
there is a tendency for Latin American countries--those that have any
reserves--to switch a little; some of the Asian countries have a great
desire to make the best of their reserve holdings and do some
switching. I don't want to exaggerate what we have seen to date but
there are some important [unintelligible] as the dollar has continued
to weaken. It's not surprising that you see these kinds of pressures.
MR. BOEHNE.
external deficit.

It has a clear effect on how we finance our

12/15-16/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's the crucial point.

MR. KEEHN. That's the main piece of it because the market
discipline would have been much stronger on the U.S. to get the
adjustment process moving forward more rapidly without this foreign
official financing.
MR. CROSS.
If they hadn't bought $100 billion worth of
dollars then I would ask the question: How would we have financed the
deficit last year?
There's a big hole there somewhere.

exist.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't finance it if it doesn't
Maybe it would have been small.

If we had adjusted and eliminated the deficit,
MR. CROSS.
that would be a different story.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there any further questions for Mr.

Cross?
MR. JOHNSON. Nobody really knows which way this is going but
currently there is some downward [movement] in oil prices. How is
Last year it seemed to
that likely to affect the currency markets?
have put downward pressure on the dollar relative to the deutschemark
I
and the yen, and some downward pressure on the pound sterling, too.
don't know if you have any idea about that, given these low levels,
but-MR. CROSS.
It seems to have different kinds of effects.
There is the fact that Germany and other countries are more dependent
There is also the fact that oil is
on oil than we are, for example.
very heavily a dollar-financed phenomenon. So there have been times
when changes in the oil price seemed to affect the dollar one way and
I would assume that the
times when it affected it another way.
reluctance that we are seeing now might be, on balance, helpful.
MR. JOHNSON.

How is it affecting the pound?

MR. CROSS.
Well, sterling has been a little softer in the
past few days. One possibility is that it has been reflecting what
has gone on in the oil market but there are some other things going
on, too. The British seem to have had this policy of trying to
maintain the pound at 3 DM and they have held that pretty firmly and
have undertaken an enormous amount of intervention [unintelligible].
Some people think that maybe the message that they are going to hold
it is beginning to be accepted and that part of the decline in

sterling reflects that.
MR. JOHNSON. Up until that oil price change, the pound had
pretty strong upward momentum and they were really fighting to hold it
down.
MR. CROSS.

Quite apart from what they did recently,

There was heavy upward pressure on the
pound during much of that time. And, there are questions about
whether the British will, and should, reduce their interest rates.

-44-

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Cross?
If
not, I'll entertain a motion to ratify the transactions of the Manager
since the last meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, approved.
Sternlight on domestic open market operations.

Mr.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Statement--see
Appendix.]
I also have a leeway recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bring that in after

[the questions].

MR. PARRY. I have a question regarding liquidity and quality
concerns. Is central bank intervention in foreign exchange markets
also a factor? And if it is, doesn't that imply that we will have to
see not only quality concerns go away but also greater stability in
exchange markets before we can see more traditional relationships
reestablished?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that at the short end that probably
is true and that a further factor is the Treasury debt management,
which has been continuing to shrink the supply of bills very slightly
recently. But that [unintelligible] also.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
involved with the quality?

Do you think that's a big factor

MR. STERNLIGHT. The quality concerns have been the more
major factor there, I would judge.
MR.BOEHNE. Looking ahead to year-end, how do you go about
dealing with a period like this operationally?
We expect much more
funds rate volatility; how do you proceed operationally through this
period that we have coming up?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it could take a certain amount of
feeling our way as we go along, because every one of these periods is
kind of unique unto itself. But just the way the calendar works, this
time is particularly unusual. We have a maintenance period that ends
December 30 and another that begins December 31.
How much of the
normal year-end pressures might work into that December 30 period
right now is a big question mark in my mind. I think we just have to
get a sense of it as we go along through that period.
I'm sure there
will be some particular pressure that is left for that December 31
date.
That Thursday begins a long weekend. Right now our reserve
estimates do not show a very large reserve need coming up to that
period, partly because some of the weakness of money has brought down
expected required reserve levels. We probably will have to make some
allowance--maybe in the December 30 period and almost certainly in the
next period that begins December 31--for additional demands for excess
reserves.
I think we will get clues from the money market itself as
to how to respond as we go along.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions?

-45-

12/15-16/87

MR. HOSKINS. Given your reference to divine intervention
earlier, would you figure that this is an appropriate time to think
about starting option (3)? Would you be comfortable with that?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it's appropriate to begin
thinking about it, and letting it work if it didn't cause too great a
swing in money rates. I would want to be a bit leery about it through
the year-end period, and maybe just let a little show through-MR. ANGELL.

What was the question?

MR. HOSKINS. The question was that we have a fluctuation in
the funds rate on the down side, and therefore, we could perhaps begin
to move toward [accepting] more volatility in the funds rate right now
since it moved in the right direction for us first off.
MR. ANGELL. Well, that very well may be due to the fact that
we're so sensitive to any increases in the fed funds rate above the 63/4 percent level and we're not sensitive about it moving below that.
MR. JOHNSON. That's not true Wayne. Earlier, when the
funds rate fell below the 6-3/4 percent level, we put off reserve add
needs, giving a strong signal that we didn't want it lower either.
MR. ANGELL. Well, my view was that yesterday we had a need
to take reserves out of the system and we didn't because funds were
trading at 6-3/4 percent. So, we said we won't take the reserves out
of the system that policy would have called for; we, in effect, put a
ceiling--

MR. JOHNSON. But Wayne, what is policy? Policy was the
funds rate range around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent, not a borrowings
target.
MR. ANGELL. If that was the policy, then this morning I
presume we should have gone in immediately, acting to keep it at 6-3/4
percent.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.
this morning?
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, I think [unintelligible] postponed.
How did the fed funds rate get to 6-1/4 percent
Float?

MR. ANGELL. Well, I know, but if we had a fed funds policy,
what would you have done if it got to 6-1/4 percent?
MR. JOHNSON. Just what I said before: When funds were on the
weak side earlier, we postponed an add need, and that was a signal in
the markets that we didn't desire funds trading below 6-3/4 percent.
MR. ANGELL. My view is that we did have some notion about
the amount of borrowing that would be associated with a 6-3/4 percent
funds rate and the need came yesterday to drain reserves. And we
didn't drain reserves, it seems to me, because we were sensitive to
having the rate go above 6-3/4 percent. Is that right, Peter?

-46-

12/15-16/87

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. ANGELL.

I think that's right.

Okay, Peter says that's right.

I think you have to ask yourself what
MR. JOHNSON. Wait!
What's the basis for adding or subtracting reserves
the policy is.
The policy is to maintain the funds rate
under these conditions?
There's not any other independent
around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent.
So
factor deciding whether we have an add need or a subtraction need.
There is
with the funds rate trading at 6-3/4 percent, why would you?
no add or subtracting need.
I declare this a draw. I don't care
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
whether or not there are Johnsons or Angells on the head of a pin!
If not, I'd like to
Are there any other questions for the Manager?
entertain a motion to ratify his previous actions.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I will move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
[make a recommendation] on the leeway?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Do you want to now

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
provision?

Would someone like to move that

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, approved.
move on to Mr. Prell and the economic situation.

Now we'll

[Statement--see
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I think I'll conclude on that decisive
Appendix.].
note.
I thought you were going to go further.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Any questions or clarifications for Mr. Prell?
I have a clarification on the National
MR. HOSKINS.
Association of Business Economists survey. Mike correctly reported
that nearly half of them expected to see a recession in 1988.
However, that's a general question asked to them about recession. But
the data with respect to questions on their own firms are inconsistent
In other words, most of them
with their forecasts of recession.
commented that the order books in their own firms were fairly strong.
MR. PARRY. Mike, you talked about the decline in interest
rates and I wonder if you could give us some idea, in terms of
numbers, of what kind of short-term rates you expect in the first half
in that Greenbook forecast.
MR. PRELL. Basically, we have both long and short rates
declining between 1/2 and 1 percentage point by the middle of the
year.
MR. PARRY. That's fairly significant.

-47-

12/15-16/87

MR. PRELL. Given the elasticity of response of some of these
sectors, that's not an enormous amount; but it's certainly noticeable
in terms of the increments that we have been talking about around the
table.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON. I have a follow-up on that particular
question. My understanding is that you have a funds rate change in
there of about that magnitude.
Is that right?
MR. PRELL.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON. What would the forecast look like assuming no
change in the funds rate?
MR. PRELL. We used our quarterly model to try to answer that
question and, essentially, if we just held the funds rate where it is,
that tighter monetary policy would chip off a fraction of the GNP
growth over the coming year. Most of the effect would be in the
second half of the year, so that we probably would not see a very
noticeable pickup in the second-quarter rate.
For the year as a
whole, growth would be somewhere approaching 1/2 percentage point
less, according to the model.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes.
I was looking at your linkage model
estimates and I guess I would have the same sort of assumptions.
Those estimates are -.6 percent for the first quarter, and that's a
downward revision since the last estimate, since supposedly it
incorporates trade and retail sales numbers. But I notice it has a
standard error of about 3 percentage points around it, which means it
could be anywhere from -3-1/2 to +2-1/2 percent, I guess; but the
center of gravity is on the negative side.
I was just wondering what
kind of discretionary factors you have added to that to bring it up to
where you are.
MR. PRELL.
MR. JOHNSON.
that's why-MR. PARRY.
MR. JOHNSON.

I wouldn't-They have revised down and you revised up and
What is that forecast?
The linkage model forecast.

MR. PRELL. That is just an experimental tool that has been
under development for a while and we don't approach our forecasting by
add factors, so to speak, to that model. That model was done with a
minimal amount of judgmental add factoring and tended to be very
responsive to incoming data, and we've been working to moderate that.
As a matter of fact, the one that you have doesn't incorporate the
inventory data we received or the housing starts released today, and
it has a fairly strong short-run sensitivity to the stock market.
I
think that is one of the factors that yielded the negative result for
the first quarter. But let me just say that, given those confidence
intervals, I wouldn't want to try to distinguish very much between
that reading and growth in the 1 percent neighborhood in the first
quarter of next year.

-48-

12/15-16/87

MR. JOHNSON.

Sure.

I think that model has difficulty picking up such
MR. PRELL.
things as incentives in the automobile market and many other things.
As I
So, I wouldn't want to make much out of that difference.
suggested, if you apply any reasonable confidence interval around our
projection, you certainly can't rule out a negative quarter in the
first or second quarters.
All right.
On the housing numbers, I notice
MR. JOHNSON.
I realize there's not much of a
permits are still trending down.
correlation, but do you read anything into the fact that permits
continue to trend down versus starts?
I think that the permits number was about
MR. PRELL.
unchanged in November from the October level.
MR. JOHNSON.

It was down 0.7.

Given the volatility of these numbers, that's
MR. PRELL.
Basically, the number doesn't
certainly an insignificant change.
appear to be inconsistent with the starts level running somewhere
So, I
between 1.5 and 1.6 million over the next couple of months.
think that's very much in line with our sense of not very much going
Our forecast doesn't show
on at this point in the housing market.
much of a movement in coming months.
MR. JOHNSON.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mike, as you're well aware, there's a school of
thought out there that the economy has been running on the strong
growth of the aggregates of a year or a year and a half ago and that
the economy is about to go downhill as a result of the much flatter
If that's not
growth of the aggregates in the last 9 or 10 months.
your expectation, then would you assess that expectation?
MR. PRELL.
I suppose it is possible, if the outcome is
similar to our forecast, that people who would want to read the money
stock numbers as having those kinds of implications would feel that
they had been vindicated; that would be a noticeable slowing from what
We don't
we have seen over the first few quarters of this year.
approach the forecasting process with that kind of simple connection
But obviously, if
of money stock to nominal GNP and real GNP outcome.
we had forced money stock growth to be faster this year, then we would
have had, at least for a while, lower interest rates and possibly a
lower dollar, and a number of other events which might have
So I
strengthened the outlook for nominal GNP in the coming months.
don't see an inconsistency; but we're not putting a heavy weight on
that monetary deceleration per se now.
MR. KELLEY. At what point in time would you start to give
more weight to it?
How long can the growth in the aggregates stay
very modest without beginning to be a drag?

behavior.

Well, I think much depends on money demand
MR. PRELL.
Our forecast is not built on an assumption that we will

12/15-16/87

-49-

continue to have that kind of slow growth. We have M2 and M3 growing
at rates that are well within the target ranges tentatively set for
next year.
So that would represent, particularly in the case of M2, a
noticeable acceleration from what we've been seeing.
MR. KOHN. I think the related point is that the aggregates
just haven't been very good predictors of what's going on in the
I have here a simulation of the
economy in the last couple of years.
Darby model using M1A, and it has the economy slowing down. It has
much slower growth for 1987 than it looks like we have been getting
and a picture for next year that isn't all that different, assuming
some pickup in the aggregates, from the forecast in the Greenbook.
But it has much more rapid inflation both this year and next year--on
the order of 7-1/2 to 8 percent this year and 7-1/2 percent next year.
I wouldn't put much confidence in that, because it plays off the very
rapid money growth, which we never really saw feeding through in 1985
and 1986.
Those aggregates in and of themselves have not been very
good predictors of future developments in the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you're looking at the monetary
aggregates, I think it's important to recognize that when they were
working and you could see the plumbing operating--meaning you could
see the effect of changing monetary aggregates reflected in real GNP
and the price level--the relationship was in sync. The problem that
we have now in evaluating these data is that, essentially, we have
gone through a cycle and a half in which the plumbing has been
In a sense, we're getting very significant changes in
disconnected.
these monetary variables, but we don't see any filtering through. The
argument that slow money growth will inevitably lead to a recession
The trouble is that there is no mechanism
may turn out to be true.
which can tie it together at this stage. We're caught in a situation
where I suspect that the plumbing is going to get reconnected at some
point and it's going to work again. The real trick is going to be
figuring out when that's going to happen. The assumption that it is
already happening is not verifiable in the information, at least as I
see it.
It probably happened when we started our
MR. HELLER.
monetary targeting, because according to Goodhart's law, anything you
want to control will get out of hand. But that isn't my question.
According to your projection, the deficit is going to worsen by about
$20 billion to $165 billion. According to the Administration, it's
going to improve by about $20 billion to $123 billion.
I was
wondering what would happen to your forecast if the Administration
were right.
MR. PRELL.
I don't think we have a really current set of
numbers from the Administration. I suspect that if the Administration
is right, in essence it would be because there is a stronger
[economic] performance. That's the answer itself. I think that's
largely where we differ with the Administration in terms of their midsession review prognostication for FY 1988.
MR. HELLER. Mike, your forecasts are quite far apart on the
expenditure side, too.
Some of that is cyclically related, so you
wouldn't see much of a weakening of the economy if the budget cutters
actually succeed in [unintelligible].

12/15-16/87

MR. PRELL. Well, we built into [our forecast] their
succeeding, in essence, in what they agreed to in the compromise
session. That is a moderate restraining influence on aggregate demand
in the coming year, but it's not an enormous effect.
It's one more
ingredient that one wouldn't want to overlook.
It's a magnitude of
roughly half a percentage point on GNP.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I was quite influenced by an article I read in
this morning's Wall Street Journal about Marshall Fields, where Si
Keehn lives, in the suburbs of Chicago.
He has to get out and do more
shopping! Anyhow, it made me think about the retail sales report and
your comment that the numbers were revised downward in September and
October and showed only a modest gain in November. You said this is
causing some downward revision in your real GNP estimate for just this
quarter. You're not thinking of this as something that will spill
over into the new year also?
I wasn't sure I heard the-MR. PRELL. I tried to suggest that if indeed we get that
kind of greater weakness in consumption expenditures, there probably
would be some higher level of inventories, which would tend to weaken
the early part of next year. At this point, given the uncertainty of
these numbers, I am more inclined to think of it as enhancing the
likelihood of our getting the kind of deceleration that we forecast in
the first part of next year rather than influencing the
[unintelligible] level we forecast. But I think we had a rather brave
forecast in that we were looking for a very noticeable slowing in
production growth without having any real sense that there was an
inventory accumulation going on to trigger it.
Basically, we have a
very rapid response of producers to that incipient weakening.
If it
turns out that consumption is weaker in this quarter than we think it
has been, it's almost certain we would get that kind of slowdown.
MS. SEGER. That leads me to my next question.
If that's
happening--if there are inventories building up that are not planned-in the past that has often led to some sort of liquidation. Maybe it
is just because I've been around for a long time, but that's typically
what happens at the retail level, wholesale level, etc.
So, at what
point might that kick in?
MR. PRELL. As I said, we would expect a fairly prompt
response in which production would slow down considerably in early
1988 if we do get that pattern.
I must say, some of it would probably
show up in reduced import demand, thus not affecting domestic
production so heavily. But at this point I just don't have the
feeling that the inventory position, by and large, is that
uncomfortable.
Certainly, it didn't show up in the Beige Book, which
is the information from two or three weeks ago.
While you hear these
stories, and they vary in the retail sector, there isn't much else to
suggest we're getting massive inventory accumulation.
MS. SEGER. My final question involves the trade statistics.
I guess the numbers were disappointing on both sides, but the exports
ran quite a bit below what we had expected. Again, at what point
would you think that this might mean more serious trouble and not just
a one-month blip on the screen? We have a lot of eggs in the one

12/15-16/87

-51-

basket next year--mainly an assumption of a strong trade turnaround-in order to get the kind of real growth that we have for 1988, as I
read the forecast anyway.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, Governor Seger, as Mike said, most of the
disappointment was on the nonagricultural export side.
The press was
disappointed by the imports, and if there was a surprise it was in the
oil.
That seems to build up imports of products, which seem to fall
into the inventories, and I could tell a better story [unintelligible]
The surprise was on the
statistical effect in the first half of 1988.
side of the nonagricultural exports and if that's a true indication of
the trend, then obviously they are much weaker than the outlook that
we have [unintelligible].
I don't think there's anything in the
anecdotal evidence that suggests that month is anything other than a
fluke; but if the next two months of the quarter begin to look like
October, then I would be worried about the outlook.
MR. PRELL. From my less informed standpoint, the anecdotal
evidence and the manufacturing employment numbers and physical
products data that go into our industrial production index just don't
jibe with that kind of disappointment on the export side.
I think
everything is pointing to substantial export growth. In fact, that
gives us some confidence that probably this will turn out to be noise
and that there will be some offsets in coming months.
MS. SEGER.
It's just that I'm a cautious person, and when
you put a lot of eggs in one basket I think you really have to make
sure you check the assumption very, very carefully.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we think we will have something close to
$40 billion or a bit less in nonagricultural exports, in 1982 dollars,
over the four quarters of 1987; and we have a little more in [our
forecast for] next year.
In percentage terms it is slightly less, but
with a higher base it's essentially the same pattern of growth as over
the four quarters of 1987.
Now, there are people who have forecasts
that are much more optimistic than ours. We have tried to be a bit
conservative. That's not to say that we can't have a boom in exports,
but not an explosive pattern. And the forecast, while it probably is
off by several billion dollars one way or the other, is a reasonable
projection, I think. I am much more comfortable about making the
forecast for the four quarters of 1988 than I was a year ago when I
was making a similar forecast for the four quarters of 1987.
MS. SEGER.

Was $40 billion what we estimated?

MR. TRUMAN. Essentially, we have had nonagricultural exports
right on--plus or minus a few billion dollars--since the beginning of
the year.
MS. SEGER. I know we expected a big turnaround;
remember the exact number.

I couldn't

MR. TRUMAN. There was some slight offset in GNP terms but
where we have been wrong has been on the nominal import side because
we haven't had the price, we haven't had the quantity trade balances
[unintelligible].
We've had more imports; therefore, the statistical
GNP has been not quite what we thought it would.

12/15-16/87

MR. PRELL.

-52-

Just to cite the numbers: in our February

Greenbook we had forecast 10 percent growth in real exports, and we
have 15 percent at this point. And our confidence has definitely
increased since [several] months ago.
MR. PARRY.

How much of an adjustment would you make to the

fourth-quarter net export number given October's rough order of
magnitude? We have $18.5 billion included in-MR. TRUMAN. We went back maybe about $4 or $5 billion. Now
again, part of that is in oil.
[Unintelligible] because consumption
picked up on that side; and on the export side, if you don't take the
[unintelligible] out of production, the exports going into inventories
might drop by a billion dollars, in 1982 dollars, in the fourth
quarter; so we have [net exports] going down from $18.5 billion to $13
to $14-1/2 billion GNP [basis]-MR. PARRY. With a small change like that, it might be too
early to give up on that 3 percent for the fourth quarter.
MR. PRELL. Looking at the labor market data, we could easily
see 3 percent [GNP] growth. But I recall that a year ago in the
fourth quarter we were looking at very strong labor input, and even
after GNP revisions we only ended up with 1-1/2 percent. So there's
considerable looseness in this; but there is the potential for it
being strong if, as we hope, it wasn't all inventory.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr. Prell on
substance?
If not, let's now go around the table on our own views on
the economy. Who would like to start off? Mr. Boykin.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the national economy, we
certainly agree with Mike Prell's presentation. In our District,
we're seeing some slight improvement, we think. Of course, with what
little improvement we do see, we're growing at a slower pace than
other parts of the country. There is considerable improvement in
manufacturing employment; in fact, we're keeping pace with the
national statistics in that regard. We don't see the possible $2 or
$3 drop in the price of oil doing a great amount of damage to our
District in terms of oil exploration, primarily because most of the
planning has been done assuming an oil price of about $15.
However,
there are implications other than just for exploration in terms of
revenues to the state and subsidiary effects that could go along with
that. The peso reevaluation is probably a somewhat neutral [event]
because we've had diversification along the border, with not so much
reliance just on the retail side. While that does affect retail sales
[negatively], it improves the myceladora, the twin plant concept. So
that turns out to be somewhat of a wash. We feel pretty good about
agriculture; it has been considerably better this year. Energy, so
far at least, has held its own. Construction, we think, is leveling
out. Granted, energy is at the bottom and nothing is going on, but no
further deterioration is indicated. Manufacturing plus services are
remaining fairly even, although we may see more improvement in
services than we are forecasting. So, while it's not a really bright
picture, I do think and hope that, aside from the situation of our
financial institutions, we are at the bottom and that there is
improvement coming along.

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

-53-

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any
particular new insights on the immediate outlook, but I have become
more and more preoccupied with the longer-term question of how to deal
with these fundamental imbalances in the world economy. What I've
done, for a change, is ask myself the longer-term question rather than
what's going to happen next quarter. And the way I went about that
with my colleagues was to say, let's take the 1988 forecast as is--and
there's no great difference between the Board staff and the New York
staff forecast--but then superimpose on that by assumption, different
patterns of behavior over the 1988 through 1991 period to see what
kinds of conditions in that overall period can get us out of the box
we're in. And there are really four questions that seem to me
I
important: (1) Can we get out of that box without a recession?
(2) Can we get there without entailing very,
think the answer is yes.
I think the answer there is
very clear risks on the inflation side?
no.
I'll explain these answers in a minute.
(3) Can we get there
with the current exchange rate structure? And the answer to that is
yes.
(4) Can we get there without a long period of subpar growth in
domestic demand in the U.S. economy, and by implication, a slower rise
in the standard of living than we've been used to? Unfortunately, the
answer to that question I think is unambiguously no, we can't. No
matter what you do, all scenarios that I can visualize involve, among
other things, a large increase in U.S. market share abroad and also a
large increase in our external financing requirement over the period.
With my colleagues, the way I tried to get a fix on the dynamics of
the long-term problem was to just take a couple of simple arithmetic
examples and work back. The first is one that simply postulated a
trade deficit of $50 billion in 1991 and then asked what it takes to
get there given a 1988 forecast like that in the Greenbook. What it
takes is something like this: growth in U.S. domestic demand of about
1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent over the entire period; growth in U.S. GNP of
about 2-3/4 percent, growth in foreign domestic demand of about 3-1/2
growth in foreign GNP of about 3 percent. And by
percent and
implication, it will require, over the entire period, U.S.
manufacturing output increasing by 4 percent and growth in capacity of
plant and equipment in the United States from year-end 1988 levels of
something like 3-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's annual?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Achieving either one, in the
context of the kinds of things that have been going on, is a long
shot.
But to put up an argument, even if all of those things worked
right, the end-of-period situation, by assumption, would still leave a
trade deficit of $50 billion and using very conservative interest rate
assumptions, a current account deficit of $77 billion, or 1.3 percent
of GNP. Our net foreign indebtedness at the end of the period would
be $900 billion, or 15 percent of GNP, and a country with a net
foreign indebtedness of 15 percent of GNP--other than in war time or
in the early stages of development--is quite unusual indeed. That's
the kind of gradual adjustment scenario.
Incidentally, that case also
assumed no change in the real exchange rate from current levels.
Another way to think about it is to impose a constraint on
our current account balance by the end of 1991, again assuming no
change in the standard of living which means, among other things, no

12/15-16/87

-54-

change in the real exchange rate.
In that case, U.S. domestic demand
kind of by assumption is 2-1/2 percent but real GNP would have to be 4
percent.
Now, here's the killer: foreign domestic demand would have
to be 6.6 percent and foreign GNP would have to be 6 percent.
The
point, of course, is that I don't see any conceivable way to get from
here to there under those kinds of assumptions--that is, maintaining
domestic demand growth and expecting that the whole adjustment, in
effect, is going to take place externally. That kind of scenario
would require growth in U.S. manufacturing output of about 5-1/2 to 6
percent and growth in physical capacity of about 5-1/2 percent.
Again, I just don't see how that could happen. But it would result in
a trade surplus at the end of 1991, a $25 billion current account
balance, and our net external debt would be about $785 billion, or 121/2 percent of GNP.
The third approach that one can think of is something that
combines a little of both: to superimpose on case 1, if you will, a 10
percent further devaluation [of the dollar] that is front-end loaded-in other words, it comes mostly in the early part of next year.
Then
again, if the constraint is a current account balance in 1991, in
order to get there, U.S. domestic demand growth would have to be
something like 1.2 percent; GNP growth, 2.5 to 2.6 percent; foreign
demand growth, 3.5 percent; and foreign GNP growth, 2.9 percent or so.
That would require manufacturing output growth in the U.S. of about 41/4 to 4-1/2 percent and capacity growth again of about 4 percent.
That would also get you a current account balance in 1991.
These
estimates are obviously nothing more than an exercise in arithmetic
and there's no suggestion that they are anything more than that.
Obviously, one could quibble with any one of them, or all of them, but
I think the broad profile that emerges from that kind of an exercise
is right. That broad profile says to me that any way you cut it, we
have a situation involving a huge unfunded external liability sitting
out there that is going to have to be attended to.
It says to me that
domestic spending, at least by historical standards, is going to have
to be restrained and that there is considerable force to the argument
to stabilize exchange rates sooner rather than later. I can see very
little to be gained by further instability in the exchange markets and
further downward pressure on the dollar. As a matter of fact, it
seems to me that the risks of further downward pressure on the dollar
are rather asymmetrically on the side of making things worse, not
better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. Do I
assume, incidentally, that implicit in that is that if we are going to
[unintelligible] some of these very large external funding
liabilities, we may have to do it in currencies other than the dollar?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If things started to rupture, that's
right.
There's a lot of risk, and I should say that right now, at
this precise point in time, I think the risks are on the financial
side.
I regard those risks as a matter of particular concern. What I
am trying to say is that, as great as those concerns are right now, I
think the longer-term problem remains; and, in order to try to deal
with the problems today, we need to do it in a way that recognizes
what we are up against over a long period of time.

12/15-16/87

-55-

Are you saying that
MR. PARRY. A point of clarification:
policy today ought to be directed at preventing the dollar from
declining?
But the
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I didn't quite say that.
I don't
question is what kind of policy would produce that result?
I think it has a lot to do
think that is totally within our control.
with the attitudes of the U.S. government as a whole. But if I had no
constraints, and you asked me if my preference would be a policy that
puts heavy weight on stabilizing the dollar, my answer is yes--not
exclusive, but heavy--yes.
MR. BLACK. Would you go so far as to say that recession is
almost inevitable to get a desirable result?
In my mind, that's the value of
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No.
doing this kind of exercise, because it does tell me that we can avoid
a recession.
It tells me that we have a very thin line to walk and
very little maneuvering room. But the comforting thing is that it
does say to me that there is a conceivable set of circumstances over a
period of time that can produce a desired result without a recession.
If we make too many mistakes, one of the biggest risks in this long
term is that it involves a lot of inflationary pressures over a long
period of time. Obviously, if those inflationary pressures escape us,
that is one of the things that increases the risks of a recession.
But the comfort I draw from this is that it does suggest you can get
through this without a recession.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Where are the inflationary pressures
coming from in this arithmetical scenario?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, part of it is what's already
built in. But when you have growth, say, in manufacturing output, in
the ranges that are implied even in the gradual adjustment scenario,
and the need to increase plant and equipment spending in sufficient
magnitudes-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's true, but we're talking about
a pattern of behavior over a number of years with a starting point of
an unemployment rate of 6 percent, when the starting point in terms of
capacity utilization--and in this scenario we use the rate forecast
for the end of 1988--is 82-1/2 percent.
The overall rate is
[projected to be] up to 82-1/2 percent, but there are about 8 or 9
two-digit SIC industry groups that are big exporters where those
capacity utilization rates are already pushing de facto full
utilization. So, it does take a not inconsequential amount of hard
investment to be able to sustain that kind of export-driven output in
manufacturing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you make use of sources and uses of
investment and savings in this study?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What it implies is that the budget
deficit comes down in proportion to the reduction in the current
account, in rough order of magnitude, so that in the so-called gradual
adjustment case the budget deficit in 1991 is down around 1 percent of

-56-

12/15-16/87

GNP. But it also implies that the saving rate comes up more in line
with early to mid-1980s experience as opposed to the experience of
last year. Of course, if either or both of those things don't happen,
then you have problems because if the saving rate doesn't come up, and
then you superimpose a higher level of consumption spending than what
it is already, then your domestic demand -CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
unemployment.

Then you won't get the adjustment in

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. HELLER.
were increasing?

That's right.

What are your inflation rates?

You said they

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In this? The inflation rate in this
is basically held stable at 4-1/2 percent by assumption. That's one
of the things that permits an orderly interest rate outlook here.
Again, I want to emphasize this is just arithmetic; it's not a model
or anything like that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not exactly, but you do have
relationships between foreign demand and U.S. exports.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. BLACK.

Oh, yes.

Is business saving rising as well as personal

saving?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Excuse me, the overall saving rate--

MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, the one thing I want to say about
this is that it's got 1 percent more growth abroad than any foreign
official is prepared to target.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's right.

MR. TRUMAN. And, if you put their growth not at 3-1/2
percent, but at 1-1/2 to 2 percent--which has been the experience so
far--then I think you get a very different set of scenarios.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I hate to admit this but I find the
scenario that the Vice Chairman has been outlining more benevolent
than any of them that I've been contemplating.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's not without risks. But, Bob,
to answer your question, it's not all that precise. The overall
saving rate goes up, almost by assumption; it's the only way you can
get that result.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But that is only arithmetic.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That is right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because, if you start with the GNP that
will relate to income, you have a consumption element fit in-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

It has to go up.

-57-

12/15-16/87

MR. BLACK. You almost have to have a rise in business
saving as well as personal, I would think, under that scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think that's probably right.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as Alan said before, in this
scenario--assuming there's no generalized outburst of inflation
driving up wages--presumably the profitability in manufacturing would
be fairly robust in these circumstances.
MR. BLACK. That's what I was implying: that you would have
rising capital consumption allowances and profits.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But, there's a whole bunch of things
that have to work right. As Mr. Truman said, even this gradual
adjustment case assumes foreign domestic demand growth of 3-1/2
percent and foreign GNP growth of 3 percent.
MR. BLACK.
else, I guess.

That's what really bothers me more than anything

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. I really don't have much to say. I think the
staff did an exceptionally good job on the Greenbook, and Mike really
covered all the caveats that we now are throwing out. I'm sympathetic
with what Governor Kelley said about worrying about the aggregates.
To use your metaphor, Mr. Chairman, we don't know if the plumbing has
been reconnected or not; but I do strongly suspect that it will be
reconnected before we know it has. And I'm wondering if these could
be flashing danger signals. But, on the other side of that, the
employment [outlook] from the National Association of Purchasing
Managers report was extremely strong. We went back and telephoned the
contacts that we usually talk to when we produce the Beige Book to see
if we could find any evidence that there were changes in expectations
or sales. We looked at 25 retailers, for example, and 18 said that
recently their sales definitely had been running well above what they
were last year; only three said they were down.
MS. SEGER.

What is well above?

MR. BLACK. Well, Martha, I was going to get to this in a
minute, and say you were spending more than Si Keehn, because the
in Washington, Baltimore and Philadelphia, said that
sales were exceptionally strong. In Washington, they were running 16
percent ahead; in Baltimore 13 percent ahead; and in Philadelphia 18
percent ahead.
MR. HELLER.

Is that dollars or volume?

MR. BLACK.

Dollars.

MR. PARRY.

Probably volume as well.

MR. BLACK. There's a lot of discounting, so I don't know if
it's more or less. If there's more, then that means that you have

-58-

12/15-16/87

more volume, really, than these figures would imply.
at our industrial-MS. SEGER.

We also looked

Is that for one month?

MR. BLACK. It's since Thanksgiving, which is really the
beginning of the Christmas season. She was very optimistic, much more
so than
But it was really amazing to us that we
couldn't find more evidence; nobody had scaled down estimates of what
would happen next year. In looking at the industrial contacts it's
pretty much the same sort of thing. So I guess you can just summarize
their responses by saying that going into the details just didn't show
any real signs of weakening at this point.
So, for what that's worthIt makes me feel better than I thought I would feel at this time
following the crash on October 19.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, looking ahead to 1988, I too
definitely think the October events [unintelligible].
I agree with
Bob on that.
While obviously those events were hardly positive, they
have not had a fundamental effect on the economy as I had thought they
might, at least as yet. Therefore, our outlook is not at all
inconsistent with the staff forecast. We may be a touch on the more
positive side.
I have just a couple of specific comments. On retail
sales, I certainly agree with Bob Black.
I talked to somebody Monday
who has important operations in the Midwest and, for the Christmas
selling season so far through Sunday, their sales have been 5 percent
over last year; and he thinks that for the balance of this Christmas
season their sales will improve over that.
The outlook for retail
sales appears really quite positive at this point. Capital spending
programs have not been cut and I've talked to an awful lot of people
about that over the last two or three weeks. Most companies have
contingency plans in place and they are taking a very careful look.
They have a cautious attitude but, so far, nobody is reducing their
plans and they are really carrying on with them in a pretty good way.
There are two dichotomies here that I have a hard time
understanding: first, on inflation, I keep hearing these anecdotal
reports about very significant price increases for a variety of raw
materials, steel in particular.
I have heard some huge numbers on
steel from some people--30 percent increases on an annual basis; and I
have heard of paper products and chemical products also moving up
pretty rapidly. But these are offset by comments of other people.
I
have met with major companies, and one very, very large manufacturing
company that I talk with pulled out their material prices for me. For
1987, excluding steel, their material prices have only gone up .7
percent; and for next year they are forecasting an increase of .5
percent.
For steel for this year, they in fact had a price decrease
of 1.8 percent; for next year they are expecting an increase of only
0.4 percent.
So, there is this tremendous difference between large
companies that have big power and the smaller companies that really
don't.
Certainly, the increases are not showing up in the inflation
numbers.
On the labor side, the news continues to be very good.
Three-year contracts, at least in our District, are very standard.
In
some cases, annual increases in all costs are under 2 percent and
certainly, 2 to 3 percent is quite standard. The productivity work

-59-

12/15-16/87

rule changes have been very important. Therefore, the productivity
increases for some companies have been very impressive, so that unit
labor costs indeed are coming down. So, with regard to the inflation
problem, at least as I talk to people, certainly the pressures at this
point are not nearly as great as I would have expected last summer.
In fact, at least some of the heat has come out of this problem.
The other dichotomy, which we have talked about a little, is
this trade balance issue. A lot of people I have talked to are really
getting much better results on their exports; they are operating at
high levels in some specialized industries but, at the current level
of the dollar, they can easily compete in Europe and the Far East.
But again, this is not universal. There are other people who are not
having a similar kind of experience. I am reminded by people that
when the dollar was so very high, dealer and distribution networks
really came down very significantly; and those who were dependent on
such networks are having a bit of a problem re-establishing them. But
for the long run, I do agree with Ted Truman and Mike Prell that the
fundamentals have to be very, very good and that, at some point, we're
going to begin to see these improvements on the export side. On net,
given the reduction of the dollar, and if the foreign markets hold up
and indeed begin to improve, I think that we are going to see this
increase in exports. If the consumption numbers hold up--and
certainly I have this early look that they are moving along better
than I might have expected--I think the staff outlook is a little soft
on the consumption side. I do think the outlook for 1988 continues to
be positive and not inconsistent with the results that we've had this
year.
MR. BLACK.

It's the sort of scenario that would worry Jerry

MR. KEEHN.

Yes, that's right.

Corrigan.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. As far as the overall Greenbook forecast, I
think it's reasonable. In our own District, we continue to see strong
employment gains. And in those areas where we've seen some slowing in
the growth--Delaware, for example--I think it is more because of
supply constraints than demand constraints. We've been seeing the
same thing that Si Keehn has: the manufacturing sector is picking up
handsomely and I think that's largely attributable to improved
exports. Growth in construction, while slowing, still is at a fairly
healthy level, particularly in the nonresidential area. On retail
sales, we've been picking up; as I've heard around the table, they are
doing really rather well. Our retailers say that they are holding up
to pre-stock market crash expectations and it is very hard to see the
effect of the stock market on retail sales. So, in a nutshell, the
regional economy continues to do well.
I would like to piggyback very briefly on this adjustment
process issue that Jerry brought up because it seems to me that we
have to view the economy and the outlook a good bit differently with
this overhang of the adjustment process than we ordinarily would. In
the past, we've gone through periods where inflation was a problem and
we've had to make some adjustments. We've gone through periods where
aggregate demand was too weak. We've had recessions and we've had to

12/15-16/87

-60-

make adjustments.
I think this is the first time that any of us has
gone through an international adjustment process of this magnitude
with the U.S. because I don't think we've been in this kind of a
situation. We'd have to go back to before the World War I period. We
may get this shift from consuming more than we produce to producing
more than we consume; we may be lucky and get that magnitude just
right.
We may get the changes in exports and imports so that we can
keep aggregate demand going along at what most of us would consider an
acceptable growth rate. But we may not be so lucky; we probably won't
be.
There are a lot of scenarios here, but my sense is that we are
going to have to be prepared to accept slower growth than we would
otherwise think of as being desirable in the interests of this
international adjustment process.
Some of this slower growth may be
forced on us by market discipline of the kind we were talking about
earlier. We may have to begin to settle our foreign liabilities in
other currencies rather than the dollar. But, I think there will come
a time--probably sooner rather than later--when monetary policy
decisions are going to have to be increasingly influenced by this
adjustment process. We can lean toward helping the adjustment process
or we can lean against it; but I think we are going to have to think
more in terms of what we can do to lean in the direction of helping
it.
It just may mean that we will have to accept growth rate
increases that are less than we ordinarily would in order to do that.
But I think it is better for us to get ourselves in that kind of
thought process rather than have the market disciplines coming down on
us very hard, which they will if we don't.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard to the regional economy, as some
people have already suggested, it remains quite difficult out our way
to find any pronounced negative effects as a consequence of the stock
market decline in October. Most sectors in our District continue to
do reasonably well. Anecdotal evidence is generally positive,
particularly with regard to manufacturers and what they are seeing in
terms of trade and international competitiveness.
It leaves me, at
this point, with very little doubt as to where we are going in that
direction. I'm not sure that this continuing strength in domestic
demand is all to the good at this point, as Bob Black already
commented. As for my view of the national outlook, I'm going to echo
Ed Boehne here to some degree. The Greenbook may be certainly a
satisfactory outlook, and it may be about as good as we can expect.
I
happen to think that we are probably in the midst of this transition
to an economy in which growth will be driven by growth in trade and,
for a time at least, in inventory building and that domestic final
I'm not sure that we can go through this kind
demand will be subdued.
It
of adjustment process, this transition, and avoid a recession.
seems to me that that's a risk that we have to run and that we may not
have much choice about it.
I have been struck that--at least until
what's been happening with OPEC the last several days--the bond
market, as far as I can read it, has been reacting to declines in the
dollar kind of the way it was back in April and May and again in
August and September.
That's one form of the market discipline that
would be foisted upon us if we don't take steps to promote the
transition ourselves, or at least to allow it to occur.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

12/15-16/87

-61-

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, after looking at the
surprisingly strong October-November employment gains, it would seem
that when the stock market decline hit us we had an economy with a
very strong head of steam, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
Perhaps the stock market drop will turn out to be a blessing in
disguise in that it has taken at least a little of the speculative
euphoria out of the system. The only impact we see in New England
from the stock market decline is changed expectations as to the growth
rate of the financial services industry, which had been growing very
rapidly in New England, particularly the mutual fund business.
Looking at the forecast, it seems to me that the risk is that the
economy will grow more rapidly than we are forecasting, particularly
in the business fixed investment sector. I know that the current
quite modest projection is in line with the forecast, as Mike Prell
said. But if we keep moving in the direction of greater utilization
in manufacturing capacity, which I think is in the cards, I wonder
whether the rate of growth of business fixed investment in 1988 may
turn out to be substantially higher. Then we could have a situation
in which the economy is growing faster than we can afford to see it
grow. Maybe we could grow at a 2-1/2 percent rate without generating
acceleration of wage increases. But if growth is much beyond 2-1/2
percent, I think we run the risk of making a fundamental change in
this benign wage environment that we've had. So, I don't see that we
have a lot of room to maneuver here. And I think the risk in the
forecast is that we forecast too low a rate of growth in business
fixed investment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In our District, the real strong point is
employment. Non-ag employment has kept pace with national growth
rates. And we've seen particular strength in manufacturing
employment; in the three months before October, that was up over 4
percent. Construction has been notably weaker in both sectors but for
a long time it was stronger than the rest of the economy. I would say
that the retail sales situation is a little more moderate than
described in other areas. I talked to a major national retailer about
two weeks ago and they were disappointed with their November results.
December started off better, but their profit plan for February
through August has been nudged down significantly; and they're taking
about 10 percent, or $75 million, out of their capital spending plan
for next year which, in a sense, doesn't surprise me. This individual
also mentioned that apparel manufacturers are talking about double
digit price increases for the spring line and he does not see that
that's in the cards at all, based on his outlook of demand. Adding to
what Jerry Corrigan and Gary Stern said about the adjustment process
that Jerry was describing: it seems to me that the big risk--and I'm
talking in the broad sense, not about monetary policy specifically,
though it certainly fits into the picture--is that if we are perceived
as not pursuing underlying policies that are consistent with that
adjustment process, then it will trigger prices in exactly the way Sam
Cross was describing before. As I said at the last meeting, I don't
believe in defending the value of the currency; but the fact of the
matter is that I perceive that we are in a financial situation where
we just don't have a lot of room to ignore it.
I wouldn't put my view
in the context of specifically defending the currency but I do think
that we have to run policies that are consistent with that adjustment
process. That gets back to Ed Boehne's point that we have to be

12/15-16/87

-62-

looking at lower demand growth than we might otherwise be willing to
accept.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the generally healthy Twelfth
District economy has experienced few significant changes since the
stock market decline.
The firms we surveyed indicated that they were
going ahead with planned capital spending projects for next year.
Moreover, retail sales appear to be holding up well, according to
representatives of several major department store chains.
from September to date, which
of course, is the most important part of the Christmas period up to
this point, his sales were up 13 percent. He has had no price
increases so that is basically a volume increase. Evidence from the
mortgage market in our area is mixed but, on balance, activity in the
residential area appears to have weakened slightly in the wake of the
stock market decline.
One little vignette in terms of exports comes
from
a large lumber
company. He said that, unless there is a significant decline in the
demand for lumber domestically, there is no room for further exports
of lumber; capacity in the industry is not going to be added to
significantly for the next two years, and you just can't count on
lumber exports at a higher level unless there is a significant decline
in domestic demands.
Our economic forecast has a little more strength
in activity next year and the same rate of inflation as the Board
staff's forecast. The slowdown that we have in the first half, of
course, is a result of the negative effects of the stock market
decline.
It is important to point out that both our staff's forecast
and that of the Board staff--and I think a lot of the forecasts that
have been mentioned around here--have included a fairly significant
decline in interest rates in conjunction with the slowdown.
It would
also appear that those forecasts imply an easing in policy in the near
term. Now, I want to emphasize the point that the forecasts all
assume the negative effects of the stock market. And it seems clear
to me, at least at this point, that as yet there haven't been any
signs of such slowing.
The second-half pickup, which is a little
stronger in our forecast, results from the dissipation of the adverse
wealth effects.
In addition, the decline in interest rates in the
first half has a role in causing the economy to grow more rapidly in
the second half and, finally, the recent sharp drop in the dollar also
adds strength to the second-half growth rate. Finally, although
short-term prospects for inflation appear comforting, I don't think I
could describe the expectation of 4 percent inflation next year,
following a similar increase this year, as comforting at all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments. A few weeks
ago I met with the chief financial officers of about 125 Fortune 500
companies. One of the things that I asked them about was their
reaction to October 19, both individually and corporate-wise.
Basically, they were sort of frozen in place. They hadn't dealt with
that kind of situation before so they hadn't recommended dramatic
changes in plans to their CEOs nor had they changed their profit
plans. Most of them were right in the middle of the profit-planning
season for 1988.
Because most of them hadn't been through this

12/15-16/87

-63-

experience before--and, unlike us, they didn't have models that would
predict the impact when there hadn't been a similar event--they were
playing it by ear, I would say, and trying to get readings on what the
sales of their companies were doing, and so forth. They were going to
continue to look at them and there might be changes forthcoming; but,
at that point, they were simply not sure.
They said the biggest
As one
impact was on the bonuses and the value of the stock options.
fellow said, one of the biggest shocks was having to get his CEO out
of a board meeting and tell him that their stock had stopped trading
on the New York Stock Exchange. That shook things up quite
dramatically. The one company that really has reacted to this,
though--and I think I mentioned this before--is
They have done such things as: cut back on a major plant modernization
job; pushed the completion date into the future for an addition that
was going on at a similar plant
and delayed a new tech
center they were going to be building out in
Also, they continue to fiddle with their pension plans, building more
liquidity, raising cash, and cutting back on holdings of stock and
also of long bonds.
In addition, they continue to fiddle with their
production schedules. As you know, Ward's announced that the auto
industry as a whole was planning for production for the first quarter
of about 14 percent below the first quarter of this year; but
is making plans that are more pessimistic than that.
Also, I was told
by them that some of the other auto companies probably would be
cutting their first-quarter plans more deeply and that, therefore, the
Ward's number would probably turn out to be a little overly
optimistic. Also, the inventory situation in autos is really, really
severe. As of November 30th, the days' supply was 86 days as compared
At the end of December, they think it will
with 73 days a year ago.
be 98 days.
That certainly is consistent with the idea of cutting
production because these incentives that they have tried to use for
the last year and a half have less and less "oomph" every time they
drag them out.
And so, they just have to do something else. The
final point is that there is great concern about the deterioration in
consumer confidence, looking both at the University of Michigan survey
and also the Conference Board's.
One of the points made to me was
that averaging the results of these two surveys, the latest number
showed the lowest reading in this recovery after registering the
highest level for this recovery in September. So, they are concerned
about what that will do to future consumer purchases of their
products.
If you want a group that isn't rolling in the aisles with
optimism, I would recommend that you talk to some of these people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
The manufacturing side of the Fourth District
is strong and it is strong based on the dollar. From what we can
tell, it is strong in steel, chemicals, and capital goods.
The
emphasis on the customer side has been more on delivery times as
opposed to price, which implies some increase in price of very
[unintelligible] commercial side.
It is very consistent with respect
to not bringing on [line] a lot of old plant; they want to wait a
while longer to see if the demand lasts.
On the retail side, it's
very much the same as everyone else has reported.
Higbee's, May's,
and Federated all have reported strong sales gains since Thanksgiving.
None of the weakness that we've all been anticipating has shown up, to
date.
In terms of the longer-term forecast, we have no really major
differences with the Greenbook forecast.
In terms of the adjustment

12/15-16/87

-64-

process we were talking about, I suspect surprises in the future
rather than disappointments will be on the side of a quicker
adjustment rather than a slower adjustment than we have seen lately.
And the reason for that has to do with what is going on, at least in
some companies, with respect to their profit margins. The profit
margins of foreign companies are being squeezed; they are holding
market share, as everybody has discussed. But they are doing the same
thing that the Americans did six or seven years ago: they are putting
plants in place in domestic markets or buying plants in domestic
So, they are going to suffer a
markets to retain their market share.
profit squeeze for a while, and then they will be up and running with
domestic plant production which would then imply less imports from
abroad.
So, I have some view that the adjustment process, at least as
forced by the marketplace, is going to go a little faster than perhaps
It doesn't mean that we shouldn't
we are expecting at the moment.
worry about the things that Jerry Corrigan and everyone else are
worrying about.
But my emphasis would be that, obviously, we don't
have a lot of control over all of those variables. One we do at least
have some influence on is price stability. And I would find a
consensus around the table for moving more towards zero over the next
four or five years more comforting than 4-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. This is my first time here, and this process is
fascinating. Economic development in the Southeast appears to be very
similar to what I've heard others comment on in the national picture.
Manufacturing and trade-related activity--and in our case that
In Texas
includes textiles and chemicals--clearly are doing better.
and Oklahoma the oil and gas industry is finally showing some signs of
Yet, I think there's a little concern that some of the projects
life.
that are still on the shelf and that haven't been restarted could be
discouraged, or at least put off further, if the price of oil does
fall back or stay at lower levels.
So, that's a minor concern in that
in the paperboard packaging
oil patch of ours.
business, reports backlogs have grown and he can't even shut his
So somebody, somewhere, thinks that
plants for normal maintenance.
business is going to be good. Very much like I've heard others say
around the table, our retailers also report that their sales have come
But we've had a number of people point out
in close to expectations.
that they had scaled back their expectations for the last half of this
year even before mid-October, so I don't think we would use words like
strong. We've even had a few retailers, as Tom Melzer indicated,
point out that they have a little concern about the early part of next
year, after we get past the Christmas season. Finally, with regard to
the region, at our last board meeting a bit of uneasiness about the
early part of next year was expressed from Tennessee, which has become
kind of a mini- Detroit with a lot of automobile and consumer
durables-related businesses. But Tennessee has done well and they are
looking through that and see that it is only a temporary problem with
a little disappointment perhaps in their minds for the early part of
next year.
Nationally, we, too, are comfortable with the Greenbook
forecast; our differences are marginal. We might see modestly less
improvement in the trade deficit but we see the prospects for
manufacturing investment perhaps being even a little stronger than
indicated, as Frank Morris suggested; so, those tend to balance out.

12/15-16/87

-65-

Overall, we are reasonably comfortable that we will get moderate
I am a little concerned that perhaps the downside
growth in 1988.
risk in the early part of next year might be a little stronger than
the upside risk.
I'm
I agree with a lot of the comments.
MR. JOHNSON.
picking up the same thing: that the export side of things is very
strong. You don't hear anyone complaining about orders coming in and
their ability to compete at these exchange rates and the activity of
their businesses at this stage, so I think that on the production side
things do look very solid at the moment. What's starting to trouble
me a little though--and maybe I'm smoking something because I seem to
be a bit out of sync with some of the other views--is certainly not on
the production side right now but on the sales end of things. We got
revisions on October and September retail sales, which were down
considerably and down relative to the Greenbook, if I remember right.
We have revised down the retail sales figures even [for the period]
before the stock market crash; our view of domestic demand is weaker
going into the stock market crash than in fact we thought before,
Now, I agree with everyone else: I haven't
relative to the forecast.
seen the impacts of the stock market decline on consumption at this
Retail sales were actually up modestly in November; automobile
point.
sales seem to be holding up, although that's mainly an incentive
issue. But we haven't seen a really severe hit to domestic
consumption since the stock market crash. What I'm worried about a
little is that we may not quite be seeing it yet but, given the fact
that sales are running below what we anticipated them to be before the
stock market crash, there's a little more downside risk, in my mind.
I think some circumstantial evidence is that we have seen weak credit
demands in November. How you translate that, I don't know; but it's
the first time in a while that we actually have had a decline in
overall credit demands for the month of November.
I don't place a lot of emphasis on the aggregates but the
fact that we are now projecting an actual decline in M1 growth in
December, when we were hoping for an increase, is a little bothersome.
I can't really explain it and I don't want to have just a knee-jerk
reaction, but it bothers me that I can't rationalize it either. So I
think there is some near-term risk, but I agree overall with the
longer-run view that we have to see consumption run lower than we have
in the past to get the adjustment we need. I think the external
adjustment is taking place; exports look very strong, and even
adjusting out oil imports, non-oil imports don't look bad at all. But
my concern is that things don't sneak up on us on the domestic demand
side--that while we are expecting slow domestic demand and we are sort
of looking the other way, the numbers go down sharply. I don't want
to get caught in that side of things. We do have to resist a strong
expansion in domestic demand or we have to have a very conservative
expansion in that area or maybe even almost flat; but that's different
from a sharp decline.
But, once again, I don't see the sales numbers
sharply weaker since the stock market crash.
I'm worried more that we
went into that on the weaker side than we thought.
That's sort of
where I am on the adjustment process. What I'm worried about, though,
is that if we end up with a sharp downward reduction in consumption as
the adjustment mechanism, we're just simply going to replace private
sector demands for financing with public sector demands for financing,
because we are going to see a huge swelling in the budget deficit.
I'm not sure that our needs for foreign capital flows are going to

12/15-16/87

-66-

improve under that adjustment process at all, substituting government
financing needs for private financing needs.
And the interest rate
implications of dependence on foreign sources of capital flows are
pretty scary.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. My outlook and the staff's are very, very
similar. There is only one modification and that is that I see as
strong an economy as the staff sees only without the 1 percentage
point decline in interest rates.
I guess that would mean that I see
an underlying strength of capital spending that would be able to
accomplish the contribution that the staff has laid out even without
getting the interest rate decline. That adjustment, I think, can
still give us strength. There are three uncertainties that we are all
faced with: consumer spending; the impact from net real exports and
the dollar; and the foreign exchange rate/capital market adjustment
problems. Let me mention, first of all, consumer spending.
It seems
to me that the consumer spending effect of the episode of October 19
and the days following is less than the impact of the exchange rate
and interest rate changes that have occurred since then. That is,
consumer spending is not apt to be affected in a worrisome way, given
what has already happened.
If we do not have another event, it seems
to me that, of course, we will have employment effects in some of the
financial service industries and that would be consistent with some
slowdown. But I would note that personal consumption expenditures for
the third quarter 1987 over the third quarter 1986 contributed about
1.5 percent out of a 3.1 percent economy.
So, Jerry, I think this
adjustment you're talking about is really already under way. My view,
Jerry, is that it's helpful to lay out before us, as you did, the kind
of adjustment scenarios. But it seems to me that there's just no
question that these adjustments are going to take place.
We are not
going to be able to operate with the kind of imports of capital and
the kind of balance of trade deficits that we've had; the market is
going to bring some adjustments. The question is whether the
adjustments come in the way we would like them to come or in a way
that would be very unfavorable and maybe close to disaster.
I was
very pleased to hear Tom Melzer, Bob Parry, and Lee Hoskins all
mention the fact that inflation of 4 percent is not satisfactory. Of
course, if we have low wage rates and high inflation rates, that's one
way we could get an adjustment.
I would join them in saying that's
not a satisfactory way of getting an adjustment.
Our real net exports, as you know, have been increasing in a
rather dramatic way.
I guess, Martha, I'd be on the side of calling
the November numbers a fluke or a one-time occurence.
I'm not willing
to rely on that as compared to twelve months of movement in the other
direction. When we look at third-quarter rates of 18 - 19 percent on
real exports, it seems to me that one of the problems we are faced
with is that real exports are growing at such a dramatic rate. We
pick a high [unintelligible] exchange value of the dollar and we say
we don't want to tie monetary policy to that.
I understand why, but
we may have overlooked the fact that that foreign exchange value of
the dollar is producing a real export role and a crowding out of
manufactured imports at a rate that's going to be difficult to
maintain, even given the heavier capital spending taking place there.
So, it seems to me important for us not to make any gesture in the
direction that would tend to exacerbate that problem.
I tend to

12/15-16/87

think, as Jerry Corrigan and Sam Cross and some others do, that that's
the real factor that could give us the recession that everyone is
I don't think it is going to come because of slow
worried about.
money growth. The money growth path that we've had, it seems to me,
It isn't because
is not a Federal Reserve starvation growth pattern.
If that were the case, I think we would see
we shut off reserves.
some other factors occurring: I'm sure that the foreign exchange
markets would show more evidence if we really were being that
stringent on reserves; that the Treasury yield curve would show it;
and that we would be getting some declining commodity prices. But I
do believe that the real risk that we face is a foreign exchange rate
upset that could, in a sense, give us another financial market episode
I understand why the monetarists argue for floating
in equities.
exchange rates, but you just don't get something for nothing. If we
have floating exchange rates, then we'd have to accept floating
interest rates also. And it would scare me as to what a precipitous
Frankly, I
move in exchange rates might do to U.S. interest rates.
think that the stock market episode and the recent oil price move have
simply given our bond markets some opportunity not to face the real
consequences that a continuation of the dollar on this course would
It's in that context that I've been, I suppose, oversensitive
mean.
I'm just
to any tendency on our part to peg the fed funds rate.
afraid to peg the fed funds rate in an environment in which we would
I share the
not have interest rates responding to those real forces.
view that letting the dollar go is a recipe for disaster. We're not
getting the kind of help we ought to be getting on Capitol Hill, but
it seems to me we either have to take some steps in that direction, or
we're going to get an experience that none of us wants.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I was quite surprised to hear the high degree of
optimism from all parts of the country expressed around the table
I was surprised because an awful lot of people talked about
here.
their agreement with the Greenbook. And if you look at the Greenbook,
the next quarter's GNP is down 1.1 percent: consumption is negative;
durables and nondurables are negative; industrial production is down
to a 1.0 percent increase; housing starts and auto sales are at the
Yet everybody is extremely optimistic.
lowest levels since 1983.
MS. SEGER.

[Unintelligible].

MR. HELLER.

Martha hasn't spoken yet?

MR. KELLEY.

I haven't spoken yet.

Well--

MR. HELLER. The optimism is also in contrast to what I would
almost call a barrage of visits and letters that have been coming in
Curiously, many of the
here during the last couple of weeks and days.
remarks by those representing the national associations--often of the
industries that some of you were talking about--were very much on the
pessimistic side. Obviously, we have some problem here of looking at
the trees versus the forest. And, having lived off Coricidin for the
I
last three or four days, I really don't know how to sort it out.
come down with Mike Prell, who says I see a lot of good things and I
see a lot of bad things, and I really don't know which way the
evidence is pointing. But there is a marked contrast between the
optimism that seems to be being picked up in the anecdotal evidence

12/15-16/87

-68-

and the outlook that I would argue is not at all optimistic, according
to the Greenbook. Also, if you look at some of the monetary
statistics, we have a real money supply that has been falling now
since May, and reserves are flat.
So, if all that optimism is out
there, I'm still curious why people don't hold that money. Those are
also some of the remarks I seem to be hearing, at least from our Desk
people. They say, well, the demand for money just isn't there.
So,
I'm puzzled.
Obviously, I hope it will turn out the way the vast
majority here describe it to be, but I think that there are a lot of
reasons for unease in that optimistic outlook, because I think some of
the more macro forces may not be all that sanguine.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Well, I'm glad to follow your speech, Bob,
I have some
because I think I'm coming from very much the same place.
concern, too, because I'm getting somewhat different reports than I'm
hearing around the table this morning.
In fact, the reports I'm
hearing around the table this morning encourage me greatly from where
I was when I came in here. My suspicion is that we are getting this
adjustment, as Governor Angell suggests; and I also suspect that it
may be this very slow aggregate growth and reserve growth that Bob
I'm not confident that
Heller was talking about that's doing it.
retailers are doing that well. The sales I hear about across the
country--when they started and the extent of them--make me wonder how
Indeed, there are a lot of reports coming in from
strong things are.
associations that are not as strong as we are hearing here this
I had a visit from
morning. Martha, you were quoting from
and this fellow is
an economic consultant who works with
that the economy is going to fall off the cliff in
telling
the first quarter on account of the growth in the aggregates.
That
In short, Mr.
may be part of what's going into their planning.
Chairman, to go back to your analogy about plumbing and Bob Black's
comment on it, I wonder if the plumbing may not be beginning to work
again. In any event, I suspect it will work a while before we realize
it is working. Given that the retail economy is as important as it is
to the overall picture, I think that we should be very alert to the
state of the plumbing--what the aggregates are doing and what effects
that may be having. I would be very happy with the staff forecast for
But that's where my concern
1988, and I basically agree with it.
about it would lie.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey, do you want to say

anything?
MR. GUFFEY. Well, it's getting late, Mr. Chairman. I would
just add to the optimism in a sense, particularly from the District
perspective, although we are lagging the national recovery both in
terms of employment gains as well as personal income gains.
Nonetheless, looking back from where we started, in energy,
agriculture, aircraft, and so forth, things are looking much better.
That's particularly true in the agricultural area, where things such
as agricultural real estate values actually have increased in the
second quarter--very modestly to be sure, but nonetheless there is an
increase. Energy rig exploration is something in the neighborhood of
However, given what's happening
35 percent greater than a year ago.
now with the potential fall in the oil prices, I'm not sure that will
continue. With regard to retail sales, the report that we have is

-69-

12/15-16/87

that they are modestly higher, some 5 percent higher, than the same
time last year, with a lot of sales and discounting, which means
volume should be moving through those retail elements. As a result, I
guess I would say we feel better than we did a year ago, and better
The clouds on the horizon might be a drop
than we did six months ago.
in energy prices as the result of OPEC's problems and/or a change in
the agricultural subsidy provisions from the federal government, both
of which would impact the Tenth District. However, looking at 1988,
the latter would suggest that it will be a fairly good year, given
current commodity prices--if they hold up. Agricultural exports are
very encouraging to the people in our area. Those are mostly
government-subsidized exports, I might say, but the inventories that
built up in the last couple of years are being worked off.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we take our break at this time
and continue with Don Kohn's report.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Don, why don't you get started?

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Mr. Kohn. What I would
appreciate everyone doing in the process of expounding your views on
policy is to first address the issue of whether or not we should be
shifting to some other basis, in the context of our discussion
yesterday. What I'd like to do is merely reiterate the four different
options that were outlined yesterday and ask that as part of your
exposition you stipulate where you would like to be in those various
options. As you may remember, option (1) was to retain the current
emphasis at least until markets calm further and borrowing behavior
returns more to normal; (2) was to place even more emphasis on
achieving a predetermined federal funds rate or a narrow range; (3)
was to shift back toward more emphasis on achieving the borrowing
objectives, but with greater flexibility and attention to the federal
funds rate than before October 19th; and finally, (4) was for the
Committee to return to the previous emphasis on borrowing and reserve
In the context of that, it also would be useful
pressure objectives.
to indicate your general view on where you think the funds rate should
be as well as the borrowing objective. Also, in expressing the
borrowing objective, differentiate between the current borrowing
levels, which are subnormal relative to the funds rate, and the normal
borrowing levels so that, in the event the relationships started to
return to normal, the Desk could make the appropriate adjustments in
the context of the wishes of this Committee. At the moment, I would
gather that the abnormal spread is approximately $100 million to $150
million.
I think it'd be fair to say
MR. KOHN. Yes, I think it is.
that the normal borrowing for a funds rate of about 6-3/4 percent
would be in the $400 million area. As we said in the Bluebook, we
expect about $300 million after year-end, allowing for some downward
shift, but not as much as we've been getting recently.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So you'd say it's a $100 million shift?

-70-

12/15-16/87

MR. KOHN. After year-end. Right now I'd say it's probably
closer to $200 million, but I'm guessing that some of that is saved up
for year-end.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I have a question.
If we specify
what we want the level of the fed funds rate to be will that then go
into the minutes?
I'm assuming that if we come up with a fed funds
level that it would be appropriate for that to be in the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it will depend, I think, on the
answer to the first question. If it is the consensus of the Committee
to target the funds rate--if we go with, say, either option (1) or
(2)--then I think probably that's appropriate.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
suspect not.
MR. ANGELL.

If we go with option

(3) or (4),

I would

I agree with you.

MR. JOHNSON.
target last time.

How was it done last time?

We went to a funds

MR. KOHN. Well, we did it sort of by analogy with the
borrowing. We never mentioned the borrowing specifically in the
policy record.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
It sounds like we didn't go quite
as far as we apparently went, either.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, I agree.

I didn't think we--

We didn't mention a specific funds rate.

MR. PARRY. I think it would be a real mistake to indicate
that we're following a funds target for the short term because I think
it will really confuse the market, particularly if we intend to switch
when things become more normal in a couple of weeks.
I think handling
it the way we did before is a better -CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, I misspoke.

I really meant if we

did (2).
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We actually did option (1) and we didn't
put the funds rate [in the policy record].
So it's only if the
Committee chooses option (2) that I think it will require that.
MR. ANGELL.
I wouldn't agree with that.
If we do (1),
seems to me that we would have to report that in the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do this.
see what evolves, and then we'll deal with it.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

it

Let's actually

And then we'll look at that question.

12/15-16/87

-71-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just open up by commenting that
in listening to this discussion I was surprised, in a way, about the
spread that exists between the Board members on the one hand and the
I suspect that's a short-term phenomenon
presidents on the other.
because the real world is going to impinge on us very shortly and push
I must admit I'm
us together. The trick is to figure out where.
somewhat surprised at the strength of the economy. You can see it in
the orders and you can see it in the burgeoning capital goods markets,
which in many respects have been getting less emphasis here than the
retail sales figures because in one respect, it's pretty easy to
forecast retail sales.
They're going to be dull and the reason
they're going to be dull is that the saving rate is very low and it's
very difficult to come up with an optimistic scenario on retail sales
Fine tuning the Christmas selling
no matter how you play the game.
season I find is a wonderful experience fraught with failure. The
Unlike the numbers for
reason is that customers go to the best deal.
capital goods orders which, if you get a sample of five or six major
capital goods producers in a particular industry no matter where they
are in the country, would all look the same because they're
arbitraged; retail sales don't arbitrage. You don't get the same
retail sales pattern in Boise as you do in Atlanta and as a
consequence, you need a very large sample. What all of the data
suggest to me is that none of us has been able at any time in the preChristmas season to get enough of a sample to give us a really good
judgment.
I suspect no matter how Christmas comes out, it's going to
surprise us, either plus or minus. And we really won't know what
In any event, I think
Christmas sales were until February, probably.
we have to assume that the retail markets are dull and that basically
nothing is going to happen there.
The crucial issue is going to continue to be the basic plant
It's becoming fairly obvious why the stock
and equipment numbers.
market has not had the effect that a lot of us were concerned it
might.
I guess the best way [to describe it] is to draw the analogy
of the market going up 500 points in one day then going down 500
points the next day; it's unlikely to affect anybody's behavior.
I
think we're all aware of the fact that if we had had a 500 point drop
back to levels of 5 years earlier, we would have had some really
significant effect. But the issue is that we have wiped out a
substantial amount of unrealized gains; what we were not aware of was
that nothing was heavily committed; the extent of leveraging against
the stock market gains was apparently really not all that large.
I
think that's the answer, but I must say at the moment that I feel
uncomfortable with it.
I still do not believe we are out of the woods
on the market; I don't think all of the yield spreads have gotten back
to where they were. All objective measures of stock market levels
suggest that, if anything, we are still above normal and that we are
vulnerable to a significant decline.
Consequently, even though under
normal circumstances I would say that in this type of environment we
probably should be in something of a tightening mode, if rates go up
under these conditions I suspect the stock market would go down, and
I'm fearful of the extent of that particular decline.
On the other
side of this, I feel uncomfortable about the money supply figures
mainly because, as Governor Kelley said, we don't know when the
plumbing will be hooked back in and something could give at some point
before we know it. More importantly, despite the 4-1/2 percent
inflation rate, the debt levels, the aggregate levels, are all
performing reasonably well now even though the Ms are all over the

12/15-16/87

-72-

place. If we take the oil price decline realistically, I think
inflation is in the process of easing. So, on the other side of this,
one could argue--and I'm sure a number of you will--that we should be
easing from here. But, if we ease from here in the context of still
soft exchange rates, I'm fearful that the system will crack, with the
huge holdings of dollar-denominated assets in the world. Despite the
heavy central bank accumulation, those holdings actually have never
been other than a net plus for the private sector of the world. If we
ever had private holders starting to try to liquidate, I think the
effect would be a real free fall that could bring the stock market
down and that would crash us.
So, between Scylla and Charybdis, I
sort of come out for alternative "B".
MS. SEGER. May I just ask one question about what Don said
these new numbers were for the aggregates in December?
I didn't hear
what--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.
MR. KOHN.

They were revised down.

I heard him say revised down, but I didn't hear-The December aggregates--is that what you're

asking?
MS. SEGER.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. We're now looking at about a -4 percent on M1.
That is composed of a further drop of about 16 percent in demand
deposits and a small rise in other checkable deposits. And we have
about a 2-1/2 to 3 percent increase in M2. Some of the revision to M2
is not only this demand deposit drop showing through, but the
overnight RPs and Eurodollars also came in quite weak. That's a
highly volatile series, so I'm not sure how much emphasis I'd put on
that. The household parts of M2--the bank and thrift savings and time
deposits and money market funds--don't look much different than they
did last week.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I also would favor "B".
I would define that as
a $400 million borrowings target. In my mind, that's where we were
and what we've done since then was really to accommodate the special
conditions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

This is on the normal part.

MR. MELZER. On the normal relationship. I would expect that
to be associated with a 7 percent funds rate and I would be
symmetrical in terms of the language. As to the other--I guess I
should have done that first--I would favor alternative (4).
I
wouldn't go back to it abruptly; I think I'd use the year-end as a
cover, but I would get back to that relatively promptly. I really
don't know what (3) means.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Three means to give discretion to Peter.

-73-

12/15-16/87

MR. MELZER.

I like Peter, but I think I like number (4)

better.
MR. BLACK.

How about Peter in consultation with the

Chairman?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative (3) and probably would
move in that direction after year-end. With regard to the
alternatives, if I were to follow the analysis of my staff and that in
the Greenbook, I think it would lead to a recommendation that monetary
policy soon be eased in response to a significant expected slowing of
the economy in the first half of next year and the accompanying
declines in interest rates. However, to date, I haven't seen the
signs of the negative effects of the stock market decline.
Consequently, I would support alternative "B" with asymmetrical
language providing us with the flexibility to ease before the next
FOMC meeting should that become necessary. With regard to the
specifics of the funds rate and the borrowing, I'm completely
satisfied with the work that the staff has done in the Bluebook. It
seems to me that the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent funds rate is reasonable.
In light of what we've seen with regard to the demand for borrowings,
I also would accept their $300 million borrowing number, expecting
that it probably would be below that between now and year-end.
Conceivably, we could get to the $400 million level after that, but I
don't know how fast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I'm essentially for "B" but a bit split as far
as the timing is concerned, maybe along the lines that Bob Parry was
just talking about. Through the year-end, and as long as the dollar
is under pressure, I would stick to the fed funds rate at 6-3/4
percent. If the pressure on the dollar eases, and once we get through
the choppy weather of the year-end, I would switch more towards a (3)
type policy with emphasis on the borrowing again. I would be
asymmetrical in the easing direction, too, so that might allow the fed
funds rate to drop a bit. Probably a normal borrowing target of $300
million would be appropriate for that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
consistent.
MR. HELLER.

Actually, that is three that would be

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I'm for alternative "B" with normal borrowing of
around $300 million, which would give us a federal funds rate
presumably of 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent. I would prefer a symmetrical
directive and --

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sorry, that was symmetrical?

MR. BOEHNE. Yes, symmetrical. And I like option (3) in
terms of implementation. As to whether one begins the process before
year-end or starts after that, I think that's a judgment call. One

-74-

12/15-16/87

can't make that call at this point and I think we're going to have to
let Peter and the Chairman decide that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I'd take "B" and I would want the normal
borrowing, which I guess would be $400 million after the first of the
year. I will not mention any fed funds rate.
I want no tilt and I
want (4) just like Tom Melzer. But I do think if we're going to do
(4) that we might consider an announcement.
Someone mentioned
yesterday that we might make a very simple statement indicating that
we were reemphasizing adjustment plus seasonal borrowing so that the
markets would not assume that we had made a policy move.
MR. JOHNSON.

Symmetric or asymmetric language with that did

you say?
MR. ANGELL. I want no tilt.
MR. JOHNSON.

No tilt, I'm sorry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I, too, would favor the specifications of
alternative "B", although I'm a little uncertain about exactly what
normal borrowings means in this context. Let me come to that.
In
terms of implementation, I would prefer alternative (3).
My guess
would be that we might as well start around the turn of the year and
use that as a cover because I don't think we're going to have much
choice. There's a chance that the markets are going to do something
unusual.
There will either be pressure or maybe a lot of excess
I don't
reserves around, depending on how people position themselves.
think we want to sit there and work real hard to try to offset all
that.
But it seems to me to be a logical time, maybe an unavoidable
time, to start. As I said, whether the borrowing that would be
associated with that is $300 million or $400 million, I'm really not
quite sure.
I would start with the intention of keeping the federal
funds rate roughly where it has been; but as the period develops,
obviously, I wouldn't expect that it was going to stay there
precisely. And I would prefer a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
I guess I'd go with alternative "B", with some
reluctance, over the concern about the aggregates and the continual
downward revisions.
That causes me some concern about going forward.
Obviously, the optimism we see right now is related to some events
that have already happened, if we believe in lags.
So, I'm concerned
about going forward.
If we're going to look at an aggregate, I would
try to pay a lot of attention to M2 and whether we're going to get the
growth there or not.
If we get continued shortfalls in that, then I'd
be concerned more than I would be otherwise.
I'd want to go with
option (4) if we're going to use the announcement.
I don't see any
reason not to announce to the markets that we're making a change.
We're sitting here looking for year-end cover and all that kind of
thing; it seems to me we can get where we want to be very quickly with
less misinformation or miscues by making an announcement.
If we're

-75-

12/15-16/87

not going to do that, then I'd worry a little more about markets and
go with option (3).
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Symmetrical, and $400 million borrowing.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

$400 million?

That's as good a guess as I can come up with.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Symmetrical?

No funds rate?

7 percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I would go with option (3) and begin the
I'd go with alternative "B" and
movement when it seems appropriate.
I would assume that it
probably a $300 million borrowing assumption.
could be adjusted up the same way it was adjusted down in the interim
And I would have symmetric language.
between our meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
funds rate?
MR. BOYKIN.

Do you want to say anything about the

About where it is now.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would maintain our basic policy
stance that's indicated by a federal funds rate centered on 6-3/4
percent. I think we ought to continue the present operating
procedures for the period immediately ahead but I'd like to take
advantage of some of these year-end pressures to allow the funds rate
Then as we move into
to begin to move around a bit more than it has.
the new year, I'd like to go to alternative (3) whether or not there's
I
an announcement effect, as indicated in Don's and Peter's memo.
guess that would call at that time for about $400 million in
borrowing. I would keep the asymmetrical language unless we remove
the sentence that says, "still sensitive conditions in the financial
markets."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
symmetrical or what?

So, you're saying you would stay with

MR. BLACK. No, I'm saying I would keep it asymmetric, as it
now is, unless we remove the reference to still sensitive conditions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd also be in favor of alternative
"B".
With regard to the other four alternatives, I kind of like all
of them in proper order other than alternative (2) which I do not
Certainly between now and the end of the year, I think it would
like.
be appropriate to keep current procedures in place until we are
satisfied that we've come out of that particular adjustment period;
then I would shift to alternative (3) but lean toward alternative (4).

12/15-16/87

-76-

Specifically, a fed funds between now and the end of the year at 6-3/4
to 6-7/8 percent would be appropriate, with a borrowing level not
unlike what we have now. But I think as we come out of that year-end
period, we would want to get back toward alternative (3) and then move
from alternative (3) to alternative (4) with a borrowing level of
about $400 million. I wouldn't necessarily want to judge a federal
funds rate that would be appropriate for that borrowing level; I'd
rather let the market determine what would be appropriate.
In terms
of the language, I would be in favor of symmetric language. But I'd
also pick up on the same directive language that Bob Black mentioned
I think that phrase ought
with regard to sensitive market conditions.
to be dropped and I would use symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I like Si Keehn's concept of
moving in the right order from (1) to (3) to (4).
I would go to (3)
after the first of the year, moving toward (4) later on. And I would
encourage some sort of an announcement at a proper time.
I favor
alternative "B" with probably a $300 million borrowing target and
asymmetric language on the easing side.
I'd keep the funds rate about
where it has been, calling that 6-3/4 percent, tending on the downside
rather than the upside from there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Thinking back to the market reactions early in
December when the fed funds rate passed 7 percent going north, I'm
convinced that market participants are very sensitive to what happens
to the fed funds rate on particular days.
So, I would prefer, shortterm anyway, to stick with option (1) which really watches the funds
rate very carefully. If there's a decision to tighten that's one
thing; but if there isn't, then I think the message that comes from a
fed funds rate hitting 7 percent or higher is one of tightness and I'd
be now very cautious about that.
Eventually, I certainly would be
willing to go (3) or even (4), but I don't think that now is the time
to do it.
And it may not even be the time to do it until we get to
the February meeting.
In terms of the choices facing us here, I guess
I'm going to be a nonconformist and go with "A", which gives us a
slight easing.
I certainly hope that the exports stay very strong but
I just feel that there is some risk there. Also, I remember how
difficult it has been in the past to read consumption events and
consumer behavior. It seems to me it was back in 1980, when I wasn't
here but some of you may have been, when the credit controls were put
on in March of 1980 because consumer demand was so terribly strong.
Of course, later on we learned that we were already in a recession.
And I think back in 1974 a similar thing happened when we handed out
"WIN" buttons and that encouraged people to slice up their credit
cards and so forth only to find again that we were already in the
recession. So, I am really concerned about misreading the retail
sales reports.
We're all hearing different stories--some of strength,
others of weakness. And consumption is a big chunk of GNP, as we all
know; so I think there is some risk here.
I also feel that maybe
there's more of an inventory problem out there than we have yet
identified. And I'm impressed with the fact that the inflation
numbers look far better than any of us thought they would if we go
back to our discussions in the spring or even in the summer.
I think
inflation psychology has simmered down. The Dick Hoey survey, which I

-77-

12/15-16/87

didn't believe then and probably shouldn't now, nevertheless, for
those who follow it, does show some cut in the inflationary
expectations going forward. So, I think that's good. I'm not a
monetarist but I am paying close attention to what's happening to the
reserves and the monetary aggregates; and I think that is something to
be slightly concerned about. Having said all that, I would like to go
with the modest easing identified as alternative "A".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What's the borrowing with that?

MS. SEGER. Well, because of the sloppiness of the
relationships, I'm not sure what that would be. I guess I would just
concentrate on a fed funds rate of somewhere between 6-1/2 and 6-3/4
percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think you're right that, at
least temporarily, we're really locked into a no-change policy, which
I would interpret as alternative "B".
I would make the directive
symmetric. With regard to operating procedures, I would stay with our
current stance of trying to stabilize the funds rate over the next few
weeks in the 6-3/4 - 6-7/8 percent area. But once the Desk has
concluded that the year-end adjustment is over and the relationships
appear to be moving back toward normality, I would move to option (4),
our pre-October 19 operating procedure, with a borrowing level of $300
million.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I would choose alternative "A", I think, if I
weren't somewhat concerned about the potential effect on the exchange
rate and the fragility of the financial markets right now. I still
lean that way, but I guess I would be happy with something like
alternative "B", with asymmetric language toward ease if events unfold
in support of that. Like Frank Morris, I would prefer current
operating procedures in terms of emphasizing the funds rate. So, I'd
support alternative (1) until we see a stable relationship develop.
Once we see that, I'm for going back to our old procedures. In other
words, I'd stay with (1) and, when we are sure that we are back to a
traditional relationship, go to (4).
So, I'm at alternative "B", with
the 6-3/4 - 6-7/8 percent range on the funds rate, and asymmetric
language. I have no real borrowing number because I don't see how we
can decide on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I have a multitude of problems.

My

first problem is that, going back to the last meeting, I frankly did

not realize, or did not fully appreciate at the time of the meeting,
how far we seem to have gone in terms of an operating strategy that so
narrowly pegs the federal funds rate, as indeed emerged over the
period. It may be that I missed the nuances of the discussion, but I
certainly didn't view policy quite in that strict light of literally
resisting even one-eighth of a percentage point wiggles in the federal
funds rate. As I said yesterday, that approach to policy, even on a
very short-term basis, is one that I find very, very troubling. So,
on the strategy question, I would favor going back to (4) as fast as

12/15-16/87

-78-

possible. I don't think I would condition that on a stable
relationship because there has never been one and never will be one.
The whole idea is that part of what we're providing is room for the
market itself to play a role in the process. So, moving back to (4)
promptly is something that I put some importance on. I don't want to
beat a dead horse here, but it seems to me that doing so at year-end
is the perfect way to do it. The Chairman could say in testimony or
in the question and answer [session] at the end of this week that we
expect, as always, some volatility or churning in the markets at yearend, so don't read any policy significance into it, because there's
none there. In my judgment, that provides the easiest way to get back
to (4), but I think that is your call, Mr. Chairman. If you prefer to
do it otherwise, I could live with (3) over the next couple of weeks.
But getting stuck on something like what current policy has turned out
to be would be a very big mistake, I think.
As far as the basic thrust of policy is concerned, were it
not for the proximity to October 19th, I would actually favor
tightening policy right now on the grounds that I regard the current
exchange market situation as perilous. I recognize that there are
risks on both sides. The exchange market could trigger a blowout in
the stock market; or, the other way around, a blowout in the stock
market could trigger a blowout in the exchange market. But what lies
beneath both of those concerns, at least in my judgment, is a great
deal of agnosticism or skepticism or cynicism about the thrust of U.S.
economic policy in general. And I don't think that is going to go
away very easily. However, I can't ignore October 19th, and I don't
want to throw out the baby with the bath water, so I could live with
an alternative "B" that would have borrowings, depending upon what we
want to do with the strategy question, at $400 million, at least after
the year-end. I would associate that with a federal funds rate
roughly in the range of recent experience, but I would define recent
experience in somewhat broader terms than an eighth-of-a-point spread.
On the language of the directive, I have no trouble with a directive
that is asymmetric toward easing in a context in which the pattern of
economic statistics is distinctly weak. On the other hand, I would
strongly favor a directive that is at least potentially asymmetric to
tighten if we run into another rout in the exchange market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's basically symmetric.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's not because if the
circumstances are not significant-MR. ANGELL. But, you could say it symmetrically both ways.
You could say that if your weakness-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I know [unintelligible].
In other
words, it's not the list of items that we have to determine how we are
going to behave; and we have both of those in the instructions.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The difference is that the only
condition under which I would be willing to ease would be because of
the economy itself. The ideal order [in the directive language is a
In other words, I wouldn't be persuaded by-problem].

-79-

12/15-16/87

I understand what you are saying. The
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
only argument seems to be, I would assume, that everyone who was
talking about symmetry would not have the same problem.
MR. ANGELL.

Do you want a tilt to tightness?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, he doesn't.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No. The condition under which I
would tilt to ease is only one and that is decisive weakness and
evident weakness-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Evident weakness.

But all of us who favor symmetry would have

that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

No, that's not what this says.

Well, we can get the directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The directive says: depending on the
strength of the business expansion, indications of inflationary
pressures, developments in foreign exchanges as well as the behavior
of the monetary aggregates.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I've always interpreted that to mean
you'd ease depending upon any one of those.
MR. ANGELL.

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I've always interpreted it to mean
that each individual who talked about asymmetry would be willing to
tighten or ease depending on how any of those four behaved.
MR. ANGELL.

Correct.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I can't seriously believe that we'd all
put the same weight on all those variables; it's inconceivable.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm naive as a newcomer.

That's my point.

Yes, I've always assumed that--unless

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I get hung up on the language, so
let me stress the point that I'm trying to make. Under what
conditions would I be willing to tighten?
There are several
conditions under which I would be willing to tighten: the exchange
market or strong economic numbers or a buildup in inflation or-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the economy.

But only one in which you would ease:

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But only one where I would be
willing to ease.
That's the distinction I'm trying to make.
That's a
long-winded "B".

-80-

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm going to put you down as symmetric

because that's the way I interpret it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, we'll see what the language

says.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Basically, I favor no change in policy at this
time, although I must confess that I have a nagging gut feeling that
we could be in for a little disappointment in growth in 1988.
Because

of that, I have a very mild preference to tilt the directive very
gently to suggest that we would ease more quickly than we would
tighten. I don't profess, after one meeting, to know whether
maintaining policy is $300 million to $400 million borrowing in normal
times. I, too, would favor shifting back at the first opportune time
to targeting borrowings rather than fed funds. If that can be
accomplished around year-end, I would be in favor of that. I assume
that would imply some tolerance of more fluctuations in the fed funds
rate, but I would not want to let the fed funds rate gyrate to a great
extent over year-end. We have a great deal invested in trying to keep
things calm and stable; if that means stretching out the adjustment
back to borrowings into next year, I'd be in favor of that.
Guffey.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that we're missing President
Do you want to give us a summary?

MR. GUFFEY. Well, the summary would be very short.
I would
favor alternative "B", with a symmetric directive. With respect to
the operating procedures, like several others, I would like to move to
alternative (4) as quickly as possible. I'd do it under the cover of
the year-end uncertainty. Alternative (3) has some attractiveness to
me, but it seems to me that this Committee ought to be making the
decisions rather than putting that burden upon you, Mr. Chairman, and
Peter on a day-to-day basis. As a result, I think alternative (4)
ultimately is where we should be. And with regard to alternative "B",
I'd associate that with a federal funds rate in the range of 6-3/4 to
7 percent, with whatever borrowing is commensurate with that, which I
assume would be around $350 million to $400 million.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I add these numbers up, there's a
majority for (3), and alternative "B" with $300 million borrowing
seems to be prevalent. There's one alternative "A" and, in this type
of analysis, I'd put that as asymmetric to ease, which makes four. So
we come out with symmetric language on "B". We didn't specify the
directive range on the funds rate but I would read that, to the extent
that it's relevant, as 4 to 8 percent. Is that what we had? Do you
read that pretty much the same?
MR. ANGELL.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The language for the operational
paragraph then reads:
In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of
pressure on reserve positions.
MR. KOHN.

It should say the existing degree.

-81-

12/15-16/87

MR. BERNARD.

The existing--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Several

individuals, but not all,

raised the question about that "still sensitive" portion. In view of
the fact that most did not, I infer that that was acceptable. Those
of you that did not mention it and would prefer that that be deleted,
I would appreciate your speaking up.
If not, I will assume that the
sentence remains as is.
MR. ANGELL. We could take the "still sensitive" out and
leave the "uncertainties" in. It seems to me you might leave in the
reference that uncertainties may call for a special degree of
flexibility; that would be consistent with (3) rather than (4).
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In what sense do you mean? The words
still sensitive imply a bit more emphasis on certain fragilities.
There are always uncertainties in the economic outlook. I don't think
the word uncertainties captures it. It is saying something different.
I inferred from what I was hearing that there was no objection to that
remaining in, although a couple people did raise the question. I want
to make certain that it wasn't inadvertence that-MR. ANGELL.

Well, I didn't mention it and I would like it

out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Let's quickly run down the
members of the Committee and poll on this. Just say in or out.
MR. BERNARD.

Vice Chairman Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's hard to answer that question
without knowing what else is going to be in. I guess I'd say out.
MR. BERNARD.
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

In
In
In
In
Out
In
In
In
Well, the "Ins" clearly have it.

You were correct, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One never knows.
[The language would
read]: "The Committee recognizes that still sensitive conditions in
financial markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may
continue to call for a special degree of flexibility in open market
operations. Taking account of conditions in financial markets"--I
would tentatively read that as "somewhat lesser reserve restraint
would or somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable
depending on the strength of the business expansion, indications of
inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, as
well as the behavior of the monetary aggregates. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and

-82-

12/15-16/87

M3 over the period from November through March at annual rates of
about--"
What are we using for these?
MR. KOHN.

About 5 and 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

"5 and 6 percent, respectively.

Over

the same period, growth in M1 is expected to remain relatively
limited. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated

with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8
percent."
MS. SEGER. But is that really what's going on?
broad range in there and it sounds-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We put this

We have that question at virtually every

meeting.
MS. SEGER.

Oh, I know that.

For 3-1/2 years I've--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we were targeting federal funds, I
would say that would be irrelevant. The trouble is that in this
context everyone is used to that language and I'm not sure they take
it very seriously any more. If we were to change it, it might be a
slippery thing.
MS. SEGER. I was just wondering whether there couldn't be
some way to suggest that there might be situations where consultations
would be helpful even if the fed funds rate were in the range.
Governor.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's generally implicit,
If such a situation arises, I think the Chairman would

call--

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, if we're going to (3), and that
does involve a transition, it seems to me that we do not know at this
point how the $300 million on borrowing that we've specified will turn
out. Would it be appropriate for a telephone conference call to take
place at the first of the year to get a better feel of that so that we
would not have eased inadvertently in going to that number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, (3) itself has language in it
that provides for increasing flexibility on the borrowing level, as I
read it. Is that correct?
MR. KOHN.

Well, increasing flexibility around the funds

rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Using a borrowing objective?

MR. KOHN. Right. It does still suggest that the Desk would
be attempting to hit the borrowing number but would be willing to
adjust if it looked like the relationship were way out of whack.
MR. ANGELL. In other words, if the fed funds rate were
moving down decidedly, you might not pursue the borrowing objective as
precisely as you did before October 19?

-83-

12/15-16/87

MR. KOHN.

Well, as the Manager saw that that was consistent

with market conditions-MR. ANGELL. But you would be pursuing the borrowing as your
primary operating strategy?
MR. KOHN.

I see (3) as moving in that direction.

MR. ANGELL. Yes. Now, my question relates to the transition
from where we are to that. If the transition entails an acceptance of
$300 million of borrowing and that turns out to be easier than we
thought, would it be appropriate for us to have a conference call?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it probably would. Even though
we have what seems to be relatively firm language here, we are in an
environment in which the potential volatility that exists is far
greater than normal. And I think it is incumbent upon us to seek
guidance from the Committee if something rather different than what is
currently in the economic environment or the financial environment
begins to emerge. It's quite possible that when we get into the
beginning of the year things will look different. If so, I would say
that some sort of consultation would be desirable and advisable.
I had a similar
MR. MELZER. Could I ask a question?
question last time. How will the policy record reflect what happened
here? I think some people interpret the $300 million as kind of where
we were and as no change in policy; others interpret it as a change in
policy in that we're moving the borrowing target down from $400
million to $300 million, albeit under that flexibility arrangement.
If somebody reads the policy record next time and the directive talks
about the existing degree of reserve restraint, where does it get
memorialized that the degree of reserve restraint was changed, if in
fact it was? How will that be read?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, it really wasn't changed.

No, it hasn't been changed.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It wasn't changed, but the particular
borrowing objective number came about largely because as the Desk read
the directive in conjunction with our appraisal, which was pretty much
the same--although I guess it's different from Jerry's--the emphasis
was on the funds rate and secondarily on the borrowing target. Thus,
when the divergence occurred, we stayed with the funds rate as
distinct from the borrowing target. But in no way was the Desk trying
to [unintelligible] what was inferred and was the directive of this
Committee as the extent of pressure in the markets.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Leaving that aside for a minute, I
interpret the combination of a consensus for number (3) and the
consensus to leave in that second sentence on still sensitive
conditions in the context of your remarks still to be consistent with
an operating strategy (3) and a prompt move to (4).
That, in turn,
means that before we get to $400 million on borrowing we are not, even
in the next couple of days or weeks, slavishly seeking a federal funds
rate of 6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well done.

-84-

12/15-16/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That's correct.

What you're saying

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. MELZER.
assumption?

Pardon me?
[unintelligible].

Okay.

What would be the equilibrium borrowing

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way: If the
relationship between the funds rate and borrowing objectives goes back
to where it was, I would interpret this to mean $400 million, not $300
million.
MR. ANGELL. Okay.
MR. MELZER.

Fine.

MR. HELLER. Then borrowing at $400 million could be
associated with fed funds trading above 6-3/4 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If it worked the way we thought it
would work, that would not be the result.
MR. HELLER.
MS.

SEGER.

MR. ANGELL.

It would not be the case.

Okay.

What if it does come to that?
Well, it does;

and if it goes below it, it goes

below.
MR. HELLER. Well, there was quite a consensus, though not a
total consensus, for symmetry; there was a very substantial minority
that was asymmetrical toward easing. Implicit in that view was [an
understanding] that the fed funds rate would come down from the 6-3/4
percent level rather than go up as we move to a borrowing target.
That was implicit, at least in my mind.
MR. ANGELL.

That wasn't a majority though, was it?

MR. HELLER. No, but which way are you moving?
As you get up
to the 6-3/4 percent and you move to a borrowing target we all figure
that the 6-3/4 percent is associated roughly with $300 million, right?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HELLER.
$300 million--

Currently.

Currently.

And, as you move toward the

MR. ANGELL. Let me ask a question. I thought we had assumed
it to be $300 million before the end of the year, but would assume it
to be maybe $400 million after the end of the year.
Is that right,
Don?
MR. KOHN. No, I don't think so, Governor Angell.
Peter and
I had extensive conversations on this, I would add, and we were
equally uncertain about it.
But our presumption was that some, but

-85-

12/15-16/87

not all, of the reluctance to borrow would go away because we still
would have a sensitive economic environment. We would have the Bank
of Boston situation and a lot of things going on which might make
banks a little reluctant to be seen at the discount window. So, our
presumption was that $200 million was more appropriate now and that
would rise to $300 million after the end of the year; but there would
still be a margin below the $400 million.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I think Tom Melzer has a very good point:
that the FOMC has not voted at any time to take an easing step and we
ought not to get a translation of this into an easing step without a
vote to ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I think you're
If the issue becomes ambiguous and if,
correct in raising the issue.
in fact, Peter and Don are wrong about the judgment as to where the
relationship between borrowings and funds would be at the end of the
year, in order to make a judgment with respect to how it is played
then I think it would be advisable to come back to the Committee for a
judgment at that point.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Good.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Just a footnote on Don's comment: If it
turns out that a number of banks borrow on December 31, on that long
weekend, that could throw the borrowing number for that particular
period into-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way: I will stipulate
further that the judgment as to whether that is happening is yours.
MR. MELZER.

He likes you too, Peter.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Today--oh, yes, a good point.
context, how do you read the issue you raised about--

In this

I feel satisfied that with the $300 million to
MR. ANGELL.
$400 million that we not go through the process of mentioning it in
I would not have felt satisfied before because there are
the minutes.
people in the market who do read these minutes on a belated basis very
carefully, and I would feel a responsibility that if we ever make such
a move that we should let the markets know. I believe the markets
work best when people have accurate information.
MR. JOHNSON.

If we make it into what?

MR. GUFFEY. Well, this number doesn't appear in the policy
record or the directive; it's not in either one.
MR. MELZER.

No, but the language on reserve restraint--

MR. GUFFEY.
borrowing target.

Yes, but it only talks about the level of the

MR. ANGELL.
this specification.

No,

I feel satisfied that it's not the end under

-86-

12/15-16/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
get a vote on the directive?

Peter is

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[unintelligible]

this.

Can we

Can I just ask one other question?

Go ahead.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I want to come back to this dollar
business--not that it's necessarily directly relevant to the vote, but
let me raise the question anyway. In the circumstances that we face
right now we literally have risks all over the table. And everybody
is talking about this.
There are very few things that we can
influence directly, but I continue to be deeply concerned about our
ability to have any constructive influence on any of this so long as
it is perceived to be the policy of the Federal Reserve on the one
hand and the United States Government on the other hand to be
indifferent, to the point of embarrassment almost, about the exchange
rate in the circumstances that we face right now. If there is
anything that can be done--through G-7, G-5, G-10, or any other
mechanism available--to try to stabilize that situation, that is
something I want to be strongly associated with.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What specifically do you have in mind?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Do you mean if I had my druthers?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No.
What I'm trying to ask is: Do you
mean some joint venture by the G-7 in which the basic purpose is in
that direction?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's correct.

MR. ANGELL. Do you mean specifically the use of monetary
policy to add to exchange rate stability?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That was the point I was making
before. That's implicit here under certain circumstances, but I don't
think that's enough. I think what is needed is going to have to go
beyond that.
MS. SEGER.
a little confused.

Are you talking about a discount rate hike?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
MS. SEGER.

I'm

No.

No, Jerry's talking about fiscal policy.
I thought you meant monetary policy.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm also saying that I do think
there are things that can be done in the G-7 context that would be
compatible with that objective. And unless, or until, there is some
movement in that direction, the risks that we are running in terms of
these massive unfunded liabilities constitute, in my view, the largest
single risk of the many risks that are in front of us right now. And
if push comes to shove, whether it's monetary policy or not, the
answer is going to come in the form of higher interest rates with or

-87-

12/15-16/87

without monetary policy. What I'm trying to avoid is getting there
the hard way. There's no choice here.
I agree that
MR. JOHNSON. You say unfunded liabilities.
they are unfunded to the extent that they're financing the deficit for
consumption purposes. They're not unfunded if they're private sector
investments; they are funded.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Prospectively, they're unfunded.

If there's a rate of return included in the
MR. JOHNSON.
interest rate it's not unfunded.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the vote that we're--

Let me ask you this:

Is this relevant to

It's relevant to my reservations
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
about the vote, yes. Even though I have to vote-MR. ANGELL.

You're just talking about what the minutes say

then?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

You're not talking about the minutes?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

No, I'm--

I don't care about the minutes.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I asked is that we can have a
formal discussion on this if you want.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Fine.

Let's vote.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Do you want to reopen this?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as I see it, we're on a
tightrope and I'm at the point where I think that a real effort should
By that I mean that
be made to try to stabilize the exchange market.
the dollar has gone down enough. What policy tools are available to
The problem is damn few. We're not going to get anything
do that?
more on the fiscal side or elsewhere. We could tighten monetary

-88-

12/15-16/87

policy, including raising the discount rate, but that entails all
these risks in terms of both the real and the financial sides of the
economy. Or we could try to paste together some kind of a Louvre II
agreement backed up perhaps by using swaps or some foreign currency
borrowings. But I'm dubious that that by itself, without some kind of
policy initiative, would be convincing. On the other side of the
coin, if the skepticism about policy continues and if we have a
renewed run on the dollar, it seems to me that that's going to produce
precisely the kinds of things that we're all so afraid of, including a
further break in the stock market. And that's the dilemma. But in
order to solve that dilemma, there has to be some movement someplace.
And I ask where?
And this is the thrust of my argument: that at this
point some of that movement has to come from the United States. As I
said, there are several ways to do it; but with the vulnerabilities
that I see right now, it is a very high-risk approach and I don't like
it.
I think it's very dangerous.
MR. ANGELL. I would like to associate myself, as you
probably understand, with the remarks that Vice Chairman Corrigan just
made.
I believe it's a high-risk approach. And I also believe that a
very clear-cut policy on the part of the U.S. Government and the
Federal Reserve would not require as much interest rate cost as we
otherwise will have to bear.
It would be more consistent with lower
interest rates and faster money growth than our ignoring the exchange
value of the dollar.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Does anyone else want to address this

issue?
MR. JOHNSON.

There's not enough time.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If not, I just want to confirm that the
next meeting date is February 9 and 10.
I will entertain a motion to
adjourn.
MR. JOHNSON.
MS.

SEGER.

I so move.
I second it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No objection.
END OF MEETING

