Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

November 3, 1987

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 3, 1987, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer and Morris, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Cleveland, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Staff Adviser
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Loney, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Fousek, Lang, Lindsey, Prell, Rosenblum,
Scheld, Siegman, and Simpson, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

11/3/87
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, T. Davis,
Mmes. Munnell and Tshinkel, Senior Vice Presidents
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,
Richmond, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and
Atlanta, respectively
Ms. Lovett, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York'
Mr. Weber, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Secretary's Note: Prior to this meeting, notice
had been received of the election of W. Lee Hoskins
as an alternate member of the Federal Open Market
Committee for the period October 9, 1987 through
February 29, 1988, and Mr. Hoskins had executed
his Oath of Office.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of November 3, 1987
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everybody. Will somebody
please move the minutes?
[The minutes were moved and approved at this
point.]
Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions of Mr. Cross?

I have a question that may be broader than for
MR. BOEHNE.
Mr. Cross. A week ago, we were talking about walking a thin line
between the dollar and the domestic economy and I get the feeling that
How wide is
that thin line has broadened out some since a week ago.
it and do we have a policy or don't we have a policy?
Is it the
Treasury that's making U.S. policy or are we just kind of letting the
market take us where we go or do we have some sense of where we want
to go with the dollar?
There have been a lot of changes in seven
days.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't I respond to that, and then
Sam Cross can correct me. There have been significant disputes over
the years as to precisely what the relationship is between the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve with respect to the question of
exchange rate intervention. As I understand it, even though there are
disputable issues here, we largely tend to follow Treasury's lead in
this question. The Treasury's position, while basically favorable to
the Louvre [Accord] as a general procedure, is that they nonetheless
are interested in making certain that we don't endeavor to defend a
particular position which is indefensible. And, I would think that
while the general view of the Secretary sort of backed and filled on
various occasions, ideally, he would like to see the markets stabilize
on their own without any actions on our part, whether through monetary
or intervention policies. But, should that not occur, his willingness
to commit U.S. resources is limited. And the general impression that
I get, although it is not articulated necessarily sharply at all
times, is that if the market moves us down gradually without any
secondary consequences until we reach a market equilibrium, that would
suit the Treasury just fine.
There is, however, I think a general
awareness that this all could get out of hand and that there could be
a lot of dangerous, secondary problems. But it is the Secretary's
view--maybe I should use the word "hope" because that is more
relevant--that that will not materialize.
So, I would say at the
moment, that while the Louvre [unintelligible], it is clearly fading;
and it will continue to do so unless and until there are dramatic
policy shifts on the part of the Treasury, which I must say to you, I
think would not be appropriate. Irrespective of what has been
happening recently, I would say that we are not freely floating but we
are floating in a way in which the degree of intervention that the
Treasury is willing to commit is very minor.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman.
Is there, if you can tell us,
any plan to reconvene the G-5 or G-7?
Things have changed markedly,
obviously, since the Louvre agreement.
I must say that the reason I
ask that question is that I find it a little anomalous that we are
draining reserves to defend the dollar while, at the same time, we are

11/3/87

adding reserves to add liquidity to the domestic economy. Maybe it's
considered to be a disorderly market at this point, or potentially
disorderly, but it seems a little anomalous to me to have this divided
policy in a sense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There is an element of that.

There is a

very fundamental question that we never seem to confront: How
successful is intervention under various, different conditions?

I

think that the major thrust of our policy, as I understand it, is
basically to exhibit our hand

[to show]

that we have not completely

lost interest in the exchange rate, leaving the impression that should
something really significant occur, we would be in there with both

feet. But, that is a very mild position, I think, relative to what it
was several months ago, and certainly at the beginning of the Louvre
agreement. But, as best I can read it, there has unquestionably been
a significant change in the position at Treasury in the last several
months.
MR. FORRESTAL. Do you think that they will be thinking about
another Louvre-type meeting?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, not necessarily. Do you mean to
reset the exchange-rate question or just to get the G-7 meeting for
coordination?
MR. FORRESTAL.

Well, I was thinking of both.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At the moment, I think that there's a
disinclination on our part to do it unless we have something to bring
to the table. If something significant materializes out of these
negotiations currently going on, then I would suspect that we are
dealing with the possibility of a G-7 meeting which, in effect, would
endeavor to exchange fiscal actions on our part with comparable
actions on the part of Germany and Japan. Presumably, at that point,
they would revisit specific paragraphs of the Louvre agreement,
probably to reset where the intervention points would be. We have now
run through all intervention points of which I am aware.
MR. BOEHNE. Do you have any insight as to why Karl Otto
Poehl was so blunt last night?
In one sense, they had a lot to lose
with a weaker dollar, and the sense I got out of his remarks was, if
the dollar weakens, so be it. This strikes me as-MR. MORRIS. I think they are very much concerned about too
much intervention increasing the German money supply as it did in
1978; and they want to avoid that.
MR. JOHNSON. I think they are more concerned about that than
the dollar exchange rate. They pretty much got all their trading
partners pinned down in the EMS, and I think that's about all they
care about.
If the EMS were to break up, you would see them
concerned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is concern of that. I found that
President Poehl is, I would say, somewhat less firm than Mr.
Stoltenberg on this question. And, I think what Manley Johnson is
talking about is really to the point: they have constructed for
themselves a series of monetary targets carved into granite by means

11/3/87

unknown to anybody; and the credibility of the Bundesbank is at stake.
If you go into the market and intervene heavily, you may think you are
fully sterilizing [unintelligible] but it sort of leaks all over the
place.
I think that there are significantly different views. I would
gather, but I'm not sure, that what President Poehl was saying last
night necessarily is speaking for the German government in total, but
it does reflect a significant part of his views. You were there,
Jerry. Is that your impression?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think it's just the money
supply question. I think that President Poehl, in particular,
believes that if push comes to shove, the Germans and the German
economy can handle a somewhat stronger mark and weaker dollar. And he
quite firmly believes, whether anyone happens to agree or not, that
the risks are squarely on the side of the United States--that the
risks of a weaker dollar are greater risks to the United States than
they are for Germany and-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And that's probably correct, too.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think it is correct. I was just
going to say that I find it hard to violently disagree with that. The
question that I think Ed Boehne is raising goes beyond the technical
mechanism of the Louvre or anything else and that is: What are the
risks? At least that's how I think of it. What are the risks of one
set of policies, however broadly defined, versus another set of
I ask myself this question: What event of a foreseeable
policies?
nature could really get us in the soup again? And I'm thinking, in
part, of the events of the past couple of weeks. I must say that I
think the dollar is still high on that list. If the dollar were to
fall out of bed--however one might choose to define that--first of
all, whether we like to admit it or not, I think the dollar/domestic
interest rate linkage is still there. I'm not quite sure it is--or
ever was--as precise as some people thought, but I certainly think
that linkage is still there. I think the danger is clear; I can't
assign probabilities to it but the danger is clear that you can end up
with the worst of both worlds: a lower dollar and higher interest
rates. The collapse of the exchange markets could easily trigger a
renewed outburst of chaos in the financial markets. There is one
particular thing that we have to keep in mind, and that is that a
decidedly weaker dollar could be the straw that breaks the camel's
back, especially for the Japanese stock market. I think that is a
very real danger.
MR. JOHNSON.

Why don't they do something about it?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What could they do? What they
should have done was do something several years ago. But what should
they do right now?
MR. JOHNSON.
rather than ours.

I'm just saying that's their responsibility

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
indifferent to it.

Well, that may be; but we can't be

MR. HELLER. Let me go back for a second to Germany. I
think you are quite right. There has always been a split between the

11/3/87

Finance Ministry and the Bundesbank. The Finance Ministry, as well as
all the regional presidents of the State Central Banks, has always
wanted to have a strong dollar because they were more concerned about
the employment effects, while the Bundesbank clearly was more
concerned about inflation.
I think it is questionable whether
President Poehl would have a majority on that council if he wanted to
have a policy that would defend the exchange rate at the present time.
So, in essence, he has to give in to a majority on his governing
board.
As far as the dollar is concerned, however, I disagree with
you a little, Jerry. The danger of the dollar falling out of bed has
been very substantially reduced during the last week because we now
have [an exchange rate against the mark of about] 1.70, and not even
the [unintelligible] that will go below 1.60. When you are on the
high perch, the danger of falling is not much higher; so a freefall
becomes less and less of a likelihood because the markets will support
the dollar at some level.
I think we are getting reasonably close to
that level.
MR. CROSS.
I would read it the other way: that it gets more
precarious as we get into these new and heretofore unseen levels. The
possibility of people getting really frightened and responding in some
way-MR. HELLER.
bounce back.

Like the stock market, I think it's going to

MR. JOHNSON. At this stage, really, the perception in the
markets, given the new world we are in, trying to defend the dollar
with higher interest rates here--I think that's where you would see a
tailspin.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to remember what the
issue of the dollar is.
It is not that it is falling per se, but that
whatever it is doing creates a judgment in the market that it will
continue to do that.
There are really two ways to look at this and
that is really, I think, what divides the economic fraternity at this
stage.
If, somehow, somebody could wave a wand and move the exchange
rate down sharply to a point where the expectation of future change
was zero, then the yield spreads between intermediate or long-term
issues in dollars and those denominated in the other currencies would
dramatically come together; and we would get the type of stability
that we would like.
The problem, unfortunately, is that the other
potential is that a sharply [falling] dollar merely will be
extrapolated, as Sam Cross has implied. Here, we don't know, largely
because we don't know where the bottom is.
Obviously, the lower we
are the closer the bottom is, by definition. Exchange rates tend to
be non-negative, though sometimes you wonder.
Judging from the way
the markets have been behaving the last several weeks, I think the
probabilities that a freefall is about to happen or could happen have
diminished. Unfortunately, the trouble is that even if the
probabilities have diminished, the consequences of that event are
extremely dangerous. Even if we get to the point where we are all
fully, unequivocally, convinced that there are no secondary reaction
problems in the exchange rate, I think we had better keep up our
guard.
MR. ANGELL. If we were to go back to 1983 and 1984 and have
people look at it in terms of where the dollar should have been at

11/3/87

that point in time, the dollar didn't stay within what anyone would
suggest was a workable U.S. balance-of-trade level. When the market
could go to the extreme on the upside and run the dollar up to 161 on
our index--when any careful analysis would say that that didn't make
any sense--why do you have such confidence that somehow or other on
the downside true market forces will prevail in the midst of political
A truly
whims and a political climate that could be devastating?
floating exchange rate environment is really quite different than an
environment in which you have political posturing and then it appears
It seems to me
that [the floating exchange rate environment] is gone.
that there is extreme danger that at some point in time the dollar
could become a serious problem. Given the Treasury's policy, I think
we have only one choice: we have to make domestic price level
stability our primary objective and, if the world believes that, then
I think the dollar will be okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only way we can do that is to
eliminate intervention, assuming it works in the first place, and do
it through market rates.
MR. ANGELL.

Of course.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And you will find, as you just heard,
that you have people who don't agree with you on the other side of
this table.
I don't think it's quite that black
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I think there is something of a workable middle ground and
and white.
we have to try to find it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what we're doing at the moment.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Manley, when you're talking about a
brave new world, the thing that is most new and most brave about this
world right now is that we have no policies. We have no fiscal
policies; we have no exchange rate policies,
MR. JOHNSON. That's exactly what I mean. There are a lot of
things new here; there are a lot of changes in expectations. We
really don't know. We are on uncharted waters.
MR. ANGELL. But instability breeds instability, and that's
something we have to be very careful of.
MR. JOHNSON. Maybe I'm off in the bushes somewhere, but I
think it's clear to the market that the risk on the dollar today is
mainly being caused by foreign central banks who are resisting the
kinds of pressures on their markets and are forcing the dollar down.
For us to try and deal with that situation here would be catastrophic.
MR. ANGELL. Being in such a position, with our fiscal
deficit and our balance of trade deficit, as a net debtor nation, I
don't understand how we think we ought to blame all these problems on
someone else. To me, that's naive. We have to run policy in a manner
that is consistent and sound. And what's appropriate for our domestic
economy can very well be appropriate for the others, if we consider
price level stability important.

11/3/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are now on agenda item 12 or 13.
May
I ask you to hold such remarks until we discuss policy questions?
Are
there any more specific questions of Sam? He never had a chance to
answer questions.
MR. HOSKINS.
I have one question--and this is back on the
dollar again--and it has to do with your sense of any large short
positions currently in the market.
In other words, is there a
perception that the only risk is on the downside and not on the up?
If that is the case-MR. CROSS. We don't get the impression that there is an
opportunity to flip it and get a big run on the other side. The
corporations have been noticeable nonparticipants for some time,
generally speaking; everybody tended to sit on their hands during all
of this chaos that was occurring in the market.
So, the short answer
is, I'm sure there are a lot of people shorting the dollar but we are
not, so far as we can tell, in a technical position where we could
flip that and get a runup.
MR. PARRY.
conclusion?
MR. CROSS.

Doesn't the futures market support that

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Does anyone have any further questions

for Sam?
MR. CROSS. On the question of [unintelligible], the Federal
Reserve does have the legal authority to intervene and the Treasury
has the legal authority to intervene.
But there are a number of
statements and letters and so forth to the Congress which indicate
that from the point of view of the Federal Reserve, we will operate in
cooperation and coordination with the Treasury on these matters, given
the Secretary of the Treasury's role in international financial
policy. And it is important that we not act in direct violation of
Treasury's stated views; or if we did, it would be such a major event
that we would feel it necessary to tell the Congress.
So, basically,
we have operated for many, many years on the basis of trying to work
these matters out with the Treasury.
MR. BLACK.

There's a constitutional basis for that position.

MR. CROSS.

I'm not disputing that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's a wonderful debate that goes on
in the legal literature, which somebody gave me earlier on and which I
found fascinating.
I came away from it deciding that this
[arrangement] works in ways that are very mysterious.
MR. CROSS.
I have another comment, Mr. Chairman. We have
been operating through this period more or less simply to resist the
downward pressures and not in an aggressive way, as you can tell from
the numbers. We have done $500 million since last Monday; the
Japanese have done about almost
and the Germans have
done almost
And there have been very, very heavy
purchases of dollars by the British, partly for reasons other than the
dollar situation, but it adds up to total dollar purchases in the past

11/3/87

week or so of, I would say, over $5 billion.
relatively modest amount.

So, we have done a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no other questions, I will
seek a motion to ratify Mr. Cross' activities.
I also need a motion
to approve a one-year extension in the swap line agreements.
Approved. Mr. Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we wait [on the leeway
recommendation] and see first if there are any questions on your
report?
MR. MELZER. Peter, on your assumption of excess reserves of
$1.2 billion, how long do you think that will be in place?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in fact, we upped that a little
further yesterday, President Melzer, to $1.5 billion based on what we
were seeing from actual holdings of excess by some of the smaller
institutions that already had a lot, and because some of the major
institutions had built up such a lot of excess that we didn't think
they could get rid of it all and still have some positive balance on
the day. That's relevant to this current reserve period; we will be
I have no reason to think
looking again at the next reserve period.
that we would be thinking in such high terms for the next reserve
period, but we'll have to evaluate it as we get into it.
MR. MORRIS. Peter, during most of the year, the bond market
has been very sensitive to the foreign exchange rate, but in recent
days we have seen the dollar under a lot of pressure and that has not
been transmitted significantly to the bond market.
How do you
appraise this?
I think it's a bit of an on-and-off thing
MR. STERNLIGHT.
now. It certainly is not the overwhelming presence and the tick-fortick linkage that was there early in the year, although on some recent
days the bond market has weakened in response to the dollar weakening.
But, as I mentioned, I thought one reason for that linkage having been
muted recently was that [market participants] saw the earlier
weakening of the dollar as likely to be followed very rapidly by some
tightening of monetary policy, whereas in the current context, they
don't see that as following on so quickly. There is still concern,
though, that a weaker dollar is a discouraging factor either to new
inflows of foreign capital into our market or perhaps a reason for
foreigners with existing holdings in our market to want to pull out.
So there does remain some sensitivity, but I think it's less.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we have to be careful here when
we say that a lower dollar basically induces individuals to be less
interested in dollars.
Obviously, that goes against everything else
we know: that the lower the price, the greater the demand.
In a
technical sense, every time we get a change in the exchange rate which
leads to a change in long-term yields, what we are looking at, in
effect, is a change in the far-distant forward position of the
exchange rate.
In other words, if the exchange rate is falling and
the bond market is collapsing--assume it's against the yen and the
yen-denominated securities are not moving--what effectively is

11/3/87

happening is that the short-term decline in the dollar-yen
relationship is creating an expectation of a very much sharper decline
in the future.
That's the critical issue.
It is the expected rate of
forward deterioration in the exchange rate which translates into basis
points on the yield spread in the long-term, risk-free instruments.
And, it is conceivable that we will get to a point--at some point, I
hope--that the exchange rate will arrive at a level which the markets
perceive will not go very much further, and the forward position of
the dollar will begin to rise and we will get a decline in long-term
interest rates.
The danger here is that with the huge block of U.S.
dollar-denominated securities outstanding, psychological cracks could
induce tremendously rapid changes and create high degrees of
instability. So, I think that something happened last week.
I think
one can argue that there has been an odd form of delinking--that there
is a presumption that declines in the dollar do not imply that there
will be future declines in the dollar. The trouble is that it might
be what happened last week, and it may be what's happening this week,
yet next week the markets might turn right around on us and go in the
other direction. But, I do think it's important not to think of it in
the sense of a tight linkage about what Federal Reserve policy is
going to do, although it does seem that way.
I think we have to
remember that we are dealing with real variables and that the markets
tell us a great deal in this respect.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, my interpretation of what has gone on in
the bond market lately is simply that it was just some backing off
from some of the flight to quality. When things were extremely
sensitive and unstable, we had a lot of movement in the Treasury
securities on the long and the short end--maybe a little more on the
short end, but a lot all over the yield curve. And I think as the
stock market has shown some stability over the last several days, we
probably have seen less pessimism there, and probably some movement
back out of the quality assets--I don't know if back into the stock
market, but maybe into other types of instruments.
I don't know what
your reading is, but if that really is going on, it seems to me that
maybe those excess reserves will start to wind down a little. My
guess is that quality spreads look a little better than they did
before; maybe not, but that's my impression.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I have some impression of some of those
tensions abating, some subsiding of the flight to quality.
Somebody
was saying a couple of days ago that the flight to quality has landed;
I think that is probably going too far. But I think there is some
backing away from that.
Nevertheless, I think it remains a basically
sensitive picture.
I just had a report a few minutes ago indicating a
further stock price decline today.
It was down 40 some points in the
opening half hour or so.
MR. KOHN. It was down 60 points at five after ten and bill
rates were going back down again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What was the bond market doing?

MR. KOHN. It was essentially unchanged, but it had been down
sharply earlier and has rallied.
MR. PARRY. I have a question about borrowing.
Since October
19th there has been a change in the willingness to borrow. What are

11/3/87

your assumptions about how the demand for borrowing may change over
Are you assuming that basically the shift is
the next week or two?
going to continue over that period or that there is going to be a
restoration of more normal relations?
My sense
I think it's terribly hard to say.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
would be, as you say President Parry, that there has been some
reluctance to borrow; but it's very, very difficult to come up with
even the rough and ready kinds of pronouncements that we have tried to
make in the past about a relationship between borrowing and expected
funds rates.
MR. PARRY. Wouldn't that suggest that as long as there is
that uncertainty it's probably wiser to focus on rates rather than
borrowing levels?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there has to be a lot of
flexibility in anything we try to-MR. PARRY.

I'm sorry, I'm not used to using words like that!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the funds rate expectation at
$450 million borrowing under normal conditions?
MR. PARRY.

Probably 7 percent or a little below.

MR. KOHN. Seven percent or a little below. I guess the
equations that we estimated might say a bit below 7 percent--perhaps
6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent.
MR. PARRY.

That's what I think.

I might be too
Let me ask Peter a question.
MR. HOSKINS.
But in this
sensitive to the markets, having just left those wharves.
environment if, for technical reasons, the funds rate were to trade
above 7 percent, what in your judgment would the perception be with
respect to either Federal Reserve policy in general or the linkage to
the dollar?
I guess it would depend partly on whether it
MR. STERNLIGHT.
was perceived that what was happening was occurring for some
deliberate reason on our part or despite what we were doing. The
interpretation of it would depend on how our role was seen in the
whole thing. A good many people would say that's in the range of
If I had to pinpoint an expected range
their expectation, I suppose.
now, narrowly, it might be 7 percent or a shade under; but I don't
think 7 or 7-1/8 percent cropping up occasionally would be terribly
disturbing in that context, either.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I just have two questions in areas that I need to
be educated on. First, when you were talking about our policy of
lending securities, did I hear you say that we had not been willing to
Maybe I just didn't hear you.
lend for a short sale?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes, that has been the past standard.

11/3/87

-10-

MS. SEGER. How do we know?
Do you ask them in advance what
they are going to do with the proceeds?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
facilitate a short sale.

They certify that they are not borrowing to

MS. SEGER. I see. My second question: When we have been
so-called "accommodative" in the last couple of weeks, why have we
I realize a million dollars
done all these transactions with repos?
worth of repos has the same reserve impact as a million dollars of
direct purchases of T-bills, but I think the market perception of what
I guess I just
we are doing is different in the one versus the other.
don't understand why we have done it [that way].
MR. STERNLIGHT. In mid-October, the beginning of that
period, the outlook was that we had a reserve need for what is now the
current period but that in the following period there would be only a
modest reserve need.
So, if we had done a lot of outright buying then
we would have had a concern that we would come up to an overabundance
of reserves and it could be awkward, as these are not the kinds of
markets where we would want to try to be going in and draining
reserves.
As the period went along, we kept getting revisions of the
out periods, so it looked as though we would have a more long-term
need.
If one had it to do over again, it might have made sense to
have done some purchases outright.
I don't think our broad purposes
of providing liquidity were ill-served by concentrating on repurchase
agreements, though.
This gave us a chance to have a rather continual
presence and to be providing relief to what was potentially one of the
very sore points in the system, the ability to get day-to-day
financing. So I don't think that part of it worked out too badly.
MS.

SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You have a recommendation?

Any other questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have a leeway request.
Current projections suggest a somewhat enlarged need for outright
purchases in the upcoming intermeeting period. Normal seasonal needs
for currency and increased required reserves could be enlarged even
While we may
further if current financial market tensions persist.
want to leave a sizable margin of needs to be met with repurchase
agreements, it would also be useful to have the flexibility for
substantial outright activity.
I recommend a $3 billion temporary
increase in the normal $6 billion leeway, although we may not need
very much of the enlarged amount.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we separately move on the
actions the Manager has taken since the September meeting and then
settle the motion on the specific request?
Motions approved. Mr.
Prell.
MR. PRELL.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, yesterday I talked to Tom Jester
of the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan and he
said that in a survey taken after the stock market decline, that
decline turned out to have had a very sharp effect on consumer

11/3/87

-11-

confidence. He said they think the big effect is not going to be the
wealth effect on consumer spending but the uncertainty. He thinks
consumers' reduced confidence level as to the future, generally, is
likely to produce a major slowdown in consumer spending. He thinks
the confidence index they report will be showing about a 10 percent

drop when it next comes out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We also got the Conference Board index
in a post October 19th [survey] and it didn't show that at all.
So we
have a problem on how to read these things. Mike, why don't you
report on the differences for just a second?

MR. PRELL. Well, both of them were down. The Michigan
survey's sentiment index was down, as President Morris noted, in the
period after October 19th. Basically, they had about a third of their
month's sample in that period and they looked at that group alone.
Obviously, the statistical reliability is less, but they felt that the
sharp drop was statistically significant. That put the level well
below the plateau we have been at, and that is the clear distinction
from the picture that one gets in looking at the very limited poll
that the Conference Board did after October 19th. That showed a drop,
but it was only a small departure from a very strong uptrend in the
last several months; it seems to have reflected people's perceptions
that the job opportunities were very good, and that propels that index
directly in a way that the Michigan index doesn't reflect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have a comment and two questions
concerning the Greenbook forecast. My comment: considering the modest
wealth and cost of capital effects of the stock market decline, and
also what is referred to as an expected appreciable fall in interest
rates, it's surprising to me to see real growth for 1988 at less than
2 percent. Now, my first question deals with real disposable income.
We have talked about this in the past but I think it has even greater
importance today. Real disposable income in the Greenbook forecast
rises so slowly relative to real GNP that I really doubt that that
forecast will occur. The difference in growth rates is 1.2 percentage
points.
In our forecast, there's a difference of one tenth of a
point; in the Blue Chip consensus of 30 economists, it's two tenths of
a point. A distinction of that magnitude is, I think, pretty much
without historical precedent. It is my understanding that the way
that occurs is that you have an increase in inflation as a result of
higher import prices, which causes the PCE deflator to rise very
substantially relative to the GNP deflator. And, as I am sure you
know, the relationship between the PCE deflator and the GNP deflator
is one of the most stable relationships we have. We looked back to
1973 and that relationship varied between .988 and 1.021.
In the
forecast, it gets up to 1.026, which is an incredibly high level. I
don't think it has ever been that high. And my question is: If you
had a ratio between the PCE deflator and the GNP deflator which is
more traditional, how would that affect the staff's forecast of both?
MR. PRELL. Clearly, one of the things in our forecast that
all along has been a key factor affecting the pattern of output growth
happened we believe, in large part, because of the exchange rate
depreciation. Partly because of the oil price movements earlier, we
believed that we would have some erosion of real disposable income

11/3/87

growth and thus some damping of consumer demand, which would release
the resources to support the substantial improvement in real net
I might just say that the pattern we are projecting is not a
exports.
departure from what we have been seeing over the past year or so.
Rather consistently, PCE prices have been rising faster than GNP
prices in a period in which real disposable income growth has been
considerably slower than real GNP growth. We have a continuing
decline of the dollar in our forecast and we have a continuation of
this pattern of relative price movements. We looked at the historical
record. We think there are perceptible relative price movements that
can be seen during a period of the dollar's appreciation--an
interruption of a previous trend. We have seen this ratio of PCE
prices to GNP prices rising rather markedly over the past year and we
Clearly, if somehow this didn't occur, there
expect that to continue.
would be implications for income shares and output patterns that could
significantly affect the outlook. We think this really has been a
perceptible trend recently and that the conditions that brought that
about will be prevailing still in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, I think it rests on two issues:
one is the movement of import prices at a rate higher than domestic
prices; second, and just as important, is the renewed share of imports
in total domestic demand. You need both to have this effect. The
Is it
interesting question is: How do you get this small a number?
the fact that your import price estimates are much lower than the
staff's?
MR. PARRY. No. I think what happens in their forecast is
that the higher import prices show up very dramatically on the
consumption side but not on the investment side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But we are importing computers on which
the prices are going down; that's probably the reason that it's
happening.
MR. PARRY. Well, perhaps this will happen, but I don't
I will have to look at
think it has happened to date. I'm not sure.
the 1987 data; I'm not sure we agree on that in the second half.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think you're raising a terribly
important question here.
I think it's important that we get that
right.
MR. PRELL.
If I could just cite some figures: Going back to
the third quarter of 1986, the PCE fixed-weight price measure rose 1
percentage point faster than the GNP prices; in the fourth quarter it
was 0.7 faster; in the first quarter of 1987 it was 1.2 percentage
points faster; in the second quarter it was 1.1 faster; and in the
third quarter it was 0.8 faster. We have a more moderate relative
movement in the forecast than we have been experiencing. We also have
looked at outside forecasts and, generally, they have this relative
movement in a similar range; some of them have it less than ours, some
of them have it considerably more than ours. When we look at the
fixed investment prices and what might be going on there, there may be
some wrinkles in terms of the construction of the index. As I

understand it, that is constructed largely out of PPI data, which
would be the domestically produced goods. You might not have the
direct kind of import price measurement in the way these numbers are

11/3/87

-13-

constructed as you do with consumer goods, which would sample imports
directly as well. That's a minor factor.
MR. PARRY. The statistical work that we have done indicates
that all of the increase in the PCE over that period that you just
cited can be attributed to oil and none of it to foreign exchange.
MR. PRELL. We would certainly be happy to consult further
with your staff. In the second half of last year, energy prices in
PCE were falling rapidly.
MR. PARRY.

Yes, but it depends on the lag, of course.

MR. PRELL. Well, I guess we differ on this. We have had
some discussion with your staff who raised the question with us and-MR. PARRY.

It's a difference in the forecast.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. One number that surprised me a little in the
Greenbook--especially the contrast between the 1988 number and the
1987 number--was the capacity utilization in manufacturing, which is
inching up.
If you look at producers' durable equipment, it is still
going up at a rate that is in excess of real GNP. The unemployment
rate, as you pointed out, is leveling off. Is the driving force just
the composition of imports--that they have such a heavy weight in
manufacturing? Or what explains the increase in the utilization rate?
MR. PRELL. Obviously, as you know, it's a confluence of two
things. One is how fast industrial output is growing, which is quite
sensitive to the mix of output in the economy; and the improvement in
trade is reflected in growth of industrial production and a
manufacturing component that is stronger than overall GNP growth by a
point or more next year. The other component in this calculation,
obviously, is an assessment of capacity growth. Business fixed
investment, which had been weak for a while, rebounded in the last
couple of quarters; some of this rebound reflected a spurt in
automobile sales which presumably will not be sustained. Of course,
it takes a little while for growth in PDE to feed through the
substantial increases in the stock of capital goods. We have a
relatively weak investment outlook, so from that side of things we
wouldn't see tremendous additions to capacity over the coming year.
We have a relatively moderate growth in capacity--about 3 percent or a
bit below-MR. HELLER.
precisely the point.

But that's higher than your GNP number.

That's

MR. PRELL. It's higher than GNP but it is in line with the
growth of industrial output and slightly below the manufacturing
growth rate. So we get this very slight inching up--it probably
should not be called inching but milimetering up--of the capacity
utilization rate. Assessing capacity utilization is always difficult.
As you know, we recently put out our annual revisions; the revisions
didn't really adjust the overall level very much but there were
noticeable changes in some of the industries. We have to be alert to

-14-

11/3/87

whatever we can pick up on what is going on in actual capacity. The
linkage between investment and actual capacity is not all that tight.
MR. BLACK. Mike, with businesses having become so much
leaner and meaner in recent years and increasingly willing to bring
about permanent layoffs and temporary layoffs, some of our contacts
have been telling us that if the downturn does intensify, they would
expect the unemployment rate to jump pretty sharply because of this
changing attitude on the part of businesses. Does that seem
reasonable to you? If so, have you factored it into these high
unemployment rates that you are projecting here?
MR. PRELL. Well, I hope so.
Of course, to the extent that
they are currently lean and have not been hoarding extra labor, as
there are dips in output, there is not going to be as much room to
reduce employment. Of course, once we have determined how aggressive
they are, then we would [know more about] how persistent the effect of
weakness will be. We have distinctly slower employment growth in our
forecast than we have been experiencing; and we do have the
unemployment rate going up, read literally here, 0.4 of a point over
the next couple of quarters from the 5.9 percent level we saw in the
past month.
It's hard to say how far this would go once the process
is underway; but our forecast is one in which we have only a brief
interruption of the recent growth path. And under those
circumstances, we presume they would not have unloaded tremendous
amounts of [unintelligible] labor.
MR. BLACK. I agree pretty much with your forecast.
It just
struck me as an interesting thought, since business people seem to
feel that they will not hesitate this time like they sometimes have in
the past.
MR. PRELL. Many of them clearly have more flexibility than
in the past because of their use of workers who were not strictly on
So, those
their payrolls but were hired through temporary help firms.
workers probably would be laid off during-It is interesting that they got so much leaner
MR. BLACK.
with such a big rise too in the participation rate in the labor force.
It seems to have happened.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Corrigan has probably perceived one of the
sharpest jumps in unemployment.
MR. BLACK.

He may see some jumps of other types too.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know about the demand for
BMWs and Mercedes, but that shouldn't affect the productivity numbers
too much. Actually, they should go up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there any further questions?

MR. PARRY.
It appears to me that recent developments have
had a very substantial impact on [your forecast for] final sales and
inventories in the fourth quarter. There's a very large impact on
inventories in the fourth quarter and then these unintended
inventories are worked down over 1988 and that's in large part why
growth is so weak in 1988. Why is there such a large impact on final

11/3/87

-15-

sales in the fourth quarter, given the assumptions about modest
impacts of wealth and cost of capital effects in recent developments
What if you have an inventory
and also the lower interest rate?
situation that really colors that entire forecast very substantially
through the end of 1988?
MR. PRELL. Well, it's very difficult to assess precisely
what the demand and production adjustments are going to be in this
short period of time. As I suggested in my remarks, we built in a
fairly prompt response of consumption and we also built in a fairly
prompt response of production. The inventory accumulation we have is
a combination of the automobile inventory rebuilding that is occurring
as sales have dropped off after the special incentive period, and the
automakers' having moved up their production a bit from the very low
third-quarter level. We also, though, have some significant
accumulation outside that sector. Some of that is involuntary but,
going into the early part of this quarter, some is still voluntary in
the manufacturing sector where it appeared that inventories were very
lean and that there was some desire to at least keep the stocks in
line with sales.
So, I think it's a mixture of voluntary and
involuntary elements that leads to some adjustment early next year in
production. But, we have assumed a relatively smooth path for
developments in the next several months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

After the fourth quarter?

Apart from the auto situation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I just wanted to tell Mike that I admire his
courage for attempting to put specific numbers down on a sheet of
paper because, although I'm older than most of the people sitting at
this table, I can't think of a time in my lifetime when we have had
So I'm not sure I know
comparable events in the financial markets.
how your econometric models can pick anything up when the data fed in
are like what we have just been through in the last couple of weeks.
MR. PRELL. Well, we don't rely totally on our econometric
models, of course. Sometimes we depend on them very little when the
circumstances suggest that there are just tremendous departures from
the historical norms--shocks that would disturb recent trends. But, I
guess in this case I'd say that they are reasonably supportive of this
kind of view. It's clear, though, that there are downside risks in
this forecast, should the stock market have a more dramatic effect
than we have gauged it to have at this point.
MS. SEGER. One thing that concerns me, as I said before-whether you formalize it or don't formalize it mathematically--is that
not having experienced this kind of period, I just suffer from
uncertainty about what it will bring. Also, I wonder if a 20 some
percent decline in the Dow on one day is really the equivalent of four
I have a feeling that
months' worth of 5 percent declines each month.
I don't know, but I have a feeling that there
it's not comparable.
are a lot of things in here that, at least based on my inexperience, I
cannot really judge.

-16-

11/3/87

I did try to highlight the fact that this might
MR. PRELL.
have greater shock value than it otherwise would have, if that's
possible.
I think we are now at a point where not
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
only Mr. Prell has to be adventuresome, but the rest of us do as well.
I think the amount of courage that is required is
MR. PRELL.
far less for the staff than for the policymakers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone want to open up
discussion] around the table? Mr. Boykin.

[the

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, uncertainty certainly prevails
In looking at what might be appropriate for forecasting,
down my way.
we really would not have much basis for argument [with the staff
forecast], but in our own forecast we have come down a full point;
that is very judgmental, obviously. As far as the effect on our
District economy, our initial reaction is that probably whatever the
effect, it is likely to be a little less in the Eleventh District than
in the rest of the country, simply because we are so much farther
behind the rest of the country. We have seen signs of sluggish growth
in the District. We think the situation continues to be extremely
The real estate problems keep coming up and are a pervasive
fragile.
cloud in the psychology. The earnings reports that we have just gone
through with our financial institutions, and the added provision for
loan losses--most of it triggered by real estate--just put another
The cautious optimism that I tried to express for a
damper on that.
I'm not sure we can
couple of meetings seems to have abated somewhat.
even be cautiously optimistic right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. With regard to developments in the Twelfth
District, I think economic conditions remain relatively upbeat and, at
this point, very few effects of recent financial developments have
But, it's clearly too early to see the real effects.
shown up yet.
We are, however, seeing broad-based effects of the reduced value of
the dollar, in addition to the greater exports of lumber and selected
agricultural products that I mentioned previously. For example, a
Utah steel plant which was formerly owned by U.S. Steel recently
reopened and it was interesting to note that part of the decision to
reopen was based upon a German firm's five-year commitment to buy 40
I think that is rather
percent of the plant's production.
interesting. In addition, the price of titanium dioxide, which is a
key ingredient in paint, has increased substantially due to the
dollar's decline; and a major paint manufacturer in our District is
So wherever we look, we
turning increasingly to domestic suppliers.
seem to be seeing some effects of the declining value of the dollar in
terms of expanded export opportunities or increased import
substitution.
With regard to the overall economic outlook, we estimate that
the wealth and cost of equity capital effects of the stock market
decline would reduce real GNP by slightly less than 1 percentage
Given the
point, assuming an unchanged path for interest rates.
easing that has already occurred and the expected lower path for
interest rates that is mentioned in the Greenbook, we would have

11/3/87

growth closer to 2-1/2 percent than 2 percent and the employment rate
basically unchanged.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, like Mr. Prell, I think I will divide my
comments into pre-event and post-event. Starting with the pre-event
activity: certainly, the District continued to operate on a reasonably
favorable basis, much along the lines that I previously have been
reporting, with the exception of the auto industry. The manufacturing
sector has been moving along pretty well and the employment statistics
have been good, very much in line with the national numbers. The
steel business is operating again at very, very high levels; the
demand for steel products is the best we have experienced in our area
since 1981. The delivery times have stretched out very considerably
and many products really are being sold on allocation. Construction
activity remains reasonably good. The conditions in agriculture are
continuing to improve; land prices are up and commodity prices have
improved somewhat. By and large, the harvest is in and it really has
been a very good harvest in our area.
Moving to the post-event comments, it is too early to assess
the damage but, so far at least, I don't sense from any of the people
that I talk to that any of these fundamental trends that I've just
noted have been badly affected. Certainly at the outset, consumer
spending was affected; there was a decline in retail sales as we went
through the market trauma, but that seems to have leveled out. I am
told from people who have October retail numbers in our area that, by
and large, retail sales came in this October about level with last
October. Looking ahead to next year, the retailers are reducing their
expectations but, so far, nobody has suggested a negative trend on
retail sales. On the auto side, it's awfully early to tell, but one
of the major producers that I talked to yesterday said that they are
reducing their sales [estimates] for 1988 cars and trucks together by
about 800,000 units; but they do emphasize that it's very, very early
yet to assess how the consumer will react. On capital expenditures,
so far I have been quite impressed that there are no early signs of a
sharp curtailment. Most of the companies that I've talked to--those
that have significant programs in place--intend to continue, unless
there is a very sharp downturn in the economy. They have embarked on
programs that they say they will, by and large, stay with. And I do
find that quite encouraging. So net, I think it's still too early to
assess the damage. I keep being favorably surprised that our early
assessment isn't a little more negative than it is. I think our
expectations for next year will certainly be down a bit, but it is far
too early to quantify. We are just going to have to go through a
period of some uncertainty. Nonetheless, so far things seem to have
come through better than I might have expected.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, there haven't been any actual changes that
I can see in my District. It's more that the worry level has risen.
What I sense is that the psychology is more important than the wealth
effect; if we have another shock in the market I think we would have a
real tumble in psychology; if we continue to mend without another
shock I think the effects may be minimal. This psychology is apparent
in some of the conversations that we have had with regional retailers.

-18-

11/3/87

Their merchandise for the Christmas season is already on hand, so they
are stuck with it one way or another. While no one we've talked to
has observed any decline in sales yet that they can attribute to the
financial markets, their view is that if Christmas sales do run below
plan, then they are going to run their inventories much lower than
they ordinarily would, and that would affect their spring ordering.
So, I think they just don't know. They are thinking beyond the
Christmas season if that turns out poorly.
The same attitude is
apparent in manufacturing as well, where I think most manufacturers
feel that the orders that they have on their books are there and they
are going to fill them. What they are concerned about is six months
out.
But, overall, my sense is that the risks have changed in the
economy. Whether they have changed a lot or a little remains to be
seen; but they have changed in the direction that real growth will be
lower than we thought.
If we are wrong, then we'll probably be wrong
in the sense that we'll have still lower growth. And I think the
risks have shifted, too, on the inflation side; to some extent,
concerns that we had about inflation six weeks or so ago are
alleviated.
I admire the bravery of Mike Prell and the staff for
forecasting precise numbers and I think their numbers are reasonable-not because they are necessarily right, but because I can't improve on
them. They seem to be broadly reasonable. Just one other point: I do
keep hearing some very favorable news on the export side. At my last
full board of directors' meeting and other meetings around the
District, people spoke almost with one chorus: the news coming in from
their salespeople is that they are able to compete in the export
market, both by selling abroad as well as by competing with the
imports that have been coming in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the statistical
information on the evaluation of the economy in the Sixth District
that we had prior to October 19th reflected continued improvement in
the District.
Economic activity seemed to be very good pretty much
across the board. I would echo what Ed Boehne just said about
exports: they seem to be increasing, and we also are getting reports
about better export performance.
It's very difficult at this time, I
think, to assess any impact in the region of the events of a couple of
weeks ago.
Everyone I talk to says it is business as usual, although
I find that a little hard to believe because I am sure that many
businesses are re-assessing their plans for the future. But, at the
moment, nobody has indicated to me that they have made any change in
their business plans.
I think what they are really saying is that
they feel that it is too early and they are adopting a "wait and see"
attitude. The only preliminary indication that we have that people
might expect less robust activity is that many firms--the majority of
those that I talked to--are, in fact, repurchasing their own stock.
And, of course, the Christmas sales are going to be very critical.
One concern I have is that I have been hearing scattered reports that
deposits have been moving out of thrift institutions into the banks,
reflecting greater public confidence in the FDIC than in the FSLIC and
the thrifts.
That's not a widespread movement, but it is something
that I have noted. The regional banks see very little impact from the
weak equity markets, given their loan portfolios and the relative
strength of regional growth. That was reflected in their stock
declines, which were much less than for money center banks.

11/3/87

-19-

Like others, I
with a precise forecast
have to make an attempt
moved our forecast down

think it is very, very difficult to
on the national economy, although I
to do that in order to set policy.
somewhat, although I think we would

come up
think we
We have
show a

little greater strength than the Greenbook. But it's not a matter of
great difference. We would move our forecast down further if we
continued to see increased volatility in the markets. I might just
note, in passing, that we are developing an alternative forecast which
is a less comprehensive one than others; I don't want to place a great
deal of emphasis on it at the moment, because it only has one quarter
of experience. But that one quarter was very good--better than most
of the comparable forecasts. That model shows much less growth in the
fourth quarter and through 1988 than most of the others that I've
seen. So we will continue to develop that model and watch it
carefully. But, in general, I think the Greenbook forecast is about
on target.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. This seems to be a day of confessions, Mr.
Chairman, and I will have to join those who confess that they don't
have much confidence in their own projections. I have less now than I
typically do, of course, which is saying that I don't have a great
deal. We have these two elements of uncertainty to be sure: first, we
don't know what the impact of the decline that has occurred in the
stock market thus far is going to be; second and more importantly, we
don't know how much further domestic and foreign markets may decline.
And I don't think a further decline is a risk we can completely rule
out. So, the uncertainty level is extremely high. But we don't know
the answers to these questions. Assuming that the market settles down
somewhere in the 1900-2100 range, I think the staff's forecast is
pretty reasonable; I don't think we could improve on that a great
deal. That seems to be what the business people in our District feel;
at least that's what we have been able to uncover up until now. But I
do think there's a lot of risk in this, regardless of where you come
out.
It is clear to me that there has been a big blow to inflation
and to inflationary expectations in the short run from this. But if
the decline turns out to be as moderate as the staff has projected,
and as we have endorsed, I don't think it's unreasonable to suppose
that by the middle or last half of next year the same kind of worries
that we had on the inflation front earlier might reemerge. And I
think that we ought to have that in mind as a definite possibility as
we address what we do in the immediate future, because the effects of
actions we take now are going to be felt down the road, and we ought
to be well aware that that possibility is at least out there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Responses in our District to what has happened in
the financial markets have been all over the lot. Of course, people
have been preoccupied with the baseball season until recently!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I missed it.

What happened there?

MR. STERN. I am sure the staff can prepare a memo!
Initially, there was a lot of concern coming from the financial
community; that seems to have diminished. There have been some
scattered reports of postponement of purchases of big-ticket items but

11/3/87

-20-

first of all, it seems to me, that is to be expected. Second, I would
reiterate the word "scattered" because it by no means is universal at
this juncture. One of our contacts who is pretty well plugged into
the retail picture--not just locally but nationally--reported that his
company opened six new stores the day of the collapse of stock prices
and business in all of them was terrific.
MS. SEGER.

That's because they were giving things away that

day.
MR. STERN. Well, I'm sure they highly promoted the openings;
on the other hand, these were all in new communities for them. He
also had been to a national retailers' trade convention and reported
when he came back that, basically, people were reasonably confident
about the Christmas season. Again, though, I think you would have to
make a distinction between those people selling big ticket items and
those selling more normal kinds of goods. I think his statement
pertains particularly to the people who are selling the broad-based,
moderately priced, kinds of consumer goods. We have heard some more
generalized comments about people reassessing their capital spending
plans for 1988.
I guess that's the one thing I would point to at this
juncture.
With regard to the national economic outlook, I certainly
support the general tenor of the Greenbook forecast although I guess
my own view, and the one that comes out of our forecasting model, is
that the economy will grow more slowly pretty much throughout 1988
than indicated in the Greenbook and, of course, more slowly than we
had thought previously. I think the major difference is in capital
spending and, for what it's worth, that does seem to be consistent
with the view that people are reassessing their capital spending
intentions and will probably do some postponing. At the risk of
perhaps going beyond courageous to foolhardy, we did run the model out
through 1989 to see what it produced. While originally I thought that
was maybe just an ill-advised exercise, in fact, it produced some
reassuring results. It showed a resumption of growth pretty close to
3 percent and a continuation of moderate inflation. I would not put a
lot of emphasis on all this, obviously, but it seems kind of
consistent, if you think that what is going to happen is some
postponement of expenditures in 1988. That ought to suggest that 1989
could be a reasonably good year, assuming we don't get further large
down [unintelligible] in things here. So for what it's worth, I
simply report those results.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

But we will hold you to it.

I have lots of time to revise.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Echoing what Gary Stern said on the retail
front, I talked to
national retailer in our area
and he said they looked at the week-by-week comparison of sales at
their
outlets throughout the country in the two
full weeks since October 19, and only one store showed a decline in
that first week. That was the World Trade Center
store and
sales picked up in the second week. He is really quite optimistic;
his attitude is that this is not going to have an impact. Now, you

11/3/87

have to believe that the loss of wealth, long-term, will have some
impact. But I guess my own feeling, based on this isolated comment
and other comments I have heard, is that it's a little too early to
try to sort it all out and to decide how to respond in a long-term
sense.
The other comment that I wanted to make is that the area that
shows particular strength in our District is manufacturing employment.
Implicit in what Jerry Corrigan was saying about the risks of a lower
dollar, it seems to me, would be the inflationary risk at a micro
level.
I think what we have been seeing in terms of pressures on
capacity and wage rates has really been on the manufacturing side.
When I say that, I base it on anecdotal evidence; I don't mean that it
has been reflected in the data. And to the extent that a rapidly
declining dollar causes a more rapid external adjustment in [the
manufacturing] area, it seems to me that we could get greater price
pressures in those industries that are producing for export or are
import competitive--the shoe industry, the apparel industry, and some
other industries where even before the most recent developments, we
were already hearing reports of some pressure.
So I think on the
inflation front, that is something to be mindful of on the micro
level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
In the very near term, Mr. Chairman,
I don't think there's much doubt that the stock market and related
developments do work in the direction of weaker spending and lower
inflation. But I am not at all sure as to amounts and I am not at all
sure what one should infer for the longer term. There are probably
several dozen scenarios that anybody could think of. Unlike Mr.
Prell, I don't have to put one on paper but, in my thinking, there are
two more likely scenarios in the near term. One is that the financial
markets, and by that I mean all of them--exchange markets, bond
markets, stock markets--kind of settle in more or less where they have
been in the last couple of days.
I don't know where they are right
now, so I have to qualify that.
But suppose the Dow settles in at the
1900-2000 range, the long bond settles in at 9 percent or a little
more or a little less, and the exchange markets are roughly in line
with [the levels of] recent days.
Now, in that scenario, my hunch is
that economic performance will be respectable but not spectacular over
the intermediate term--probably something like what I heard Mr. Parry
describe, which I don't consider to be all bad, by the way. The other
scenario, which I think has to be thought about along with that one,
isn't so pretty. And that's a scenario in which for whatever reason-because the exchange markets go south or the budget negotiations
rupture--there's a sudden hit to the system. Who knows what the exact
trigger might be, but we could find ourselves confronted with another
very, very difficult and turbulent set of conditions in the financial
markets.
Obviously, I can't put a probability on that.
But if I were
to just think of the two broad scenarios that would warrant the
closest attention from a policy point of view, I guess those are the
two that stick out in my mind. Interestingly enough, at least from my
perspective, they both seem to me to have the same immediate policy
implications in that they both imply the need for a great deal of
caution in policy, and a very measured and disciplined approach to
policy in which we maintain maximum flexibility for the future.

-22-

11/3/87

I would also, if I may Mr. Chairman, like to make a comment
or two about the longer-term situation as I see it, because I think
it's extremely germane both to where we are and to policy options for
the future. There is, of course, a great deal of discussion in all
circles about imbalances in the U.S. and the world economy, whether in
terms of trade or payments or whatever. But, we should not lose sight
of a couple of powerful forces on the domestic side that I think are
germane. One is the dramatic increase in debt, in leveraging, that we
have had in recent years: the ratio of overall nonfinancial debt to
GNP--and I understand all the limits in the data--has risen from
something like 1.41 in the early 1980s to almost 1.81 early this year.
It may be coincidence--it probably is--but the fact of the matter is
that the last time we saw that ratio in a range that high was in the
late 1920s. And it's not all government debt, although government
debt has a lot to do with it. Since the first quarter of 1984, the
net issuance of equity is down $270 billion and corporate debt is up
$600 billion. Again, if you look at this problem of government
deficits and savings, it's really quite dramatic. In the late 1970s,
the general U.S. government budget deficit as a percent of net private
savings averaged about 10 percent.
It has risen sharply throughout
the 1980s, peaking at 66 percent in 1986. Indeed, in 1986 the federal
budget deficit itself absorbed more than 90 percent of net private
savings. And even in 1987, that absorption rate relative to domestic
savings will fall only to the mid-50 percent range. I stress that
because in the context of all this discussion about budget packages
and all the rest, I think we have to keep in mind that, even under the
best of circumstances, the kinds of things that are talked about in
the area of budget reform are really quite small.
Indeed, there is a
great likelihood that the budget deficit in 1988 in absolute terms
will be larger than in 1987.
It is in that context, I think, that a
lot of these acute dilemmas and very, very sharp risks have to be
evaluated and considered.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the economy was headed for a
box in a corner and it wasn't going to work the way it was [earlier].
We had really slow money stock growth for a nine-month period. But we
had something else going on that it seems to me has been missed
somewhat--that is, the dramatic improvement in labor productivity.
Now, I know you wouldn't expect me to mention the manufacturing sector
of the U.S. economy, but it is much larger than agriculture.
Manufacturing is 24 percent of our economy and we have a 4-1/2 percent
growth rate in labor productivity in that sector. And that
improvement is running faster than any edging up of wage rates, so we
have unit labor costs falling in a dramatic way while the dollar
exchange rate is adjusting. That leads, of course, to what I think we
expected to have happen--dramatic increases in real exports: 17.9
percent in the second quarter and 16.8 percent in the third quarter.
And it seems to me--and here's where I differ somewhat with the staff
forecast--that that is apt to continue. I see no reason why that
won't tend to continue as far as the eye can see, because there are
just so many adjustments underway, given the wonderful new
opportunities of labor productivity. That, of course, carries with it
a need to have higher capital expenditures in the Rust belt, the
manufacturing sector; and so that makes our economy stronger than it
otherwise would have been. Then, on top of that, instead of reducing
government deficits by $73 billion, according to the staff forecast we

-23-

11/3/87

So that's an $89 billion
have a $16 billion increase in the deficit.
[swing] and it just seems to me the economy wasn't going to work. The
stock market event seems likely to bring some relief in that it might
be expected to slow consumer spending enough so that there is room for
this other rather rapid expansion to continue. But this doesn't give
us a bad inflation environment at all; it indicates, of course, with
this productivity going the way it is that you have less inflation.
In fact, it seems to me that the inflation rate in 1987 is just
unbelievable, in view of the oil price rebound and the import price
adjustments. To have the CPI, which should have more imports than
other measures of inflation, peak out at 6.2 percent in the first
quarter, and move down to 4.6 percent in the second quarter and 3.6 in
the third was just unbelievable. So, in a way, everything was going
all right except that expectations were bound to derail the train; and
those expectations came out of the lack of understanding as to how
inflation wasn't going to return; it wasn't there in spite of the fact
I don't know that there's any appreciation of
of a falling dollar.
the way in which the Federal Reserve's commitment existed in that
So, we have a rather unusual occurrence. With regard to
environment.
the forecast, the one item that I think seems like a rather rapid
reversal for the fourth quarter would be the income velocity of money.
The income velocity of money spurted up to about a +4 percent annual
rate in the third quarter from zero in the second quarter; and then it
looks to me like it falls at about a 6 percent annual rate in the
fourth quarter, which would be a swing of velocity of 10 percentage
The real
That seems a little stronger than I might expect.
points.
trick is: how can we maintain confidence in the domestic value of
money in a period of declining foreign exchange rates for the dollar?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I too agree that the outlook is
extremely difficult to forecast because we are in a fairly new
situation here. But, it seems to me that the events of recent months
suggest that the Louvre Accord was an agreement to maintain the U.S.
exchange rates at levels that were not sustainable. We have had
difficulty financing the deficit this year with private capital
inflows.
In the first quarter of this year, that reluctance of the
private foreign investor to keep on providing money at the pace needed
was reflected in the downward movement in our exchange rate; but that
Subsequently, it seems to me,
was stopped by the Louvre agreement.
the pressure generated by this reluctance of foreign investors to put
as much in as they had so willingly in earlier years was reflected in
We had marvelous stability in the exchange
rising interest rates.
rate but our bond rate was under upward pressure because of reduced
foreign demand. And that is what ultimately led to the big drop in
the stock market. The market had become extremely overvalued relative
to bond rates of return. Standard & Poor's 500 was yielding 2.7
percent at a time when intermediate-term governments were yielding
almost 10 percent.
That was the biggest spread between dividend yield
So it was clearly an
and intermediate-term bond yields in history.
unsustainable situation. Now we have to try to figure out how we
permit the dollar to adjust downward without that being transmitted
into upward pressure on the long-term bond markets. And I think
But there is no
that's going to be a very tricky proposition for us.
doubt in my mind that we have to go to a much lower level of the
dollar. The question is: How can we keep the domestic economy moving
ahead even at a relatively modest rate in that context?
I attended a

-24-

11/3/87

meeting at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank where a couple of bright
young people from the Board presented a superb paper.
I hope that it
has been distributed at the Board because it tells a lot about why we
have not had any more adjustment in our trade account than we have had
thus far. And the reason is that the import price levels have gone up
at an amazingly low rate.
In the most recent period, reported
yesterday I think by the Bureau of the Census, import prices went up
in the third quarter by less than 2 percent; I think that reflects,
and the paper supports this, that foreign producers who have gotten
into this market are very reluctant to give up markets here and are
going to try to hang in here as long as they can.
It seems to me that
it is going to take a level of the dollar well below any long-term
equilibrium level to begin to make the kind of progress I think we
have to make in reducing our foreign deficit.
So our problem for the
next few months is going to be a very tough one: How do we handle this
ball of wax on the declining dollar and avoid not putting all kinds of
pressures on long-term bond rates that are going to be very
destabilizing for the domestic economy?
If we have another runup in
rates, we are going to see a new low in the stock market.
I don't
think there's any question about that.
So, I think it's a most
unstable financial situation. I wasn't around in 1929--at least I was
not old enough to know what was going on--but I can't recall a period
when we have had such an unstable financial system as we have right at
this moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. At the last meeting, I argued that we were
moving toward a much better balance in the real economy and I think
that is still on track.
I think we now are moving also toward a
better balance in the financial economy. While there is uncertainty
around, we have eliminated some of the excesses that Frank Morris was
taking about a minute ago.
If you look at the stock market, after
all, we came from a high of over 2700, so the glass has been drained
by about 25 or 30 percent but it is still three quarters full.
And
that is not a bad position. Essentially, we are back to where we were
at the beginning of the year.
In one fell swoop, we have wiped out
inflation, or sharply reduced inflationary expectations, and that has
given us a lot more breathing room on the interest rate front as well.
And now I think what's in train is a better balance in the world
economy as well, with exchange rates now getting very close to levels
that would be sustainable on a long-term basis; and the imbalances in
the world economy will be reduced, as a lot of people have talked
about before.
By the way, on the budget deficit side, the lower
interest rates also clearly will help in holding the budget deficit to
approximately current levels.
And nobody has been talking about the
threat of protectionist legislation; that has also gone away, I think,
to a large extent.
So, I think there are a couple of bright spots in
a gloomy situation that we shouldn't overlook. I agree that there is
all this uncertainty but, if we keep following that path, I think we
will see the light of day pretty soon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is there anyone else?

MR. JOHNSON. I really don't have much to add but I'll put in
my two cents' worth. I basically agree with Ed Boehne's view about
the domestic economy that it's too early to tell what the effect is
going to be of all this. We really don't have any serious data at

11/3/87

-25-

this point to evaluate the situation.
I think we are probably not
going get data that we are going to feel confident about, in terms of
being symptomatic of the effects of this, until a couple of weeks,
maybe. Retail sales data are three weeks away; we may have some early
car sales data and things like that but the orders impact of this is
down the road. There's a lot of information that still is not
available; the only thing we really have at this point is some of the
sentiment indexes.
So, we don't know how to read the overall impact,
although I agree with Ed that it's hard to imagine sentiment improving

as a result of this. I think it's pretty clear that there is an
additional air of pessimism about the outlook that didn't exist before
and that expectations definitely have changed. What effect that's
going to have is difficult to tell.
If you look right now at the fundamentals in the economy,
they do look good; I agree with Bob's point on that. Things are
adjusting fairly nicely in the way that we expected and in the way the
staff had described in the forecast. We are seeing a transition, I
think, from domestic aggregate demand to more externally generated
growth. I think that is positive and it still seems to be continuing.
One of the things I worry about now--after the fact, with this change
in the financial markets--is that that export-led growth may come
under some pressure. Even though the dollar is obviously weaker, it
is going to improve, I think. In that relative sense, other problems
are going to [damp] the prospects for export-led growth. One of the
issues in the financial markets is that foreign stock markets around
the world actually have fallen more than the U.S. market. In
percentage terms, they have all come down by more than the New York
Stock Exchange composite. So, the stock market impact abroad is
greater than it is here. What that means is really not clear. But
combine that with [these other developments]: the fact that interest
rates in those countries are relatively higher because of the fall in
interest rates here recently and the not very large adjustment in
interest rates abroad; the fact that their currencies are
appreciating, and therefore, damping their ability to export; and the
fact that if income is going to be falling here, we are going to be
demanding less in terms of imports from those countries. So, not only
is there going to be an income effect on them, there is going to be a
substitution effect. And I think the question is: How strong are
those economies going to be? And how strong is our external
performance going to be under those conditions?
I don't really know;
I just think there are big uncertainties. And I agree with what Jerry
said: we need some flexibility at this stage, but it's really too
early to tell what is going to happen. We need to maintain our
flexibility, but we need to face the reality that the world has
changed. Sentiment and expectations are different, both in real
growth and in inflation; and I think we have to acknowledge that.
MS. SEGER. The two words that I think describe most
completely what is going on are confusion and uncertainty. All of the
business economists and business people I have spoken with in the last
couple of weeks admit to both of those. Practically no one pretends
to know exactly what the impact of the financial market disturbances
will be, but almost everyone expects some sort of an impact. Probably
the most dramatic adjustment that I witnessed was at
where, unfortunately, the event caught them in the middle
of the planning season for 1988. They immediately knocked 5 percent
off their sales forecast up through the next year and also looked for

-26-

11/3/87

two plants to close--a truck plant and a car plant. Their view was
that back in the early 1980s, when the auto industry was going into
the pink, they said they were cutting off a finger at a time rather
than doing major surgery. So, this time around they want to be
prepared for more dramatic and significant adjustments if, in fact,
they are needed.
They are watching very carefully what is actually
going on so that they can do additional adjustments if necessary.
They also have made some dramatic changes in the management of their
They have cut back on the
pension funds, which are very, very large.
They also have cut back on the
percentage invested in equities.
percentage in long bonds and have moved into a very liquid position.
I just mention that because I think it is one specific example that
some people in the business world are reacting.
Not knowing what is going to happen, I guess one of my
nightmares is that what might happen is that consumers will cut back
on their spending, as Mike has laid out in the Greenbook estimates,
except that they will cut back a little more dramatically even than we
The rich lawyers will
are estimating in the next couple of quarters.
continue to buy Mercedes and Peugeots and Hondas and things like that
that are produced abroad but they will cut back on their consumption
of domestically produced items and, therefore, we will get sort of a
double whammy: we will have the weak consumption but, also, we will
not see the import situation improving as much as we are expecting
now, and as much as I certainly would like to see. Yet, I am not
saying we are going to get a recession; I don't really know. But I
think we ought to think about what the risk is, and ask: If we do get
a recession, is that going to help the problems that Jerry Corrigan
Going into a recession with a
I don't think so.
has ticked off?
heavy debt load doesn't usually make the debt load any lighter; it
just makes it look a lot heavier to service. Also, I don't think that
As I read the
a recession here would help our trading partners.
growth numbers in Germany, Japan, Canada, and some other countries, it
They do depend
seems to me that they are not all that robust anyway.
a lot upon their business dealings with us and, therefore, I can't
imagine that we wouldn't take many of them with us, which in turn,
would make our new-found ability to export a lot more difficult to
take advantage of because you have to have somebody to buy those
exports that we now can produce efficiently. So, to summarize, I just
am concerned. And I really think that we ought to watch the incoming
data extremely carefully for signs of more weakness than we are now
expecting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Very briefly, Mr. Chairman, I think most things
have been said, but just to get on the record here: While I agree with
Bob Boykin and others that the situation is fragile, particularly in
the Eleventh District, which I am still pretty close to, I share Bob

Heller's view that there is a lot of room for being optimistic about a
light at the end of the tunnel. The risks here, I think, are two
primarily.

Number one, as Ed Boehne and others have said, no more

shocks is the key. If we can avoid that, I think things will be
enormously optimistic. I also agree with Governor Seger that it is
very important that we--and I mean we in the corporate sense--do
whatever we can to avoid a recession, which is in nobody's interest at
a time like this.
So, those are the two things that I would like to
keep a weather eye to: have no more shocks and avoid a recession to

-27-

11/3/87

the extent that we can do that.
I would like to comment briefly on
Jerry Corrigan's concern about the high level of debt, which has been
I think that ties together with Frank
one of my favorite themes also.
Morris' comment about the pressure for market share that people feel.
The creation of all of this debt has put people in a situation where
there is enormous pressure to produce; that's not only true for
foreign economies and their pressure to maintain market share here but
it is also true domestically. People who are in debt need to keep
their jobs.
So perhaps if there is a good side to all of this debt
creation, it lies in the fact that it puts tremendous pressure on
everybody to be productive and, thus, it should have a long-term
downward drag on the inflationary concerns that we all have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We haven't heard from Presidents Guffey
and Hoskins.
Do either of you wish to add to the body of knowledge?
MR. GUFFEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that I can; so
I will respectfully pass.
MR. HOSKINS.
I would speak only with some trepidation,
since my first FOMC meeting by telephone resulted in a 508 point drop
in the stock market.
I will make another observation, however.
I
have been a Reserve Bank President about three weeks now and I've
probably participated in more FOMC meetings in that time than any
other three-week President.
In terms of the Fourth District, it is
probably very typical--similar to what Si Keehn has indicated. We
polled [District contacts] prior and after the problem in the market
and, basically, heard of no major pullbacks in either capital goods or
The only comment I would like to make is that I
on the retail side.
do have some concerns about the dollar and any attempts to keep it at
a level that is other than what the market wants, particularly, if we
signal that as policy makers through interest rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In view of the time, it's probably
advisable to break for coffee, assuming that it hasn't gotten cold
yet.
Then we will come back and Don Kohn will brief us on monetary
policy.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Kohn.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there questions for Mr. Kohn?

Mr.

Stern.
MR. STERN. Given all the uncertainties and everything, what
do you have for the forecast of aggregate growth for the first quarter
or two of next year. You seem to have a sharp, or at least what I
would call a significant, slowing late this year.
I'm just curious
about what you have.
MR. KOHN. We would have growth picking up in the first
couple of quarters of next year, primarily because of the effects of
the lower interest rates in the fourth quarter. For example, we have
M2 picking up a little to a range of 6 to 7 percent in the first half
of next year rather than the 6 percent we have this year. We have M1

-28-

11/3/87

slowing down a little, but that's partly because demand deposits push
up the fourth quarter. Basically, we have these offsetting effects:
we have interest rates declining and that tends to push up growth,
especially as the previous increase in interest rates wears off toward
the end of this quarter and the beginning of next quarter; but, of
course, we have lower income growth and reduced wealth, and that tends
to keep monetary growth down. We see some stronger growth-MR. PARRY. Why is there such a significant change going from
November to December?
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.

On M1?
Yes M1, and a little on--

MR. KOHN. It's partly the monthly averaging results of the
gyrations in demand deposits.
MR. PARRY.

All right.

MR. KOHN. In fact, we had demand deposits not declining
until another week or two; they declined earlier than we were
expecting, so I'd expect a lower November and then a little stronger
growth rate in December. It wouldn't affect the September-to-December
path.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any more questions?

MR. MORRIS. I have an impossible question for you, Don. If
the dollar goes down significantly in the next couple of months, which
I think is going to happen, how do we prevent that from spilling over
into a rise in bond yields? That is the conflict we are going to be
faced with in the next month, it seems to me.
MR. KOHN. I'm not sure you can. But my thinking on this is
that the important variable here, as to whether or not that happens or
the degree to which that happens, is the way people are assessing the
economy. Think back a year or a year and a half ago, to 1986, when we
had easier monetary policy, dollar declines, and the bond market
declining for the first part of the year. Now, oil prices and
inflation expectations were important there; [they were expected] to
be stable through the rest of the year even as the dollar continued to
decline. But that was in an environment in which inflation wasn't
expected to pick up: incoming data were suggesting very little
inflation and the economy was widely viewed at that time as being
quite weak. So, I think if a dollar decline occurred in an
environment in which people thought that the economy was weak or that
the chance of a pickup in inflation wasn't large, then the bond market
effect would be muted; but if the economy didn't look [weak], as a
response to the stock market, for example, and the dollar started
dropping rapidly, we could be back where we were this summer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions of Don? Let me
start off with a review of where I think we have been. In a certain
sense, we have been very fortunate for the last couple of weeks. We
chose to supply the demand for excess reserves in the system. We did
it essentially by endeavoring to target the funds rate because,
obviously, if we target the funds rate then we automatically supply

11/3/87

the demand for reserves at that interest rate. And, in that context,
it's crucial that you come out with the right rate. I think we
fumbled into it and, at least in retrospect, it looks as though it
came out to be about where it should be: namely, slightly under 7
percent. As a result, I think we have seen a marginal return toward
the normal relationships, defined in this context as reflecting the
differential yield spreads and the basic flight--or crash--to quality
that seemed to be occurring at that point. We can go on with this
policy for a while, and my impression is that we have very little
choice but to do that. I think, however, it is important to remember
that we have a number of sequential dangers out there. I think the
one of utmost importance, against which all efforts have to be
directed, is what I would call a flight from the future. At the
moment there is investment going on in the longer term of this
country. In other words, people are buying longer-term bonds; they
are still buying stocks, and yields are not all that bad; the exchange
rate is soft but it's [not] falling on its face. It is not all that
difficult to imagine a less developed country scenario where what we
had would have led to a dramatic collapse in the exchange rate, a huge
rise in long-term bond rates, or the effective disappearance of the
long-term bond market. Obviously, under those conditions the stock
market would fall away and everything would implode into the short
run. And the bill rate would collapse, and we would have all these
crazy, horrible events that none of us thinks can happen until we see
them. Now that's the type of scenario that would force us, just to
preserve the system, to move the discount rate up two or three points.
And then we would get into the types of problems that a historic
monetary collapse always creates. We are far from that at this stage,
but I suspect a lot nearer than we would like to believe, because
financial markets have been so inherently unstable, just looking at
the variations in volume and prices. The evaluation process which
runs stocks the way they have been running in the last two weeks
suggests a degree of uncertainty--especially a degree of uncertainty,
potentially, in the foreign exchange markets. We could very readily
see a major endeavor to shift portfolios out of dollar-denominated
securities into those denominated in other currencies. That obviously
can't be successful, after the fact, but it can have powerful effects
on the exchange rates. I think, as a consequence, this is a potential
danger out there.
Obviously, we have to be very cautious about how we move from
the path that we are on toward a more stable regular policy-oriented
position. Consequently, as I said, I see no real alternative to
trying to operate, roughly, along the lines of what we are calling
alternative "B" at this stage. Hopefully, if this situation continues
to stabilize, we will be able gradually to pull away from funds rate
targeting and allow the supply of excess reserves to fall with the
decline in demand. At that point, obviously, we will be seeing a
closing of the bill rate/funds rate spread and presumably we will be
seeing the longer-term corporate Baa less U.S. Treasury spread come
back down, and the junk bonds even will look almost saleable. But we
are still a goodly way away from that; we are still not normal. These
are not anywhere close to normal relationships, normal credit
conditions, or normal attitudes in the market. I think there's a
sense of relief out there, but I don't think it's anywhere close to a
sense of stability. The fact that we have had a 500 point drop in the
Dow, as far as I'm concerned, has now changed all the program trading,
all of the different types of risk operations [unintelligible] people

-30-

11/3/87

It's hard for me to see the stock market going all the way back
take.
to where it was.
I think the risk premiums that are now associated
with what could happen have [unintelligible].
It is conceivable,
therefore, that in retrospect this whole thing could turn out to have
been a remarkable blessing. I must tell you that the odds of it
coming out that way cannot be very large, but they are not zero
either.
In any event, strangely, I don't think we have a policy
problem, at least as I see it, as to what our policy should be,
because it seems that it should be just an automatic continuation of
what we have been doing, so we can phase into something more
permanently. There is also the issue of how we portray ourselves to
the public. And that's not only the issue of what we do but of how we
say it--how we write down the directive--because this particular
directive is going to be disaggregated in such detail that periods and
misprints are going to be read as having great, great importance. So,
I merely wish to say that I'd appreciate not only your thoughts and
your usual comments here on the issue of policy--the borrowing--but
also your recommendations on how we portray ourselves to the public at
large in the specific formulation of the directive, taking any
Governor
revisions from what we tentatively put down in the Bluebook.
Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman I'm delighted to have you take
I support you and alternative "B" and borrowings of
that position.
$450 million. But I'd like to suggest somewhat of a variation on that
in regard to the fed funds range. Ordinarily, we would leave it at 5
to 9 percent; but it seems to me that there are about three reasons
And
why we might lower that to 4 to 8 percent under alternative "B".
in part, this speaks to how that would be interpreted as people read
In regard to President Morris' comments about upward
these minutes.
movement in interest rates, a dramatic movement upward to the 9
percent fed funds level seems to me very unlikely; that probably would
So I'd really rather have that
be destabilizing in financial markets.
I'd also like to have the lower bound down
upward bound down a point.
a point to 4 percent because, while we are not anticipating it, there
might be some circumstance between Open Market Committee meetings that
would give us the flexibility [to move] downward, and that might be
appropriate. So, 4 to 8 percent on the fed funds range, even though
it would maintain the policy stance about where we are, would give us
a slight variation. Frankly, I would prefer staying with variation II
of the language [shown in the Bluebook], which is the more normal
expression. It just seems to me that the additional language shown in
The very nice thing about the
variation I could pose difficulties.
statement that was released by the Board Tuesday morning, October
And I would prefer in
20th, was that it was very simple and short.
variation II to have the words read "slightly greater ... might" and
"somewhat less ... would" be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, Mr. Chairman, you're very persuasive in
terms of keeping things where they are, but I have a somewhat
It seems to me that we are
different interpretation of where we are.
somewhere between alternatives "A" and "B"; we may be closer to "B"
than to "A", but I think that we are in the "A" - "B" range for
policy, with a federal funds target of something under 7 percent,

11/3/87

It strikes me,
perhaps 6-7/8 percent or just a touch higher.
therefore, that if we go with "B" that we will, in effect, be
tightening somewhat even though it's a subtle tightening. And I sense
that if we deviate at all from where we are, that it might be better
to ease just a touch. So I come down being in the alternative "A"
It's true that we have a lot of uncertainty and we don't know
column.
what's going to happen. But I do think there have been enough
changes, at least in terms of shifts in the direction of the risks,
that it is important for us to help anchor the lower rates that we
And it seems to me that
have achieved the last couple of weeks.
something closer to "A" than "B" helps to do that, because those lower
rates that we have had are important for offsetting the effects that
I think that it ought to
we are going to get from the stock market.
be clear that the Federal Reserve is trying to do that; and I think
that alternative "A" does that less ambiguously than alternative "B".
Clearly, there is a risk in the dollar but, as I judge the situation,
we're not talking about very much of a change in rates and it seems to
me that the environment is such that we could probably absorb that
I would prefer Variant I of the language because
risk at the moment.
I think it says more clearly what we are doing, and I think it's
important that the directive that we put out says what we're doing.
Even though the language is different, and we have words like "being
So
flexible" and so on, that's exactly the situation that we are in.
If we go with
it seems to me that's what we ought to go with.
alternative "A", then I think some symmetrical language is
Now, we are
appropriate, with "somewhats" and "mights" on both sides.
effectively operating on a federal funds strategy. When we were on a
federal funds strategy in the 1970s, we tended to have Open Market
Committee meetings every three or four weeks. As we moved more into a
reserve-based strategy, we were able to lengthen out the meeting
So it seems to me that wherever
intervals to every six weeks or so.
we set the funds rate today, we are going to have to look at it very
frequently. And I would think that we ought to plan at least one
telephone meeting two or three weeks hence, simply because if you're
going to operate on a federal funds target, by necessity you have to
have more meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just interpose that we have
interpreted what we are doing as alternative "B".
Let's try to make
certain that we are not dealing with differences of current
What I don't
perception. Don, do you want to address this issue?
want to happen here is to have differences which really relate to what
we are doing as distinct from where we want to be.
MR. KOHN. We, of course, wrote "B" as $450 million because
I think you
that's what we have been writing into the reserve path.
can make an argument, and Peter perhaps will want to comment on this,
that we really have been operating a bit easier than a $450 million
borrowing level might suggest.
If you wanted to be certain, or as
certain as you can be on this sort of thing, that the center of
gravity for the funds rate really was below 7 percent and that it's
more likely to average in the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent area and touch 7
percent only seldomly, then a $400 million borrowing target might give
you a little more assurance in that regard than a $450 million
borrowing target. And maybe that is a little more consistent with
what we have actually been doing. Peter, do you have more?

11/3/87

MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I think that would make my point; I
regard that kind of thing as within the flexibility that is stated in
the directive.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, rather than say alternative "A", "B", or
"C", let me say that I would prefer to have the funds rate centered on
6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent rather than around 7 percent. Now whether
that's "A"-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, that's actually where we are.

That's where "B" would be.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's where we think we are at the

moment.
MR. BOEHNE.

But we are talking here about alternative "B"

delivered--

MR. JOHNSON.

Just take whatever borrowing is consistent.

MR. BOEHNE. Right, but as I read the Bluebook, under
alternative "B" we're talking of a funds rate centering more around 7
percent.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BOEHNE.

No, no.
That's what "B" says.
That's what

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

"B" says, yes.

I think that's a rounding question.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I'd like to round it to 6-3/4 percent, if
that's current policy. I'm for current policy; if that's "A", I'm for
"A".
MR. ANGELL. Mine also would be [current policy].
I would
presume that bringing the wide range for the fed funds rate down to 4
to 8 percent would be more consistent, in the short run while we are
in this period of greater flexibility, with a short-run policy in
which we would really hold it and not let it go to 7 percent and not
let it go above 7 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed, what borrowing number were you
thinking of? Are you thinking of $250 million, which is what the "A"
number actually is?
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I am not very concerned about the
borrowing figure.
I want a 6-3/4 percent funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You are targeting the funds rate?

MR. BOEHNE.
If that takes $300 million in borrowing, I'm for
$300 million; if it takes $400 million, I'm for $400 milion.

-33-

11/3/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Well, the borrowing assumption is in
there.
When you're dealing with this sort of market it just breaks
away from-MR. BOEHNE.

That's right,

so I don't think--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You have to make a distinction of
whether you want to do borrowing or you want to do the funds rate.
MR. BOEHNE.

I want

to do the funds

rate;

that's what I want

to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You have made your point.

President

Black.
I think the point at which you arrive has to be
MR. BLACK.
dependent in part on what you think really happened to the stock
market: whether it came from real shocks or liquidity shocks or some
combination.
I lean to the view that it was more real, along the
lines of what Frank Morris was describing earlier, in that the
earnings-price ratios had gotten totally out of line with the bond
yield.
And then there were a couple of sparks that set it off: the
problems in the Persian Gulf and the likelihood that we were going to
At the same time, I
enact some very severe protectionist legislation.
And I think we
think there were liquidity shocks once this happened.
met those liquidity shocks, as we ought to in such a case, when we
But as far as
issued a statement that we would provide liquidity.
these real shocks are concerned, I don't think there's a lot that we
So, I would come out, I think,
can do about that through policy.
And like Ed Boehne, I
right where you did on this, Mr. Chairman.
would look through the borrowing to the federal funds rate and [seek a
rate] of around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent, which I had interpreted as
being a little on the easy side of "B" as it was written in the
Bluebook, but which you now have convinced me is really what you had
in mind.
In view of the way in which this directive is going to be
But there
dissected, I think it would be good to go with Variant I.
are a couple of references in there that would bother me and might
confuse the market.
If you look at the references to greater
flexibility on lines 105 and 106 of the draft that was distributed
with the brown cover, that need for greater flexibility, I think,
It isn't clear to me what
could be a little confusing to the market.
it means and I don't think it would be clear to the market.
I would
hasten to add that this reference to our intention to ensure adequate
liquidity is perfectly clear to me and I think it's obviously
So, on the wording of this, I would tend to end up the
appropriate.
same way Governor Angell did in saying somewhat lesser restraint
"would" and slightly greater restraint "might".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, I would favor Bluebook alternative
"B", which I would interpret to mean a funds rate of around 6-3/4 to 7
percent.
It seems to me that with rates at that lower level relative
to what we had been looking at six weeks ago, we will offset most of
In
the negative effects of what has happened in the stock market.
addition, I would favor Variant I and it seems to me that, given the
uncertainties, symmetrical language would be appropriate.

11/3/87

-34-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

I'm sorry, what language?

Symmetrical.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree entirely with
your analysis of the situation, given the uncertainty and the
potential for additional instability in the market.
I think that
alternative "B" is the correct alternative for policy in the short
term. I would target the federal funds rate at 6-3/4 percent; I
wouldn't worry about borrowing.
In order to get the message across to
the markets as to what we are doing at this very critical time, I
would favor Variant I. One point I would make is that the foreign
exchange market developments seem to me to be more significant than
indications of inflationary pressures, so I would be inclined to move
that up in the hierarchy of expressions there. And I think it is
important to keep the language related to frequent consultations. We
need to let the market know that we are aggressively and actively
involved in this whole situation.
I would prefer a tilt in the
directive towards easing, which would lead me to favor asymmetrical
directive language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I'm right along with everyone
else.
I favor the 6-3/4 percent funds rate, which I guess I would
have described as "A-" or "B+" going in [to this discussion], but your
description of "B" puts me there, so I don't have any problem with
that.
On the borrowing number I was thinking $300 million, but I
guess that becomes whatever it becomes, given the funds rate that
we're looking for. On the language, I favor Variant I; I think saying
as well as we can what is going on is important.
Of course, that
won't be released for about six weeks and that's a while down the
road.
If any misinterpretation seems to be going on in the markets as
to what we are doing, maybe another statement such as the one released
earlier would be called for.
I thought that was very, very
appropriate.
I like things even on both sides as a rule, so symmetric
language always appeals to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I favor alternative "B".
I have one question I
want to raise.
If you look at the directive in the policy record that
comes out Friday and then you look at this language here, it's really
not clear what "existing" means. Nowhere in the policy record is it
memorialized that there was an adjustment in the borrowing target; we
don't put borrowing targets in there. I think it was generally
perceived, but it is not recorded there in any fashion. That may be
something to think about.
In any case, I would like to express a
little concern along the lines of what Jerry said about balance here.
There has been a major shift in policy; and the broad perception of
policy, I think, was that we were headed toward further degrees of
tightening at the last meeting. That has been washed out and there
has been some easing. Now, on the balance side my argument would be
this: I guess I never felt that we could defend a particular level of
the dollar--that's going to be set by market forces.
So, maybe now
the fact that the dollar has moved down and there haven't been major

-35-

11/3/87

adverse effects to that is okay.
In the short run I think we can
influence how that transition to the different levels takes place and
whether it's orderly or not.
But it seems to me that any changes in
monetary policy that we make now add to the perception that all that
is happening is that the dollar is adjusting to reasonable market
levels. What I'm trying to say is, if it's perceived beyond that that
monetary policy is being conducted in a fashion that we really think
we have the latitude to run out of sync with the rest of the world,
that would be very damaging to that future psychology that you've
described. In other words, I think we have lost the flexibility to
ignore what goes on in the rest of the world here. Policy
coordination is important and I hate to see us take a policy stance in
the short run that might fuel that perception that we somehow backed
off the need to do that for all the reasons we have discussed on the
financial and the real side today. So, in any case, I favor "B" and
symmetrical language.
I think Variant I is fine but I come out where
Bob Black is: in a sense there are too many statements in there
dealing with the extraordinary circumstances; it might convey more of
a sense of uncertainty about current conditions than we want to
convey. I think I'd stick with what Bob suggested on that first
statement-MR. JOHNSON. What did Bob say?
Did he say just take out
that other sentence, or what did he mean?
MR. MELZER. Well, I think what he was saying was stay with
the desire to ensure the provision of adequate liquidity. But the
statements about flexibility in open market operations in lines 90 and
91 and then around line 105 or so in the part about the frequent
consultations would be thoughts I would be inclined to take out.
I
think our actions are more important than our words, and I think the
perception of our actions in the financial markets is a positive one.
I think the perception is we are doing the right thing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Norm tells me that the adjustment and
the switch will be noted in the next policy record.
MR. MELZER.
MR. BERNARD.

It will be?
That's our normal way to do it, yes.

MR. KOHN. But not in the one that will be released Friday;
you're right about that.
MR. MELZER. Right; so in the verbiage that leads up to this
directive we are indicating-MR. KOHN. Right, the one that will be released Friday leads
up to the last meeting.
MR. MELZER.

I think that's fine.

MR. KOHN. It does have a paragraph in there, however, noting
that the Committee has been consulting daily over this period; so it
says that the Committee has been meeting and reviewing operations.

-36-

11/3/87

MR. MELZER. If we are adopting the existing degree of
reserve restraint now, that somehow implies that a change, in a policy
sense, occurred prior to this action.
MR. KOHN. Right; and that would be covered in the policy
record associated with this meeting.
MR. MELZER. But let me ask you this, Don: If there had been
a telephone call at which that was specifically put to a vote would it
then have been reported as an addendum?
MR. KOHN.

In the one that comes out Friday, yes.

MR. BERNARD.
MR. MELZER.

Yes.
You know, that's a small subtlety.

MR. KOHN. A possibility, if the members would want it, would
be to expand the paragraph that has been added [to the policy record
We could
that comes out Friday] that mentions the consultations.
reference something about some easing in policy to go with that
language.
MR. MORRIS(?).

Yes, I think it would be desirable to do

that.
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.

That would be released this Friday.
I think that would make some sense.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

I am happy to get on the "B" band wagon, or some
MR. STERN.
It seems to me that that is
variant of the "B" band wagon, I guess.
In my mind, we have
the appropriate posture for us at the moment.
moved a significant degree already, and I think the results generally
have been satisfactory. One danger that I think we want to avoid here
is what I might call oversteering; and I think holding with something
like "B" is a step towards avoiding that reaction. I think Frank
Morris has posed a dilemma: How do we keep weakness in the dollar, if
I bring up that
it persists, from spilling into the bond market?
subject just as a reminder that I think the most logical way to get
out of that trap is to actually succeed in doing something meaningful
in fiscal policy here. But that's still a very much unresolved
matter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Indeed it is.

MR. STERN.

But that's another reason why I would--

MR. BLACK.

It is something we don't have a lot of control

over.
But I
MR. STERN. No we don't; we probably don't have any.
think that's another reason not to oversteer or overreact at the
We don't know how that is going to play out and we don't have
moment.
I would prefer some language like Variant I
much influence on it.
just because, as Tom [Melzer] and some others have suggested, these

-37-

11/3/87

are extraordinary circumstances and I think our language should
reflect that.
I guess I'm not all that concerned about exactly how we
I would pick something like
fine tune that language at the moment.
"B" as a starting point, and I personally would prefer asymmetric
language in favor of lesser restraint because it seems to me that it
is highly more likely, as we go forward here, that if we are going to
move at all that is the direction we are likely to want to go.
MR. PARRY.
If your concern is about the dollar why would you
then go in that direction?
MR. STERN. No, I didn't say I would resist declines in the
dollar;
I just said that I think the outcome may be largely out of
our hands.
MR. JOHNSON.
version of "B"?

By a variant of "B", did you mean the revised

In my mind, it's something like a $400 million
MR. STERN.
borrowing target with the expectation that the federal funds rate will
be 6-3/4 or 6-7/8 percent or thereabouts.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay, that's what "B" means from now on, right?

We do have a problem here, though.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
Let's focus on it because I may have to re-poll [those who have
Listening to everybody so far, everybody is
commented already].
locking into a funds rate that is very much more narrow than the funds
rate that we are stipulating in this directive. The question that we
have to decide is this: In the process of formulating this directive
do we go with these very broad funds rate ranges, which is what would
be consistent with a specific borrowing target, or do we go with a
much narrower funds rate target, however we publish it, and have a
It's very difficult to
much broader range on the borrowing side?
encompass the type of funds rate targeting that we have been hearing
around this table in terms of 5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8 percent. This
is a choice.
Mr Chairman, I might request that we eliminate
MR. MORRIS.
that last sentence in Variant I, because we are talking about
It is a temporary
stabilizing the funds rate for a short period.
policy, and I don't think it makes any sense to talk about a range of
I think we ought it admit that we
4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent.
have temporarily changed the operating procedures; and that would
imply that we ought to get rid of that last sentence and not talk at
all about ranges that way.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't think it's all that
different from what we have, in fact, done. We have had this wide
range but it has been understood that we have had a borrowing number
that was associated with a much narrower federal funds range. And we
I think we probably would have
didn't change that [sentence] then.
met and changed that borrowing level or changed it without meeting.
MR. ANGELL.
Well, I would certainly be opposed
to an announced narrow fed funds target.
It seems to me
important that we do not have the semblance of returning
style, which would really require frequent consultations

to
it
to
to

our going
is very
the 1970s
move it,

-38-

11/3/87

and would give some the impression that over the long run we might be
willing to allow whatever reserves might be consistent with that.
I
would much prefer to have the wider range but with a temporary
understanding, as we have had in these recent weeks, that we expect it
to be in the 6-1/2 to 7 percent area.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just make a couple of
comments about policy generally, and then I may have some language
here that can encompass a lot of what is being said.
First of all, to
return briefly to this exchange rate question, I don't approach the
exchange rate as a matter of theology; I approach it as a matter of
trying to balance the risks.
And my principal point on the exchange
rate is that I do see very real risks of a further substantial
depreciation in the value of the dollar.
I know certain things that
it will do: it will add to inflationary pressures at home; it will
work in the direction of putting greater pressure rather than lesser
pressure on interest rates at home.
I don't know how it works; but I
know the algebraic signs.
And I also know that, at least in the short
run, it raises more questions about growth prospects abroad, in part,
because of another elongation in the J curve. Now, I have to balance
those risks against the hope that it will somehow accelerate the
turnaround in the U.S. trade deficit, in a context in which there are
a host of uncertainties--such as growth prospects abroad--that I think
are more important than the exact level of the exchange rate.
So
again, it's not a matter of theology for me; it's a matter of where
are the risks and what are the greater risks.
Then, there is this
question of debt deficits and debtor nations.
The point that I was
trying to get at in bringing that up before is that whether we like it
or not, history tells us in rather unmistakable terms that a country
that finds itself in the position that we find ourselves in right now
is going to have higher interest rates than would otherwise be the
case. There may be an example someplace, somewhere in history that's
contrary to that, but I don't know of it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It doesn't exist.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I don't think it exists.
The only
other point I'd make is on this question of a measured approach to
what we are trying to do here.
I favor alternative "B" as Governor
Johnson defined it a moment ago.
But let me, if it's agreeable to
you, Mr. Chairman, suggest some language here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead, sure.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is built on Variant I, and I
think it gets at a lot of the things that you have been saying. The
first sentence, without prejudging decreasing or maintain or whatever
would read:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to [decrease somewhat/maintain/increase
slightly] the degree of pressures on reserve positions sought in
recent days."
Tom, I think that gets at your point. And I would
remove the next sentence after the semicolon completely. Go down to
the next sentence "The Committee ..."
MR. ANGELL.

What was your first your sentence again?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Take out all that stuff after the
semicolon. I'm at Variant I. The first sentence reads: "In the

-39-

11/3/87

implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to [decrease somewhat/maintain/increase slightly] the degree of
pressures on reserve positions" and I would insert "sought in recent
days."
MS. SEGER.

You think the markets know what that means?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, I think they do.

Okay.
Recent days or recent weeks--either one?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, either way; we can come back

to that.
MR. KEEHN.

Jerry, what's wrong with the next phrase?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me come to that in a
minute because what I was going to suggest in the next sentence, Si,
"The Committee recognizes that the volatile
deals with that, I think.
conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the economic
outlook may call for a special degree of flexibility in open market
operations" and then insert "depending, in particular, on demands for
liquidity growing out of recent or prospective developments in the
financial markets."
MR. PARRY. Would one be willing to say instead of "may call
for" just "calls for"?
SPEAKER(?).

Sure.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the idea, Si, is to get that all
into one sentence so it's not too overburdening. Then the next
sentence--and in my mind this is crucial--would start: "Apart from
such considerations", in other words apart from the providing
Then you would have your regular sentence with the
liquidity, etc.
somewhat or slightly lesser or greater reserve restraint. In other
Others may not agree
words, that next sentence would stay as it is.
with this, but contrary to what somebody said, I personally would take
out the sentence on the next page about relatively frequent
consultations. We certainly can do that and may do that, but I think
we ought to be trying to project not business as usual but not that we
So, as I see it, Mr
are ready to jump out the window ourselves.
Chairman, a directive couched more or less in those terms would allow
us to do what you certainly want to do and I gather what a lot of
But it would stop short of a directive that
other people want to do.
becomes a federal funds rate directive. And at least in my judgment,
it provides a bridge to go from these extraordinary conditions right
now to a more "normal" environment, if circumstances permit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would you do about the very last
phrase on the funds rate range?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm agnostic on that;
a broad range there--5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8 percent;
worry too much about that.

I would have
I wouldn't

11/3/87

table.

-40-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Morris.

Chairman.

Okay, I will put your variation on the

MR. MORRIS.
I think I've already said my piece, Mr.
I have nothing to add to it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'm certainly in favor of
maintaining the current policy, which I interpret to be alternative
"B".
And I must say I like the Corrigan wording of Variant I; I
prefer Variant I to Variant II because I think it is a more honest
statement of what we are doing, particularly with the language that he
I'd have a slight bias in the wording
is proposing to amend it.
and "might" [for
toward easing, and using "would" [for easing]
tightening].
I'd be in favor of maintaining a broad range for the fed
funds rate. And I don't feel strongly about it, but I think in the
interest of consistency and stability I'd stay with the 5 to 9
percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry, what was the last phrase?

MR. KEEHN. In the interest of consistency and stability, I'd
stay with 5 to 9 percent, but I don't feel very strongly about it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Governor Heller.

I'm also in favor of "B" and I like the Corrigan
MR. HELLER.
language. Like Mr. Keehn, I'd go with the asymmetrical version. But
on the fed funds rate, I think we should narrow it just a bit. You
I think the old practice of
know, 5 to 9 percent--that's a barn door.
So if we narrow it
centering it around the expected value is useful.
a little--and everybody seems to be saying 6-3/4 percent--and insert
5-3/4 to 7-3/4 percent we have a 2 percentage point range rather than
a 4 percentage point range. Maybe that gets a little of that feeling
in there without moving to a very narrow fed funds rate specification.
MR. PARRY.
for years.

That barn door is no wider now that it has been

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, it's different in the sense that
it depends on what you are targeting and what you are leaving as a
residual. So in that sense there is a meaning in doing that; the
question is whether in so doing we also suggest a change in policy
that we don't want to communicate.
MR. PARRY.
SPEAKER(?).

I think so.
I think that would, though.

MR. ANGELL.
I think that would; that would indicate
6-3/4 percent.
I wouldn't do it.
MR. HELLER.
than obfuscating.

Well, I'm in favor of making policy clear rather

MR. HOSKINS.
I think if the Desk comes in on either side of
the market around 6-3/4 percent, it is going to be pretty clear to the

11/3/87

market very quickly where we are;
attention to the borrowings.

MR. BOEHNE.

and they are not going to pay much

I think that's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Unintelligible] but it's one thing to
be pegging the funds rate, which is not what the Desk is doing, and

it's another thing to sort of be taking a shot at it in some
direction. To peg the rate would have some interesting implications.
Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm very much a mainstreamer here.
And I have nothing to add in the way of new reasons from what has been
said around the table. I would go with Variant I because I think we
need to be seen as being on the accommodating and concerned side here,
with asymmetric language in the direction of ease. I favor
alternative "B", and I would cut the announced funds rate range back
to 4 to 8 percent, again to indicate tilting in the direction of ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

For the Corrigan language?

I like the Corrigan language.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I think I'm right in line with everyone
else: alternative "B" as we have defined it, Variant I, Corrigan
language, and asymmetric. I think we are going to have a bit of a
problem if during this intermeeting period we finally decide that we
can move to a borrowing target. Making a transition from funds rate
targeting to that could be a little touchy, even though we don't know
when we will decide all of a sudden that things are stable enough to
go from a 6-3/4 percent center of gravity on the funds rate to a $400
million borrowing target, or whatever. I don't think it's going to
work that smoothly. We may need to think about how we make that
transition at some point; that might be a good time for a call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to respond to that: I don't see
how we can do that without a conference call. Governor Seger.
MS. SEGER. I guess I can go with "B" but as I reread the
Bluebook here for the seventh time, it looks to me as if Don Kohn was
saying that all of these alternatives--"A", "B", and "C"--assume
financial markets will return to conditions of normalcy, whatever that
is.
MR. KOHN.

Well--

MS. SEGER. And down deep in my stomach I'm just asking
myself: What if, in fact, we don't? Which alternative should I vote
for? Should I vote for "A" now because that possibly would allow us
the greater opportunity to deal with abnormal times or do I go with
"B" and assume that if the roof falls in we will at that point make a
policy shift?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the roof falls in there is nothing to
choose between those two alternatives.

11/3/87

MS. SEGER. Then you go to "E" and "F" or something like
that.
So having said that, I would go with "B", the Corrigan
language, and the asymmetric language tilted toward ease.
And on
targeting the fed funds rate, frankly, I would rather see it a little
on the soft side of 6-3/4 percent rather than between 6-3/4 and 7
percent, because I think the fed funds rate is viewed as out of line
now with other short-term rates.
If we are really interested in
communicating clearly what market participants-MR. ANGELL.

You want what on the fed funds rate?

MS. SEGER. I would put a range in the statement, but I'm
saying as an operating matter that I'd rather see us go to the low
side of 6-3/4 percent rather than going 6-3/4 to 7 percent.
I would
rather see us really targeting somewhere between 6-1/2 and 6-3/4
percent because I think that the funds rate is quite a bit out of line
with other short-term rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would join those who
would opt for "B" with asymmetric language towards ease--that is, if
"B" as it has been defined means a funds rate around 6-3/4 percent or
a bit higher, and I think it clearly does.
I also would adopt the
Corrigan language, particularly if I understood Jerry correctly, that
he wants to delete from Variant I the language referring to relatively
frequent consultations.
I think that highlights something that six
weeks or eight weeks from now, when this is released, perhaps will
have more meaning than we want to give to it.
On the federal funds
rate range--although quite clearly we are targeting the federal funds
rate within some very narrow range, it is under very unusual
circumstances--to change that language in the last sentence from 5 to
9 percent to 4 to 8 percent is a bit meaningless and, in my view,
unnecessary.
I'd leave it at the present range and keep it as broad
at it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
I don't have anything to add to what has been
said with respect to alternative "B".
I think I like the Corrigan
language; I'd prefer the funds rate about where it has been--I don't
have any problem with that.
I would not want to err too much on the
high side in terms of a federal funds rate over 7 percent because I
think that might sent the wrong signal to the market.
I think the
point that Manley Johnson raised is an important one: that it may be
difficult when do we shift from a mode of providing liquidity back to
some kind of monetary aggregate. And I think I would be remiss if at
my first opportunity with all of you I do not mention the monetary
aggregates.
In that regard, they have been growing slowly relative to
trend for six months or more. The staff projection for M2 is 4-1/2
percent, fourth quarter over fourth quarter and that's down from a
trend rate for two years of roughly 9 percent.
That usually is
considered a significant change with some real impacts; however,
that's not for this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we can feel the consensus, which
surprises me in a sense but--

-43-

11/3/87

MR. ANGELL.

Could I ask a question about the Corrigan--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We didn't listen to what Governor

Heller-MR. HELLER.
It's a very minuscule point: in the draft
directive with the brown [Class I] cover, lines 20-21, we say
"business capital spending was strong in the third quarter and forward
I think that's a little
indicators pointed to continuing gains."
strong. It's certainly getting a lot slower. Maybe we could just
drop "forward indicators pointing to continuing gains."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is not "pointing"; it's "pointed".

MR. HELLER.

Yes,

"pointed".

MR. KELLEY.

No, that's an important difference.

MR. HELLER.

Yes but pointed to continuing gains, though.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it's technically correct if you
think about it.
It is past tense: that the indicators in that period
pointed to continuing gains.
MS. SEGER.

Since then it has changed.

It's not discussing the continuing
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
gains, it's discussing the indicators.
MR. HELLER.
may misread it too.

Well, I certainly misread it and I think others

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that issue?

Does anybody else feel strongly about

MR. HELLER. Well, mine is not a strong feeling but I just
thought there was a-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technically, that statement is correct.
It's only a question of how you read it.
MR. HELLER. I think it sets the wrong tone a little; that
"continuing gains" is what bothers me. Maybe you want to say: And
while forward indicators pointed to continuing gains, this is no
longer true.
MR. BLACK.

You can say way back when they--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Yes, I'd like to look at the Corrigan language.
Where it says "may call for a special degree of flexibility".
I think
that's that first sentence where he added a phrase. Would it be okay
to say "may continue to call for a special degree of flexibility
because"

-44-

11/3/87

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure what it says right now
because it was sent out to be typed about 10 minutes ago; it hasn't
come back yet.
MR. ANGELL.
amendments.

Well, I understand, but I'm just looking at the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a suggestion?
This might not
be a bad idea since it is a very crucial directive.
I think it would
be useful to have it xeroxed and circulated so everyone has a chance
to take a shot at it.
Is that-MR. ANGELL.

That's all I'm asking, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have any further comments
at this particular stage on substantive questions?
It's fairly
obvious that there is a consensus basically on "B", however we define
it, and asymmetrical language towards ease.
Everyone is talking,
essentially, 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent on the funds rate, but I presume,
to depict it in the usual wider range. And Jerry Corrigan is getting
rave reviews and we will use his language. However, before we
finalize it, let's take a look to make certain that we are all talking
from the same set of notes.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Let me see it.

MR. ANGELL. Would our transition borrowing be expected to be
$450 million or $400 million?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

I would say $400 million.

Okay.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Let me just take a look at it.

MR. ANGELL. The words that I wanted to look at here would be
to continue to call for a special degree of flexibility, which would
be an indication of continuing what we have been doing rather than of
some new policy. And then I have trouble with that sentence: the
outlook for monetary growth over the months ahead is subject to
unusual uncertainty.
I'm not sure what that means; it seems to me
that the only uncertainty when you look at Don's new figures is that
it looks as if we have had a liquidity bulge.
But certainly we don't
expect uncertainty in regard to the downside do we?
MR. KOHN. No, that's why I had in that reference to somewhat
greater than expected.
If you keep reading, it says on lines 100 and
101: "but more rapid growth is possible should preferences for
liquidity be particularly strong."
That was exactly the point I was
making. You may not need the sentence on "subject to unusual
uncertainty" if you have those sentences that follow.
MR. ANGELL.
I'm just not sure what that sentence says.
It
seems to me that the uncertainty is somewhat directed at one side.
MR. MELZER. When you say "apart from such considerations,"
it seems that it's not necessary down below to have "conditions in the
financial markets" in there again.

11/3/87

-45-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

Right; that's right.

So we have to make this asymmetrical right?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I guess so.

MS. SEGER. I thought it was lesser reserve restraint would
and slightly greater might.
Isn't that what we-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The sentence I think should read:
"Apart from such considerations slightly lesser reserve restraint
would or slightly greater might".
MR. ANGELL.

No, somewhat, slightly.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Would or slightly greater restraint might.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. MELZER.

Somewhat lesser reserve restraint--

Okay.

You need a comma after "would," too.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
business expansion, etc.

And the economy, strength of the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Angell, are you still concerned
about that money growth reference?
Oh, it's not--.
MR. ANGELL.
changed would [unintelligible].

I think the way it is now

MR. KEEHN. Earlier, somebody suggested that in line 5 we
change that "outlook may call for" to "may continue to call for".
That's appropriate.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Should we put 4 to 8 percent in for the
funds rate range or would you prefer 5 to 9 percent?
MR. GUFFEY.

I'd prefer just to maintain 5 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I have a quick rundown on the copy
of this Corrigan language for 4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent?
Vice Chairman Corrigan - My own preference was 5 to 9.
Mr. Angell - 4 to 8.
Mr. Boehne - 4 to 8, but not a strong preference.
Mr. Boykin - 5 to 9.
Mr. Heller - 4 to 8
Mr. Johnson - Totally indifferent.
Mr. Kelley - 4 to 8
Ms. Seger 4 to 8
Mr. Stern - 5 to 9
Mr. Keehn - 4 to 8

11/3/87

-46-

MR. JOHNSON - I'm totally indifferent, but you might even
drop the whole sentence.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. HELLER.

You're not voting on that?
Yes, I'll just be agnostic.
Well, 4 to 8 is closer to zero.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

[Unintelligible]

around 6 to 7

percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
read the directive.

Before we vote, let's have Norm Bernard

MR. BERNARD. In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of
pressure on reserve positions sought in recent days. The Committee
recognizes that the volatile conditions in financial markets and
uncertainties in the economic outlook may continue to call for a
special degree of flexibility in open market operations depending, in
particular, on demands for liquidity growing out of recent or
prospective developments in financial markets. Apart from such
considerations, slightly lesser reserve restraint would-MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

Somewhat.
Somewhat lesser.

MR. BERNARD. --or slightly greater reserve restraint might
be acceptable depending on the strength of the business expansion,
indications of inflationary pressures, developments in foreign
exchange markets, as well as the behavior of the monetary aggregates.
While the outlook for monetary growth over the months ahead is subject
to unusual uncertainty, the contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period
from September through December at annual rates of about 6 to 7
percent, but more rapid growth is possible should preferences for
liquidity be particularly strong. Over the same period, growth in M1
is expected to be well above its average pace in the previous several
months. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 4 to 8
percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I also read from everything I've been
listening to that the official borrowing target, to the extent that
it's required, is $400 million.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, that word respectively isn't needed is it?
The word respectively should be out?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Right.

It's out, if you put it the way--

-47-

11/3/87

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since it is 1:30 p.m.,
to vote on this and get to lunch.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

I think we ought

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The vote is unanimous. The date of our
next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, December 15th and 16th. Do I
hear a motion to adjourn?
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection, to lunch.
END OF MEETING

