Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 17-18, 1984

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Monday, December 17, 1984, at 3:00 p.m. and
continuing on Tuesday, December 18, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey and Morris, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang,
Lindsey, Prell, Siegman, Stern, and
Zeisel, 1/ Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Attended Tuesday session only.

12/17-18/84

-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Messrs. Balbach, Bisignano, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,
Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,
Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Broaddus, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
December 17-18, 1984
December 17--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to approve the minutes.
objection. We'll go to Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.

No

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any discussion?

MR. WALLICH. Has anybody on the other side suggested any
modification [in our swap line agreements]?
MR. CROSS.

Only these two technical modifications have been

proposed.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say the Bundesbank
raised the question of whether it was worthwhile having the swap line
at all.
MR. CROSS.
They asked whether we were interested in
continuing it and I told them we were.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
getting a message across.

That was sheer bluff--a way of

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion on this?
If not, I
will entertain a motion, other than Mr. Cross' motion, to renew these
swap agreements as amended.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. MARTIN.

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Without objection, they are approved.

Mr.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any comments?

MR. WALLICH. Peter, you said that non-reduction of the
budget deficit was not likely to have a great rate impact unless the
economy rises.
Does that imply that people believe that, yes, a
reduction of the budget deficit would have a substantial rate impact?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think they believe that a significant
reduction would have an impact, yes.
MR. BALLES.
Peter, maybe this is the wrong time to be
raising the question, but sometime before we get through here I'd like
to have somebody on the staff explain, if they can, what seems to be
going on in M1 with this latest big drop of over $7 billion. Are we
looking at seasonal problems, reporting problems, or don't we know?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Well,

I would say that there are at least

12/17-18/84

seasonal problems.

But Steve might want to comment.

MR. AXILROD.
We'll know better tomorrow when we get some
confirmation or not of the data for the last week. At the moment we
expect a fairly great rebound, though maybe not an entire rebound.
And yet, having looked it over very carefully, I think there was a
seasonal problem having to do with days ending with threes compared
with four or five and the timing of the Social Security payment, which
I'm not sure was properly allowed for.
So, I would expect a rebound
in the week of the 18th and I'll be surprised if it isn't pretty big.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Based on some of those market surveys taken
among the larger banks, people in the market are looking for a sizable
rebound from the $7 billion drop--on the order of $4 to $6 billion.
MR. PARTEE.

So you want a $6 billion [leeway],

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. RICE.

Peter?

I would suggest $6 billion, yes.

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Approved.
We
transactions. Without objection, they're
have presented a little paper on a number
be resolved now but should be resolved by

need to ratify the
approved. Mr. Axilrod, you
of items that don't have to
the time we come to 1985.

MR. AXILROD. As I mentioned in the paper, a question that is
somewhat but not necessarily related to the Committee's decisions is
the importance the Committee may or may not wish to place on M1
which
But the
obviously is the aggregate most closely related to reserves.
first issue is much more an operating issue; the other two are partly
The
operating issues but partly [address] the policy thrust.
operating issue was mentioned by President Morris at the last meeting
when he raised the question of the behavior of the funds rate and
borrowing when the funds rate got higher [than expected].
The
Committee, of course, voted with knowledge that the rate tended to get
higher than at the least the staff was projecting at the beginning of
each period--except for the last [unintelligible].
Later on there
seemed to be some drop in the funds rate as borrowing stayed the same.
In trying to explain that [behavior] we raised the possibility that
shifts in the demand for borrowing could have occurred in the wake of
the Continental problem and the problems with Latin American debt
I'd like to point out two aspects of this borrowing
negotiations.
targeting that do create problems.
One occurs when the money supply
is weak, not because of these kinds of shifts in the supply function
but because of what is going on in economic activity and transactions
demands.
I do believe that we did get a higher funds rate in the
summer for any level of borrowing because banks became more protective
of their positions in order to conserve their access to the discount
window; they didn't really want to be seen at the window or to have
rumors floating around the market that they were in there. In the
We ran
paper I made an effort to estimate the extent of this effect.
through our money market model holding the funds rate at the May
level, which was around 10.30 percent, through September. The
borrowing level was about $1 billion. In doing that, we found that we
could account for 2 percentage points [less] M1 growth at an annual

12/17-18/84

rate.
We also got 2 percentage points less growth at an annual rate
over that period because of the gradual rise in the funds rate from
10.30 to 11.75 percent, given the level of borrowing. I would say
that was a supply constraint, given what was going on in the banking
system and the way we were targeting but, as I say, a constraint that
the Committee accepted.
Subsequently, I think another factor was at
work.
That, of course, was that these higher rates worked through and
affected the economy, weakening the transactions demand for money.
But it might have been weakening in any event.
So, I can't isolate
whether it was from that or from other factors that were working--the
[unintelligible] working or the inventory cycle, for example. And
that also tended to weaken money growth for any given level of
borrowing.
Now, the Committee does allow for all this in its operating
procedures because as money supply weakens or strengthens there's room
for judgmental adjustments in borrowing. But there is not [a
provision] for any automatic adjustment in the [current] period. The
actual judgmental adjustments in borrowing that have occurred are
pretty much on track with what almost 100 percent automaticity would
have given in the last month. But they are nowhere near on track with
what 100 percent automaticity would have given, for example, prior to
the last month. So, if there were any automaticity--as in the period
from '79 to '82--borrowing would have been lower well before last
month. In light of this, and partly because looking at the data in
various ways it seems that M1 is nowhere near as bad a variable as it
was in the period from '82 to the first half of '83, I do make a
suggestion.
It actually is somewhat like the suggestion Mr.
Sternlight and I made earlier this year, which was not greeted with
open arms by the Committee. That suggestion is to permit a certain
degree of automaticity in the level of borrowing, should M1 weaken.
The suggestion that I made [in the paper] is really rather moderate--a
very small-scale automaticity--because I'm assuming that the Committee
would prefer to continue essentially a judgmental approach.
But
within that general approach, it strikes me as possible to let
borrowing fall by a very small amount if M1 is weak. The suggestion
there is [to limit an automatic change in borrowing to perhaps] 25 to
50 percent of the deviation in M1 from what is acceptable.
That would
give you a [typical] deviation, I think, on the order of $35 to $70 or
$100 million. Some weeks it would be down; some weeks it would be up.
I'm suggesting that we permit that kind of variation and then lever on
top of that the judgmental adjustment, should there be a persistent
trend weakness in M1 or persistent weakness in the economy or
persistent movement of the exchange rate away from what is considered
desirable in light of the Committee's overall objectives.
In addition, I think another lesson to be drawn from the
experience of the summer and fall is in the area of judgmental
adjustments.
Traditionally, of course, for judgmental adjustments we
look at interest rates, the economy, overall credit conditions, and
other similar things. What has happened very recently, of course, is
that the dollar has remained high on exchange markets longer than most
people expected. With the international sector now becoming such an
important element in changes in GNP, it seems to me that under present
circumstances among the judgmental factors that might be given a
little more weight than perhaps the Committee is used to thinking of
would be the value of the dollar.
Another I mentioned is, of course,
indications of price pressures; one could add almost any indicator to

12/17-18/84

help in assessing inflationary expectations and the degree of
restraint that we might be getting from any given set of credit
conditions. Those were comments that had to do mainly with the
implementation of operating procedures, Mr. Chairman.
But, of course, the degree to which the Committee either
judgmentally, or even to a degree automatically, would want to respond
to M1 depends in part on the reliability of M1 as an indicator of the
behavior of the future variables about which the Committee is really
concerned--which are obviously economic growth and the price level.
Dick Porter and others on the staff did some work over the last few
weeks in that respect and we're still in the process of evaluating it.
But in substance, it seems to indicate that [the reliability of] M1,
just looking at its velocity and its predictability to GNP, more or
less disappeared over the 1982-1983 period; it was not a variable that
one could put any confidence in.
Now, when evaluated in relation to
other variables such as M2 and M3, it is probably no less reliable in
some sort of absolute sense than it was in the period before '82 to
'83.
From what we can discern statistically, it might be giving
roughly the same average amount of information, but the degree of
confidence we might want to have in that average amount of information
ought to be a little less.
That is, the range of variation around
what it's conveying is a little wider. And I think that is not an
unusual finding, given the kinds of institutional changes that have
occurred since we entered this new era of deregulation with different
kinds of deposits such as Super NOWs and MMDAs.
People are still
getting used to them and we're not sure how they're going to behave
So, I would judge from this that if you
under various circumstances.
thought M1 was reliable in the '79-'82 period, with a caveat in a
sense that one should be a little more uncertain now, you could think
it is fairly reliable now. But I would emphasize that you ought to be
more uncertain; that's what the data seem to be suggesting.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I discussed an issue that has come up
in many years--target basing. I focused on the base for M1 because
the market and everyone else seems to focus on it as the principal or
key variable for the Committee.
The question becomes whether to base
on where M1 actually ended up the year or whether to base on the
midpoint of your target or some such other point of your target.
It
happens that at the beginning of February at least, the HumphreyHawkins Report did suggest that the Committee thought that with
velocity behaving somewhat normally M1 might come in around the middle
of its target.
It was mentioned in the report that if velocity were
weak M1 could come in higher; it was silent on the question of
velocity being strong.
In the event, velocity growth in the year was
about 4 percent, which is a shade higher than the average for the
second year of expansion in the postwar period--but not enough higher,
I suspect, to make a lot of difference in how you look at it
analytically. I don't think I need to detail the analysis that is
I tended to conclude that
laid out in the paper, Mr. Chairman.
presentational considerations in some sense argue against rebasing M1.
It is a bit difficult to get clear the difference between an actual
growth and a hypothetical growth based on your target.
But even more
importantly, I think it may be difficult to explain, if the Committee
wished to rebase this year, why this year and not earlier years.
In
the past we have often considered a result within a percentage point
of the midpoint as success, by which I mean well within the range of
It is probably well within the
variation of ordinary M1 movement.

12/17-18/84

range of really unrandom shocks of velocity that probably should be
compensated by M1 movements.
Further, of course, it has to be noted
that the Committee can indicate--and has done so in the past--that it
may wish growth to be in the upper, the middle, or the lower portion
of the range that it does adopt, depending on what it views as [a
desirable] path in coming years. So, that option is open.
In
essence, this paper tends to be somewhat negative on the question of
shifting the base, largely on practical grounds [relating to the
difficulty] of explanation.
On the economic issue of whether there
has in fact been a demand shift that accounts for 1 percentage point
lower growth, I tried to remain somewhat agnostic. There is evidence
that says there is.
You can look at our quarterly model. But I think
"within 1 percentage point" doesn't seem like a very good practical
argument to be making if growth were 2, 3, or 4 percentage points off.
If there are [major] institutional developments we can point to, then
I think the argument has practical weight. But I don't think it's a
very good practical argument when you're only 1 percentage point off
your midpoint.
It seems a bit like [unintelligible].
MR. MARTIN. Steve, with regard to the question of rebasing:
Are you saying, in the absence of new savings instruments or other
institutional changes, that if we were to select the midpoint of the
fourth quarter or the midpoint of the year or something of that sort,
that based on that rather hypothetical level we would tend to be
locked in and have to, in effect, use that procedure in the future?
MR. AXILROD. No, I don't think the Committee is ever locked
in, but I think you would have to explain why you rebased this year
and not in earlier years when there may have been even bigger misses.
And then, of course, you would have to explain why not rebase the next
year.
I don't think it locks you in to doing that each time at all.
MR. WALLICH. It would seem to me that it locks us in, in the
sense that we're accepting the path of the previous year, which may or
may not have been right.
But if you extrapolate this [procedure] into
the distant future, we'll always be on the midpoint of every past
cone.
MR. AXILROD. In that sense, yes.
I thought Governor Martin
was asking the practical question of whether we could be forced in
some sense to make the same decision.
MR. MARTIN.

Precedent.

MS. HORN. In principle, we [would] never base it on the
midpoint unless we were willing to argue that we had reasonable
targets, or what we might in retrospect judge to have been reasonable
targets, in the previous year.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, whatever the money growth was,
it was associated with a GNP result.
And we would have to be saying
also that we found the GNP result to be inadequate, I think, to
rebase. The other comment I had is that this is putting a lot of
emphasis on the midpoint.
My recollection is that we have not
emphasized the midpoint of the ranges. We have said that it's a range
because we don't know where in the range would be the appropriate
number. Of all years, this one we came closer to being within our

12/17-18/84

So, this
ranges for everything than any other year I can recall.
burning issue is not really much of an issue this year, is it?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to be talking about this little
We
matter of the base, which I suppose is the simplest to talk about.
We're just
don't have to make decisions on any of these issues today.
exchanging some preliminary views, so why don't we stay on this
Frank, were you on this question
particular question for the moment.
or something else?
[MR. MORRIS].

I was on the other operating procedure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
started with it.

Well, let's stay on this one since we

On
I'd like to pursue the operating side too.
MR. BOEHNE.
the issue of rebasing, it seems to me that's why we have some width in
I don't recall that we have said that the midpoint was
the ranges.
better than the upper or the lower limits. What we generally have
said is "Here's the range and there might be certain [circumstances]
that would take us to the top end, or maybe even a little over, or to
So, the idea of making the midpoint sacrosanct in any way
the bottom.
is probably too mechanistic--or at least too mechanistic compared to
how we've been operating in the past.
MR. RICE. Haven't we said, though, that we expected a
particular aggregate to come in at around the midpoint, or above the
midpoint, or below the midpoint?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Sometimes we have and sometimes we have

not.
MR. RICE.

Well, more recently we've stated what we expect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Not for all aggregates all the time.

MR. AXILROD.
In July, Mr. Chairman, the Committee and your
report were silent on M1; it was in February when there was a
[passing] mention that [growth around] the midpoint [would be
appropriate], depending upon velocity.
[We said]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
credit to be above [their ranges].

in July that we expected M3 and

I think there is even less of a case
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
for making a shift in 1985 based on the 1984 results--both for the
reasons that Chuck gave and for the embarrassment we would have if we
I just don't see any way we
didn't make a downward correction in M3.
could present anything as drastic as this to the public and to the
Congress in a selective way. Down the road we could be facing an
accumulation of many misses and it would not be an easy job to stick
It seems
to this; and, certainly, we can't stick to it selectively.
to me that it would be a great mistake to depart from our policy of
basing on the actual outcome rather than on the earlier year's
targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have said from time to time in
the past--and I'm not sure whether we said it ex ante or ex post--that

12/17-18/84

high growth or low growth in the earlier part of the year was fine
because it made up for fairly slow or fairly rapid growth in the
previous year.
MR.
the geometry
off above or
of some kind

MARTIN. That raises the question of the presentation-that is so bedeviling in using that cone. When we start
below the line so drawn, if we could express it in terms
of plus or minus a parallel line--.

SPEAKER(?).

Yes, I saw them in the Bluebook.

MR. PARTEE. What are those parallel lines?
as to what they were. They're upward sloping.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. PARTEE.
them back.

I wasn't clear

They're sloped on the midpoint--5-1/2 percent.
Oh, I see.

You get the end point and then draw

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Congratulations.
I thought the staff
would never do that.
I tried 3 or 4 years ago and could never get the
staff to do that.
MR. GRAMLEY. You see they didn't throw the cone out.
They
just put some parallel lines around it.
It makes everybody feel good;
you can take your pick that way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think once before we drew M1 that way.
Does anybody else want to comment on this rebasing question?
I have
not detected a lot of sympathy for it.
MR. MARTIN. I would agree with Tony that it looks as though
it's a major move.
It's hard to explain.
I don't think it is a very
good idea.
MR. BLACK. It's hard to explain that you're aiming at a rate
of growth from someplace you aren't.
MR. RICE.

The presentational problems are insurmountable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If we continue to get $7 billion declines
in M1 for the next few weeks-MR. PARTEE.

Yes, you might have to do--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] something even less than
We had a couple of
Nobody else has comments on this question?
that.
people who wanted to talk about the operating procedure. Mr. Morris
and Mr. Boehne.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the memorandum that
Steve wrote. I'm not very enchanted with the idea of solving this
problem through automaticity.
It seems to me that that would be a
step backwards toward the kind of interest rate volatility we think we
But I do think that in a situation where the
have gotten away from.
Manager finds that he cannot attain his total reserve path and at the
same time produce the assumed level of borrowings--which is the case
we had this summer--there is an incompatibility in the instructions to

12/17-18/84

the Manager and it ought to be resolved not in some automatic way but
by having a conference call to the Committee.
I suspect we may well
have the opposite case in '85 at some point, with total reserves
growing faster than the original projection because the Manager is
just pushing in nonborrowed reserves at an increased rate in order to
meet the borrowing projection.
I would have the Committee decide--on
the basis of what is happening to interest rates, the economy, the
money supply, the exchange rate, and everything else--how we should
deal with this incompatibility in the instructions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what you're getting at.
There is no instruction on total reserves, the way we have it now.
Maybe there should be.
MR. MORRIS.
The total reserve path comes from the
Committee's objective with respect to the aggregates.
[Required
reserves are] plotted out first and then the Manager puts in the
[excess reserve allowance] and then the assumed borrowing level is
subtracted to form a nonborrowed reserve path.
So, although we've
[not] talked about a total reserves path, that's implicit in the whole
operation. The problem this summer was that the Desk couldn't hit the
total reserve path because it was following a nonborrowed path that
was related to a level of borrowing that the market was not doing.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Wasn't the more meaningful
incompatibility this summer the fact that we weren't getting the fed
funds rate that one normally would associate with the nonborrowed
reserve path?
And that was because of the changes-MR. MORRIS.
That was a product of the banks' aversion to
using the discount window, which was reflected in a lower-thanexpected level of borrowing relative to the interest rate.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Well, what would you do about that?

MR. MORRIS.
My thought is that we'd have a conference call
and the Manager would say that we have a situation in which the banks
appear to be averse to borrowing from the window and as a consequence
they're [bidding] up the funds rate and we're not getting the level of
borrowing that we expected to get.
The question to the Committee then
would be:
Do we want to reduce the borrowing level or not?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
we have a meeting.
MR. PARTEE.
to let it roll.

We don't have to have a conference call;

Yes, we discussed that at a meeting and decided

MR. MORRIS.
I'm talking about in between meetings, if we
have an incompatibility in the instructions by this definition.
MR. MARTIN. But if the FOMC had chosen some percentage [of
automaticity], say, 25 or 50, the Committee would know a priori what
form the implementation would take.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but there may be times when we might want
to adjust the procedure and times when we might not, depending upon
the circumstances.
I'm rather disenchanted with automatic adjustments

12/17-18/84

after our experience of recent years.
I'd be more comfortable with a
judgmental assessment as to what we ought to do to reach our
objectives.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I fully understand. You had
the chance during the summer in a meeting, whether or not we had a
conference call.
You had repeated chances in September, October--.
How many times did we meet this fall?
Nobody wanted to do anything
about it.
MR. AXILROD.

The relevant meetings were July and August.

MR. MORRIS.
I forget which meeting it was, but we had an
unexpected rise in the funds rate. To my knowledge and my
recollection, nobody on this Committee contemplated the funds rate
going above 11-1/2 percent even though we had a 12 percent [upper
limit on the] range.
That was not the expectation given in the
Bluebook as to what the course of action chosen by the Committee would
produce in the way of the funds rate.
The funds rate rose from 10-1/2
to 11-1/2 percent, not because of any overt decisions on the part of
the Committee but because of the change in attitude on the part of the
banks to borrowing. Now, the question was:
Should we have responded
to that by lowering the borrowing?
That's my question.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I understand that question. But I say
that at least once the Committee had a meeting and--for a while,
anyway--said no. And the opposite happened this fall.
MR. MORRIS.
I think it's quite clear with hindsight that we
should have said yes.
But that is clearly hindsight. However, I
would much prefer that sort of procedure to an automatic response on
the part of the Manager in putting in a certain amount of reserves.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would agree with you on the
automaticity. I think there are problems with that.
But, let's face
it:
In practice there is a modest range of flexibility based on
consultations of the Manager and Steve Axilrod and the Chairman.
We
have recognized that, I think, by talking about some flexibility.
In
particular, at the last meeting we delegated some flexibility around a
modest range.
Basically, there are three people who make those
decisions. I think it would be very awkward and difficult to have a
consultation every time. What we are seeing now, and I think it's
working fairly well, is that when there is a need to make a larger
change in the borrowing, then the Chairman has a consultation. I
don't really see that there should be changes in practices for times
that might require some more immediate, flexible, and minor
adjustment. Those adjustments are done now basically.
Sometimes the
Desk waits a day or two before draining or adding reserves. There is
some flexibility now based on the tripartite approach we're following,
keeping an eye on interest rates as well as on hitting the reserve
path.
I'd agree with you:
I don't particularly like the idea of even
a partially automatic adjustment; it just seems to me that what we're
doing now makes a good deal of sense.
I really do feel that we had
the opportunity to take whatever action--a change in the borrowing-was necessary to get the funds rate that we were all thinking of.
In
that sense I agree with the Chairman; I think we had the opportunity.
But the economic events were changing at the time--the economy seemed
to be overheating and, therefore, we really didn't object to the fact

12/17-18/84

The majority of the
that we were getting a higher fed funds rate.
Committee was comfortable enough with the situation.
MR. MORRIS. Well, maybe I'm proposing something we're
already following. On the other hand, I think there is some merit in
thinking of it in terms of a total reserves objective.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've not focused on that aspect of it
They are well
because reserves have been falling short for some time.
below the mark. Mr. Boehne, I think, expressed a desire to talk
I have a note here that Manufacturer's Hanover has cut its
earlier.
prime rate to 10-3/4 percent.
MR. BOEHNE. On this judgment versus rules debate, there are
different kinds of views as to how you can apply judgment. You can
have a judgmental approach which says that when things don't go
according to plan you look at the money supply and reserves and
foreign exchange and so on and then make a judgmental response to
In that kind of approach, in effect, it
whatever the deviation is.
takes positive evidence to make a change. Or you can have a
judgmental approach which says that if we were on an automatic
response of some kind, this is the way we would go; now, are there any
So, in
good reasons why we might not want to go in that direction?
that sense, you need negative information. In the way this is carried
out, is it more the first kind or the second kind or is it somewhere
I'm not sure.
in between?
The degree of automaticity we're suggesting is
MR. AXILROD.
so minimal that I suspect it would hardly be seen in the market at all
except that to a minor degree it might temper the timing, at the
Therefore, it is really more
margin, of Mr. Sternlight's operations.
of the second kind of indicator--that your judgment ought to be in
this direction and here's a small step in a way that might even be
At
reversed in the next two weeks if the aggregates pop back up.
least I have in mind more of the second kind of approach, in spirit.
It wasn't that you would stop it, but it's so small that it isn't
going to have any very significant effect until it really accumulates
substantially.
So it's not really automaticity in the pure
MR. BOEHNE.
It's a direction in which your judgment ought to be leaning
sense.
and which you ought to follow unless there's a-MR. AXILROD. There's a small step in that direction but one
that I do not think will be noticeable in the market, given the
variations we've had in the borrowing/funds rate relationship.
MR. BOEHNE.
happens now?

But in reality how does that differ from what

MR. AXILROD. Well, it gets you started and it tones up your
thinking, I think. The word that comes to mind is "excuse," but I
It gives you a reason to be thinking in
don't mean it in a bad sense.
that direction--to start something so that you don't say it's just a
It's a reason, in some sense.
feeling in my gut that's moving me.
MR. BOEHNE.
happens now?

So, it's really a fairly subtle shift from what

12/17-18/84

MR. AXILROD.

That's all I had in mind.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
I would like to speak up in favor of some degree
of automatic response, as Steve set forth a good case for it in his
paper.
In fact, the whole paper was a badly needed new look at our
operating procedures in the sense of some general dissatisfaction by
many of us--with the benefit of hindsight now--with how the second
half turned out in terms of our money targets and interest rate levels
and similar matters.
I would have to say, though, with respect to our
current operating procedure or even the amendment to it that you are
proposing, Steve, that I think we're still going to be subject to all
the weaknesses that we found way back in the 1960s with respect to
free reserves. Any given level of borrowing or any given level of
free reserves is compatible with a wide range of interest rates, a
wide range of different economic outcomes, and a wide range of
possible growth in the monetary aggregates.
That's what we
experienced so many years ago.
I'm afraid we're still working with a
tool that has those built-in disadvantages.
So, while I personally
would be in favor of going along some sort of semi-automatic route of
the type Steve described, I think we also ought to consider, as an
alternative to that, some semi-automatic targeting of nonborrowed
reserves, which is after all closer to what we're really trying to
control--the monetary aggregates as our intermediate targets.
We
don't need to get back to a full automatic pilot. Even if we were to
go back to nonborrowed reserves targeting, we could also introduce
some semi-automaticity simply by making judgments as to the degree to
which the nonborrowed reserve path would be varied in response to a
deviation of money from path. I'm pretty much convinced at this point
that that kind of approach would be superior over the longer run than
something hooked on the borrowing target.
[The latter approach] most
recently, as well as many years ago, has demonstrated the kinds of
weaknesses that concern many of us.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I end up very close to John Balles
on this.
I'd like to say first of all that I agree that Steve has
done a very fine job on this memo and, as some of you might suspect, I
think he is right in saying that M1, despite all its imperfections, is
probably still the best target.
So, I would favor tightening up the
targeting procedures on that so that we could more nearly hit our
targets, which leads me to favor, as he does, some degree of
automaticity. I think Steve's suggestion of about 50 percent of any
deviation of required reserves from path would be a pretty good place
to start.
But I still entertain hopes that someday we're going to get
to a total reserve target and a penalty discount rate, because I
believe ultimately that that's the best hope we have for really
getting to the point we want to go.
I'd also like to mention the
point that Steve made about the difference between a net borrowed
reserve target and a fed funds target.
I think that's a point that
has escaped many of us.
There are some differences there; maybe they
are differences of degree. But if in fact there is a greater degree
of fluctuation in the federal funds rate under the borrowed reserve
targeting, I think that can give us good information, as Steve
suggests, unless of course the change in the federal funds rate comes
because of a shift in the borrowing function or something of that

12/17-18/84

To me the main point that really comes out of this paper is
sort.
that it generally underscores the need for not less fluctuation in the
federal funds rate but more fluctuation in order to achieve our
And that in turn calls for more frequent and maybe larger
targets.
adjustments in the borrowing target to reinforce these desirable
In short, I think that the
movements in the federal funds target.
present procedure, when we restrict the limit on fluctuations in the
federal funds rate, is not that much different from targeting the
I would like to strengthen it so that we really
federal funds rate.
do take more advantage of the differences that exist between those two
basic procedures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I don't think I really want to change
anything, and I guess I have a couple of reasons.
First of all, I
think that this whole debate about automaticity and targeting
procedures and everything else is very germane as is this reliability
question that Steve talks about in his memorandum. And on the
reliability of M1, I must confess that I'm more skeptical, not less.
In my judgment, these various equations under the best of conditions
don't leave one very comfortable; and I would emphasize that those
equations by definition are the best of conditions because among other
Apropos of
things they incorporate all the historical data revisions.
that, even as we sit here today questioning what happened in the first
half and the second half of this year, I think there's at least a 5050 chance that by the time the jury is in and all the revisions are
made M1 is going to look a lot different for the year 1984 than it
looks right now.
MR. PARTEE.

The pattern within the year?

In other
MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, the pattern within the year.
words, the second half will be a good deal stronger and the first half
I don't know that for certain but, as I
will be a good deal weaker.
say, there is at least a 50-50 chance of that and that's just the
So, I
first revision. There will be several others down the road.
think the question of the reliability of M1 just in the narrow and
empirical sense of the numbers themselves is a very, very important
aspect of this question of automaticity. Partly for that reason but
for many others, as Tony and others have touched on, I think it would
be a mistake to make any move in the direction of a more automatic
response no matter how marginal it may seem. Having said that, I too
have my frustrations--not so much with the apparatus, but in some very
Clearly, at
real ways with the environment within which it works.
least in my judgment, during this year and last year the Committee has
moved in the direction of looking through reserves, M1, and all the Ms
and looking more--perhaps not in a systematic way but in a fairly
deliberate way--at the economy, exchange rates, prices, industrial
And part of what we're seeing, in
production, and all the rest of it.
my judgment, is nothing more than the fact that the economy on both
sides has surprised us in a significant way throughout this period.
And because the economy has surprised us, we have found ourselves in
the position where the need to make these flexible adjustments has
I think the
seemed to the Committee as a whole to be a pressing need.
fact that those adjustments were made and the way that they were made
over the period as a whole basically constituted a pretty solid
approach to policy, recognizing that we're never going to be able to

12/17-18/84

-13-

Some of the frustration
fine-tune this; that's just not in the cards.
that we all feel at times I think has to do with the fact that these
adjustments are made in intermeeting periods and we all have our
personal subjective biases as to which are most important and which
are least important in the laundry list of things that we put into the
directive--whether it's the exchange rate, or M2, or M22, or the GNP,
or whatever. And because our personal biases may differ a little in
terms of where the priorities lie, there may be differing degrees of
frustration in terms of whether and how much of an adjustment is made
in the borrowings target, particularly against the background of the
appropriate inhibition against treating any of those intermeeting
consultations as a meeting [requiring] a vote on all the rest of the
My bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is
apparatus that could go with it.
that I think the apparatus works pretty well, particularly against the
background of my personal skepticism about M1, and I think the
frustrations that we all feel at times are almost inevitable.
But
compared to the alternative, I think those frustrations are quite
manageable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a good deal of
On the other hand, it does
sympathy for what Jerry has just said.
seem to me that Steve's paper made a pretty compelling case for some
I think that's particularly true when
degree of automatic response.
the demand for money is stable and we're not getting noise from other
I would really hate to see us get into a position of having
factors.
conference calls of the Committee to deal with very minor issues that
come along from time to time. But having said that, I too have a
Certainly, it's a
little hesitancy about the reliability of M1.
better aggregate than the others we've been dealing with, but we've
had some variations in M1 recently--and over the past year in fact.
Because of that, I would like to keep any degree of automaticity to a
minimum. But the scenario in the regime that Steve has outlined in
this paper seems to be somewhat of a compromise between those who
would move to a fully automatic response and those who wouldn't change
it at all.
I guess I would feel more comfortable if we had some
degree of automatic response, but I would have to admit that as I look
back over the past year I don't think policy would have been changed
very much at all if we had had this kind of automatic response. But,
I think to fine-tune it a little would be in order.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Let me make a clarifying point first, and that
is that there are at least two operating issues that we started
talking about and they don't have anything to do with one another
necessarily. One is the level of borrowing and whether or not the
federal funds rate in relation to the level of borrowing is where we
And the other is how we respond to
thought it was going to be.
unexpected deviations of growth in M1 from the path laid out ahead of
time. Now these two happened to be closely related this summer, but
that was an accident. One has to deal with those two problems quite
I can easily think of an example in which the opposite
separately.
sort of relationship began to develop between borrowing and the
federal funds rate and the kind of automaticity we're talking about
would have made things go in the wrong direction. The automaticity
issue relates strictly to whether or not we respond more quickly and

12/17-18/84

more sensitively to changes in growth of M1 relative to path than we
I'm very much with Jerry on that and I would put it
have in the past.
that we haven't been frozen in stone between FOMC meetings.
this way:
We've evolved a procedure over the course of the past couple of years
in which we instruct the Manager on what he's supposed to do when
these deviations occur, and why, taking into account a whole lot of
And in a world in which if money demand is stable from one
things.
quarter to the next it isn't necessarily stable from one month to the
next, I think that is a lot more sensible response to deviations of
money growth from the path than an automatic response.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

Well, I think the word "automatic" ought to be
MR. PARTEE.
banned from this discussion because I don't think there's anything
automatic really being proposed. What we're talking about is some
procedural rules that would be followed unless there is some reason
for not following them, as is always the case with the Federal Open
Before, we had a rule that we would provide the
Market Committee.
nonborrowed reserves consistent with the money growth we wanted to get
Now we set the level of
and then borrowings automatically fell out.
borrowing and the reserves automatically fall out--the reserves
associated with whatever the demand for money does and what occurs.
What Steve is proposing is simply that one other way of dealing with
this as a rule for operating procedure would be to go between these
I think that makes a lot of
two extremes and split the difference.
sense. And the reason that I think it makes a lot of sense is that
I've never known the time when in the first instance anyone could be
certain enough that they ought to do something and, in fact, did it.
You
It's always ambiguous.
We always have an ambiguous situation.
could say in looking back as well as forward that maybe we ought to
let M1 growth fall off [its path] because, after all, the economy has
been strong and there are a lot of inflationary expectations out
The economy isn't strong
there. And it could turn out to be wrong:
and there isn't the inflation expectation. But by the time you've
It seems to me that
learned that, a couple of months have gone by.
some adjustment in the borrowing level to take account of the fact
Now, as you
that M1 is falling off path is a reasonable thing to do.
all know, I've practically given up on having any view that anyone can
look forward with a degree of certainty and, therefore, I'm always
It would have been safer this summer,
looking for the safer course.
certainly, had we done it that way--and it might well be safer in the
other direction looking forward in the next year--because we would
The funds rate would have dropped
have had quicker adjustments.
faster had we followed the rule and it may go up faster if we follow
the different procedural rule in the year ahead. And I think it's a
But, again, it's nothing but a procedure. And if
better way to go.
the Chairman or Steve or Peter or anybody else feels that there is
something odd that has accounted for this, there is no reason we can't
get together and say "Well, there's an oddity here; I think we ought
not follow this rule."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of accuracy, let me
redescribe what I think our techniques have been during this period.
You said the contrast was between (1) setting a nonborrowed reserve
path, keeping it, and the borrowings would fall out and (2) setting
the borrowing and the nonborrowed reserves would fall out.

12/17-18/84

MR. PARTEE.

-15-

In the first instance.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The correction I wanted to make was this:
That may be true in the first instance, but we have always made
adjustments either to the nonborrowed reserve path or now, conversely,
to the borrowing, depending upon what the other was doing.
You're
talking about some bias when you're talking about this technique. But
these things that Steve is talking about are so small that they're way
within the discretionary adjustments we were making anyway with either
technique. We make discretionary adjustments when the Committee
permits it.
MR. PARTEE.
I do think that one's attitude toward this is
strongly shaped by how much one believes in M1.
In fact, I've kept a
tally so far and that exactly identifies the positions.
too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Guffey.

Well, we have to get back to that subject,

MR. GUFFEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would start out with
the premise that maintaining as much flexibility as possible is the
most desirable course for the Committee.
It does, however, turn [out
that] the Chairman and the staff who work with this on a daily basis
have a great deal of discretion, I think, within the very broad
directive that the Committee adopts for the intermeeting period.
Having said that, however, I am attracted somewhat to Steve's proposal
because of its directional content if you will.
It seems to me it is
so small that it will not alter policy, particularly in the public's
view or the market's view, but it will give the Committee some
indication as to what the Desk is doing or what it's thinking about on
a day-to-day or week-to-week basis.
If the borrowing level were
adjusted by as much as $20 million or $50 million at a particular
time, then it's a clear indication that the people who are looking at
it and making those judgments are indicating that money growth is
deviating from what they believe the Committee directed at its past
meeting. And in that sense, it seems to me it would be very helpful
to me as a participant in this organization and would not do great
damage in the sense of disrupting the markets or [producing] wide
swings in the interest rates. As a result, I would be in favor of
moving in this direction in the very modest way that Steve has
proposed.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH.
Well, we seem to be having a low key version of
the discussion of rules versus discretion. To me good discretion or
good judgment is always bound to be better than a mechanical rule.
The question is whether good judgment is more likely than not. We
went to automaticity in 1979 because we felt that in the past
discretion or judgment had caused us to move too little and too late
so, in effect, we forced our hand by automaticity. That, it seems to
me, has not been our problem recently. We've had a great deal of
discretion and the discretion I think has been sound.
So in terms of
recent results, there isn't a great deal to be said for going back to
rules or automaticity.
I do have a sense that this need not always be
the case.
Sometimes judgment can be right; it can be wrong. Maybe
there is always a danger in this Committee, as in others, of doing
unpleasant things too late and too little. Against that I think one

12/17-18/84

-16-

can guard by having a small injection of automaticity. The upshot of
my points is that we have fewer meetings a year than we used to have
and we don't particularly want to have conference calls, but I
certainly wouldn't want to go back to where our hands were tied
excessively and where the automaticity of the rule got the better of
our judgment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, but I was so busy a
while ago making a case for automaticity that I neglected to say that
I did not mean to rule out discretionary adjustments in the borrowing
targets.
I think those we've made recently have been very
I would want to augment the automatic part of it, if we
appropriate.
vote for that, with discretionary movements such as we've had, if it
appears those are desirable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, unless I'm missing something, it
seems to me the issue is not rules versus discretion but rather rules
for exercising discretion. I think the discretionary aspect is
certainly there--at least that's what I'm interpreting Steve to be
saying. It's pretty much a confirmation of what has been going on but
with just a small amount of added comfort level to the staff in terms
of doing what they have had to do.
It seems to me that giving staff
just the slight amount of latitude that Steve's talking about makes
sense.
I think anything excessive or any apparent trends or anything
unusual would certainly come to the Committee and would come very
quickly.
I just think there's a certain degree of comfort level here
that would be helpful to the staff, but I don't think it would be
giving anything away from the standpoint of what the Committee is
trying to accomplish. My bottom line is that I don't have any real
problem with this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Miss Seger.

MS. SEGER. I admit to being confused--to make a general
statement. The second thing that strikes me is that whether or not I
think M1 is important, there are a lot of Fed watchers who do.
So,
It isn't the theoretical matter but whether a
maybe it's like gold:
lot of people assume it's important that makes it important.
It's
hard for me to divorce the slowdown in M1 growth from the very
dramatic drop in total reserves. And just hearing Jerry Corrigan's
remarks about the slowdown in the economy--that this is what produced
the M1 slowdown--it is as if the Fed had nothing to do with the
slowdown.
I think it is pretty hard to argue that either we had
nothing to do with the slowdown in the economy or the slowdown in M1.
Also, I heard in the past couple of meetings concern about allowing
the fed funds rate to drop much because then we might have to retrace
the steps and jerk the economy around and or jerk the markets around;
yet when the funds rate shot up from 10-1/2 percent or so to 11-3/4
percent, which did jerk the markets tremendously, I didn't hear the
same kind of concern.
So, again, I don't know the answer to this, but
somewhere along the line I think we've got to make some changes.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me just clarify [my comment].
I think you
misunderstood me. What I was saying was that when all is said and

12/17-18/84

-17-

done the slowdown in M1 that everybody is so concerned about right now
might not even be there in the final figures.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but I think the slowdown in the economy is
real.
That's all I'm saying. And I think there is some association
between that and what happened to monetary policy, particularly if you
want to look at total reserve creation since late spring.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. It seems to me that for many of the reasons that
have been stated these are the kinds of decisions that lend themselves
to judgment based on a variety of circumstances that can change very
significantly from time to time and it's very hard to prejudge them.
The only other thing I might add is that moving to some kind of
mechanical procedure, which I think is what this suggests, is a bit of
a slippery slope.
If we begin to move in this direction and become
very mechanical, it opens up the possibility that our critics would
suggest that the whole procedure runs itself from a higher level of
mechanical procedure than we're using.
So, I would be very much in
favor of staying with the procedures we're presently using.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, on this issue I would line up with
Governor Wallich, Governor Partee, and Bob Boykin.
I think that
Steve's proposal is very little different from what we're doing now.
I don't see the lines closely drawn between judgment and automaticity.
It seems to me that as long as we limit the automatic changes-especially on the low end--to 25 percent rather than 50 percent, the
result would be little different from the procedures that we're
following. That is especially true if you keep in mind how flexible
this Committee has been all along. In my experience since I've been
on this Committee, there has been no reluctance to superimpose
judgment on any kind of arrangement that we had agreed to earlier.
So, I'm confident that judgment, and hopefully good judgment, will
always be there superimposed upon any slight automaticity that we
agree to go with. And I think the advantage of 25 percent automatic
changes is that it keeps us going in the right direction without overcommitting us.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Everybody is willing to impose judgment,
so long as it's their judgment!
MR. MARTIN. Well, it seems to me that Steve's paper
indicates that the reason for this proposal--other than the fact that
proposals in Washington never die, they just come back around after a
while--is that he detects a tendency to accommodate in part undesired
swings in money demand.
I suppose that is a more eloquent way of
saying that we tend to be a little too late in our movements,
depending in part on the direction of the so-called undesired swings.
If that's true, then it seems to me that there is merit in this
proposal in terms of "expectability."
One would know as a member of
this Committee, within these very small gradations, the move that
would take place.
I have confidence in not only my own judgment but
in that of the Chairman, vis-a-vis his immediate comment here. And
I'm sure he would in appropriate circumstances overrule the rule.
What we're talking about are small gradations.
In the example given,

-18-

12/17-18/84

if you start at $650 million of borrowing, the $70 million [change]
for the $2 billion deviation from what I take is a quarterly path,
gets us what--25 or 30 basis points change in the fed funds rate, or
something of that sort and a 25 basis points change in M1 [growth] or
We're talking about finite
50 basis points or something like that?
gradations of change, whatever the numbers are.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But you think they're that much?

MR. PARTEE.

No, I don't think it's that much.

MR. MARTIN.

It wouldn't get you that much?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The rule of thumb is a $100 million
borrowing level change gives you 1/4 point [on the funds rate].
MR. MARTIN. Well, these are small gradations. And it seems
to me that that argues for building in some technique useful in
[making] the judgment. If we adopt this, I think this Committee
should from time-to-time set that percentage [rather than] simply
accept 50 or 25 percent, because isn't it true that the impact would
So, I would
vary depending on the level at which borrowing started?
say this is a good idea, but let's have some setting of the
percentage.
When you say
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for my own edification:
the result is $25 million, what are you assuming that's related to--a
$1 billion change in M1 or something?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was assuming a 7 percent reserve
requirement on transactions accounts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.
in M1 produces-MR. PARTEE.

Yes, and how big a change in Ml?

I used as an example that a $2 billion change
$35 million.

--$140 million on required reserves.
MR. AXILROD.
that is $70 million and 25 percent of it is $35 million.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Half of

And you would react every two weeks.

[Suppose] you had a
MR. AXILROD. What I had in mind was:
nonborrowed path based on $1 billion [of borrowings] and in this twoweek period it began to appear that M1 was running $2 billion below
[path]; M2 and M3 were not behaving so differently to override it-that, of course, would be in there. And the Manager wouldn't reduce
nonborrowed by the full amount [implied by] the shortfall in M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A few people commented, favorably or
Does anyone else wish to
unfavorably, on what they thought of M1.
Unless you have changed your
make comments on what they think of M1?
mind, you don't need to raise your hand.
MR. MORRIS.
Mr. Chairman, I don't want to miss this
opportunity.
I would simply say that several times around this table

-19-

12/17-18/84

in the past few years I've heard the statement that now M1 has
restored its normal velocity relationship. And I've always noted that
this turned out to be a very temporary phenomenon.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

What about credit velocity, Frank?

MR. MORRIS.
I also note that, beginning next year, the
minimum deposit on Super NOW accounts drops down to $1,000.
I don't
know what impact that is going to have.
I don't see much of a
marketing effort around New England to do this, although there's a lot
of activity in the money market deposit accounts. A lot of the banks
have already announced that they're going down to a $1,000 [minimum]
on money market deposit accounts. But I think M2 could be impacted.
[Unintelligible] after a few months in which the gap between what we
would have expected M1 velocity should be and the actual drops down to
close to the normal range.
I think we ought to consider this, until
we have a lot more evidence, as sort of a random distribution of
velocity for Ml.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I'd just like to remind us that we're going
through a period now in which the money numbers have been weak and the
economy is weak. So we say to ourselves "Oh, I wish we hadn't let
that happen."
But the safer course is not always the one of either
slowing down money growth at this point too fast, or speeding it up at
this point too slowly. I want to take you back to that period from
October of 1981 until April of 1982 in which we had a growth rate of
M1 in the range of 9 to 10 percent. Had we permitted the kind of
growth that the economy needed to turn around, it would have been 15
percent.
The safer course in that case was not to resist the growth
of M1 but to let it happen. Now, that was a case in point in which
the money demand function that we were using was just miles off track.
And I don't think we should decide that just because M1 has been
behaving reasonably well roughly since the middle of 1983--we have a
little less than 18 months' experience--that this number is now going
to be a safe guide for the future.
I don't think it will be.
I agree
with Frank entirely.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.
I didn't comment on M1.
I would not be prepared
to restore it to its original grandeur. On the other hand, Lyle, I
think more of it than I have in recent times.
I feel it's probably as
good an indicator as we have now. So, I would put a little more
emphasis on M1 now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Well, I'd like to concur with Steve's assessment
of what has been happening to M1 recently. There is never any
indicator that's going to be perfect.
I think M1 has exhibited some
stability recently, more than it did in the earlier period. But
whenever I hear this criticism of M1, I have to ask:
What are the
alternatives? And the alternatives--such as M2 or M3--are even worse
as far as I can tell.
And the worst one of all in my personal opinion
is the "look at everything" approach, which generally leads to
confusion and indecision and action that is taken much too late.

12/17-18/84

There's a tendency when one looks at everything to fail to distinguish
between the leading indicators and the current indicators and end up
So, given the alternatives, I would still
not doing anything right.
I think
come out for putting more emphasis on M1 than many of you.
that will guide us better than these others.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
emphasis on Ml?
MR. PARTEE.

How many people would like to put primary

Of the aggregates?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, of everything. We're not deciding
anything today. Who would put primary emphasis on M1 in the conduct
of open market operations?
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. RICE.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, isn't that what we're doing now?

No, I don't think so.
No, no.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
they go down again.

[Unintelligible]

among the aggregates.

I see a few hands go up weakly and then

But what you're really saying is a
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
policy with the emphasis on M1 and the mechanical feedback--the same
as from October '79 to the end of '82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[It would]
but whether or not it's mechanical--.
on Ml?
MS. SEGER.

Versus the Ms or including total reserves?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

certainly go in that direction,
Who would put primary emphasis

Everything.

Primary emphasis.

The economy, inflation--?

MR. BOYKIN. It would be awfully important, but I would still
want to keep my eyes open to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOYKIN.
MR. KEEHN.
make a judgment?

else.

SEGER.

I didn't say exclusive.

Okay.
It has a role involving something from which we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS.

I said primary;

Primary relative to anything else.

Okay.

MR. WALLICH. It's a matter of the magnitudes of everything
If the economy collapses, I would not go with M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
anything about this today.

Well, fortunately, we don't have to do

-21-

12/17-18/84

MR. GRAMLEY.

Merry Christmas.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm not very happy with this proposal of
Mr. Axilrod's.
I'll tell you this:
It's Mickey Mouse in my opinion.
I don't see anything the matter with it, but it's trivial in a way.
I would point out that the money
Let me give you two reasons why.
supply has been steadier when we depressed its importance and the
automatic responses we have given to [the aggregates].
Not so many
months ago we were being praised by the monetarists for this new way
we had found to keep the money supply steady. I at least am
suspicious that it's not entirely accidental--that any reaction we
make to it of a sharp kind is after the fact and affects things with a
lag. And it may send things off in another direction. So you get
sine curves instead of stability. Nobody has talked much about the
fact that we are working with economic projections and I find, just as
a pragmatic judgment, that the Committee puts tremendous weight on
them. The economic projections are consistently unreliable in terms
of the ex post judgment that's made about what the satisfactory
And I think that's
quarter-to-quarter movement is in the economy.
just a fact of life; it's not that the projections are any worse than
anybody else's. You can't project the economy quarter-to-quarter or
half year-to-half year with a degree of sensitivity that is required
ex post to make everybody happy.
That's another way of saying you
can't fine-tune on the basis of economic projections.
I find the Axilrod approach--I call it the Axilrod approach
though he was responding to a request--a little narrow because it's
focusing on whatever M, M1 presumably. Maybe the more relevant
question, or at least as relevant a question, is whether we shouldn't
be putting more weight on other indicators of what is happening. We
have an exchange rate that in my judgment is wildly out of line with
the needs of this economy over a period of time. And it should have
been telling us something for a long period. We've had commodity
prices falling rather sharply for six months now, I guess, during a
period when economic projections were pointing in quite a different
direction. Commodity pricing didn't prove to be the worst economic
indicator in the world. And it tells you something in that it makes a
policy difference as well. How well you do it in the first
[unintelligible].
The only reason I would worry about the Axilrod
proposal is that I wonder whether we'd be kidding ourselves by making
this little automatic rule, if I may call it that, [and if] that would
It is so minor in and of itself
inhibit making discretionary changes.
that it doesn't do much. And if the Committee sits around and says
"We have this automatic response mechanism so that's all we're going
to do"--if that's the psychology of it--we may not be responding often
or fast enough.
I don't know whether it would work out that way, but
I'd be a little suspicious.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, when we made a 100 percent
adjustment we did have these ad hoc adjustments made and I think we
should continue those. And if this is Mickey Mouse then I'd like to
kick it up to 100 percent and then-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
used to do it 100 percent.
SPEAKER(?).

I agree.

You can argue the opposite.

We'll have to go for Pluto!

We

-22-

12/17-18/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this [unintelligible].
must be something drastic about doing more than that.

But there

MR. PARTEE.
Certainly in the past we've found that we had to
adjust by more than the change in required reserves in order to get
the desired change in the aggregates.
MR. RICE.

No, that's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Oh no, we are--

This is just a portion of the change in required

reserves.

in M1,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
too.

[Unintelligible]

you're getting a wiggle

MR. AXILROD.
I don't know if it's of interest, Mr. Chairman,
but I did work out--I couldn't do it dynamically--what the
hypothetical borrowing at 100 percent in "automatic" adjustment would
have been between Committee meetings starting over each Committee
meeting and not assuming any adjustment in the figure.
And what this
shows is that in June and the first half of July this hypothetical
level of borrowing would have been about $100 and some odd million
above the $1 billion that was used consistently in that period for the
path. The actual turned out to be a shade under $1 billion. But in
the last half of July and the first half of August, with a 100 percent
adjustment the hypothetical level of borrowing would have been on
average $350 million less.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $350 million less than the $1.1 billion
that we didn't make the previous time or than the $1 billion?
MR. AXILROD.
No, the billion--always carrying it at the
billion.
I didn't know how to assume what was going on.
And then in
[the second half of] August and September we began lowering the level
of borrowing judgmentally, so the last half of August was $1 billion
and then September 12th it was $900 million and September 26th, $850
million. The [respective] hypothetical levels would have been $870,
$680, and $760 million--so, running a little lower still. And then in
October when we had been running with $750 or $700 million, the
hypothetical would have varied between $65 and $505 million. And then
in November-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
borrowing?

Only $65 million--practically no

MR. AXILROD. Practically no borrowing, yes.
November, they're very close.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's with 100 percent?

MR. AXILROD.
That's with 100 percent.
drop in required reserves against Ml.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.

And then in

That's just the whole

Because September was the way it was?
Yes.

-23-

12/17-18/84

MR. CORRIGAN. What would have happened if the federal funds
rate went all over the place? Then the money supply would have been
all over the place too.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I guess what would have happened is that
the funds rate, instead of rising in the course of July and August,
would have been back down closer to the 10, 10-1/2 percent area, but
that's--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We wouldn't let it go down to $65
million, I presume. We would cut the discount rate.
MR. AXILROD.

I assume the judgment would override.

MR. BLACK. Jerry, I think that's an empirical issue.
There
is reason to suppose that but, if the market saw us hitting what they
thought we ought to hit a little more regularly, I'm not sure that
we'd have that wild a gyration. We might.
But I don't think it would
hurt a lot if we did have it in the federal funds rate-MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in the abstract that might be right.
But on the basis of experience I see nothing that suggests that one
can disentangle the behavior of the federal funds rate from these
other short- and long-term rates.
Now, in theory, they should be able
to be disentangled.
MR. GRAMLEY. That was the theory proposed in October of
1979; it just didn't work.
MR. CORRIGAN. That's what we tried. And look at the
behavior of the money market and the bond market and the mortgage
market and everything else.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. CORRIGAN.

They survived.
Barely.

MR. GRAMLEY. Recall also that in the first half of this year
we had growth rates in one month as low as 1/2 percent and in another
month as high as 13 percent. And unless those are anticipated--those
rates were surprises, and monthly variations of that kind are always
to some degree a surprise--we are going to be accompanying them with
very, very large variations of interest rates.
I really can't see why
anybody would want to go back to the kind of policy we pursued in the
fall of '79 and the fall of '82, given the success of what has
happened since.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the success of what has happened
since depends upon what happens in the coming months.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, yes.
I'm by no means ruling out that
with a monetary policy as ideal as any human brain can conceive, given
our knowledge, that we're still going to have variations in economic
activity. There's just no way that I could buy the argument that the
main reason why we had this dramatic slowdown in the economy was
because of high interest rates in the spring. I just don't believe
that for a moment.
Some of it is; the decline in housing surely is.
But [with] the increase in the saving rate of 1/2 percentage point or

12/17-18/84

-24-

so in the third quarter, why would you so argue when consumer credit
continues to grow? This tremendous drop in net exports surely can't
be assigned primarily to the rise in interest rates in the spring.
It's a much broader phenomenon there. We can't provide a perfect
monetary policy. There's no way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can provide a perfect monetary policy
if you say we just can't provide a perfect economy.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Well, all right;

I'll accept that.

MR. CORRIGAN. There's another point, too, on this business
of chasing M1 around.
Don't forget that since the experience between
[October] '79 and early '82 we've had a heck of a lot more deposit
deregulation in the banking system and there's a potential implication
in terms of the behavior of the real economy. The credit quality of
banks and thrifts in the kind of interest rate environment the
depository institutions are operating in is, if anything, worse than
it was in that earlier period.
I don't claim to-MR. BOEHNE. On the one hand, this is somewhat Mickey Mouse
and, on the other hand, it takes us all the way back to 1979!
I have
a feeling that it's probably a little more than Mickey Mouse and not
quite as dramatic as going back to '79.
Whether one is for this or
against it, it seems to me we're talking in extremes here.
MR. PARTEE.

Go right down the middle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, [after my] having given a
great endorsement to all business forecasts, would you like to deliver
one?

ahead.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, with my usual confidence I will plunge
[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One of the questions that arises [with]
the kind of outlook you forecast for next year--whatever the
reliability of that may be--is where the risks lie. And is it
satisfactory or does it itself imply that one ought to be going for a
higher or theoretically lower [outcome]? Where do you lean on policy
with a forecast of that sort, if you believe it.
It doesn't tell me
what the risks are on one side or the other.
MR. PARTEE.

I wonder if Jim has any comments about the

risks.
MR. KICHLINE.
I think the risks on inflation have been
changing to the more favorable side as time has gone on.
In fact,
there are many people--at least on the Research Division staff here-who would like to argue the case for lower rates of inflation in 1985
than in 1984.
In particular, the profit margin is extraordinarily
high and rather difficult to explain. Virtually all the models and
past behavior would suggest a lower profit margin than has been in
place for some time.
If that profit margin were to begin to erode a
bit, one could very readily take a posture of lower rates of
inflation.
In the shorter run the risks on the energy side--and Ted
and I talked a little about this on the oil side--seem to be down
rather than up as well.
So, I would tilt the inflation side down a

-25-

12/17-18/84

bit leaving real activity alone.
On real activity I think the risks
are fairly well balanced. We have quite a moderate picture, really.
In thinking about real investment, in particular, this year we're
expecting close to a 15 percent annual rate of increase in business
fixed investment. We have 6 percent for next year. That's consistent
with the Merrill-Lynch and McGraw-Hill surveys and it's consistent
with the orders [figures].
Who knows what the tax proposals will do?
They can cut either way. But essentially it's quite a moderate
picture at the moment, and I think the risks there are reasonably well
balanced up and down.
I would take the same view on the consumer
sector, although in the very short run it is confusing to us.
So, I
think the real side risks are fairly well balanced.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
On this profit margin question, I have a
very vague impression from looking at the figures, though not closely.
You can confirm it on the basis of a lot of careful work, I'm sure.
Why do I hear so many complaints from businessmen--pretty much across
the board it appears, though it may not be across the board--that
profit margins are under pressure?
They say "I'd love to raise
prices; I can't do it because of imports."
But the [overall]
impression is that profit margins are awful.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, they came back very strongly. And, as
you know, profits as a percent of GNP are at very high levels in an
historical perspective and they've stayed there.
It's quite clear
that there are many industries suffering substantially, but I think
there is a severe distribution problem; it depends upon the nature of
the industry and the degree to which it's subject to the import
competition.
I would only say that when you look at the aggregate
numbers relative to GNP and other more narrow measures of profit
margins they are really quite strong.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible]

the manufacturing

industry.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes. What we don't see, however, in our own
forecast is very much growth from here on out.
So, I think what may
have been happening is that there was this surge in profits in '83 and
that has tapered off in '84. We think especially in the latter half
we may be seeing some sick profit numbers. And next year in the
staff's forecast, given the rate of growth of the real economy and
prices, we have virtually no growth in profits.
So, I think, one of
the problems here is what businessmen are thinking about--continued
very strong growth or maintenance of a high level.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You're looking at so-called economic

profits.
MR. KICHLINE.

Correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Did you see that article in the
Sunday New York Times yesterday?
The automobile quotas are costing
the consumer $10 to $13 billion dollars, of which $6 billion or more
increases corporate profits in the automobile industry.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
corporate profits?

You mean above the

[unintelligible]

in

12/17-18/84

No.
What they argue is that some of
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
it went into overtime which could have been handled more economically.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I mean the $6 billion figure.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
corporate profit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes.

The $6 billion increases

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Maybe you assume they will only break

even.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't any evidence, I presume, but
how much gossip is there on what these tax proposals are doing?
You
I understand that, but I
say theoretically they might increase it.
haven't heard a-MR. KICHLINE. No, we're agnostic in the forecast. We
If you believed something were going to
haven't taken a position.
happen along the lines of the Administration's proposal, I think there
would be an incentive to accelerate equipment purchases to get the
favorable depreciation and the tax credit.
It's a bit risky on the
If you were into a standard tax shelter partnership
structures side.
trying to turn over commercial buildings, I don't know that you'd want
I would say
to touch that at all.
Basically, it can cut either way.
the overriding feature is a healthy dose of uncertainty. And that is
rather unhealthy in this environment.
There is a lot of uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On depreciation:
If you invest next year,
that accelerated depreciation continues through the life of that
investment?
MR. KICHLINE. That's what the Administration has said:
that
there would be liberal transition rules.
Their own numbers, at least
[based on] talking to them, [suggest] that in the aggregate their
proposals would raise the cost of capital about 10 to 12 percent over
the life of an investment.
So, it's a substantial potential change.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If everything is indexed on inflation
in this new tax proposal, presumably it will take a less high level of
interest rates to prevent the economy from overheating.
MR. MORRIS. All the anecdotal evidence I hear in New England
indicates that it has had the effect in the short run of putting a lot
I don't know
of investment plans on the shelf until this is resolved.
whether that is true nationally or not, but that's the word I get from
industrial people. They will wait and see.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

That's what I get, too.

Especially long-term investments.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
this have an ax to grind.
MR. RICE.

Sure.

But I think the people who are saying

12/17-18/84

MR. CORRIGAN. Do you people have any feel at all as to how
much of housing starts and residential construction outlays in recent
quarters is for what would be considered second houses?
I don't know that we have a good feel for
MR. KICHLINE.
that. There are some scattered [signs] but it's very hard to break
out of current starts figures.
MR. CORRIGAN. I think the dollar figure would be even more
important because if one looks at all these recreational areas around
the country, one sees very, very expensive houses and condos and so
forth. They seem to be springing up all over the place.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is very confusing. For example, I
believe the Administration's proposal is that [a taxpayer] couldn't
deduct more than $5,000 above investment income for interest charges
on something other than a primary residence. What that really does is
to induce people to take out big loans on their primary residence.
And there are other incentives in terms of tax-adjusted returns, but
the proposal doesn't adjust the interest paid on a primary residence.
In effect, that gives a primary residence preferential treatment and
will build in incentives to leverage highly that part of the market.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to the more basic
If you assume [3] percent real
question that I guess you asked:
growth in '85, you said that the risks of deviating either on the down
side or the up side are about even in your opinion. Isn't it true
that if there were a major change in the dollar, that would heavily
weight the risks on the down side?
If it goes up,
MR. KICHLINE.
Which way is the dollar going?
it would be applying more restraint on the domestic economy. And
that's one of the features of our forecast; we've knocked a few tenths
off our forecast because we have been assuming in our recent forecast
So, in effect, it
a higher value of the dollar [than we had earlier].
It's a depressing influence on the
is draining off income abroad.
I think, Ted, that the assumption in this forecast
domestic economy.
is about an 8 percent decline in the value of the dollar over the
course of 1985 from current levels. Now, if it were to go down much
more than that, we'd be talking about lessened restraint on real
activity and a better export picture than we're now talking about.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
following year.

But that would show [up] more in the

MR. TRUMAN. Well, it depends obviously on when it occurs.
If it occurred sooner, then you'd get more of it in the 12-month
period than if it occurred later.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Just out of curiosity, how do you get
You used to do 10 or
something as precise as an 8 percent assumption?
15 percent.
MR. TRUMAN.

Approximately the same way.

On this trade business, some of the people in my
MR. BOEHNE.
District say that even if we got a drop in the dollar of some
substantial magnitude, that might prevent the further erosion of

-28-

12/17-18/84

business but it wouldn't any time soon or maybe a very long time out
in the future cause a turnaround in their business.
They say that
those companies that are now exporting to the United States would
adjust their profit margins or their profits somewhere else to hang on
to this newly acquired share of the market at least for a while.
So,
it would seem to me that the risks of this really speeding up the
economy in 1985, even if we got a big drop in the dollar, [are slim];
it probably wouldn't happen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
next year?

What are you assuming in the trade balance

MR. TRUMAN. I can't remember the number exactly.
It's $125
billion on average for the year and approximately the same on the
current account.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the trade balance?
MR. TRUMAN.

You're saying no further deterioration in

Well, yes, on average.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
billion on the current account.

We're assuming in New York $150

MR. TRUMAN. Our current account at the end of the year goes
to $140 billion. On President Boehne's comment:
In aggregate terms I
think the hardest thing to predict is the lag structure of the
[effects of] exchange rate changes. Most equations do say that there
is some lag in this, which I think one could say is a manifestation of
exactly that phenomenon, even assuming some absorption of an exchange
rate [change] in foreign profit margins.
One way to interpret lags in
these equations is that it's not until the exchange rate has gone down
or up and stayed there that you get the impact of those exchange rate
changes on real trade flows.
And it is for that reason that one can
be quite skeptical about the precise timing for any given exchange
rate change--even a permanent exchange rate change--or how fast it
would show through. There are equations around--in fact the Commerce
Department uses a technique where they assume that almost all of the
adjustment comes in a very short period of time. And that's what led
them at one point to make very much more optimistic assumptions in
their projections on the current account and the trade balance than we
were making at that time because they assumed that there was nothing
left in the pipeline. With a forecast of the type that we have--just
an 8 percent decline against the background of a 12 percent increase
last year--in some sense you have more in the pipeline than you're
making up.
So it's necessarily the case, at least on the exchange
rate side, that you will have some net negative impact most of the
year just with the [unintelligible] exchange rate adjustment of the
type we would-MR. MORRIS. What are the interest rate implications of an 8
percent decline in the value of the dollar in the short run?
MR. TRUMAN. There are some components of that in the price
forecast, though less than last time, as Jim said, and also in the
real forecast to the extent that interest rate projections are somehow
related to the demand-for-money equations.

12/17-18/84

-29-

If you get more economic activity and prices
MR. AXILROD.
with the same money supply, we'd have to say you'll get somewhat
higher interest rates than you're thinking of.
Does anybody else want to deliver
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If not, we'll come back and
themselves of a comment at this point?
make more pregnant comments in the morning.

[Meeting recessed]

12/17-18/84

December
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

18,

1984--Morning Session

Mr. Kichline, what do you have for us this

morning?
MR. KICHLINE. With a smile, housing starts are virtually
unchanged, staying at the depressed October level of 1.53 million
units.
Permits rose about 11 percent, however.
Personal income is
reported to have been up 0.7 percent in November following a downward
revised 0.4 percent increase in October. At the same time, personal
consumption expenditures on this release, which will go into the flash
numbers of the Commerce Department, on their calculation rose 0.9
percent in November following a 0.2 percent decline in October.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
say what you want to say?

Mr. Axilrod, why don't you go ahead and

MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the three alternatives that
we presented to the Committee in the Bluebook all encompass some
recovery of M1 growth from the reduced pace we've had, at least [based
on] these present and concurrent seasonals for the second half of the
year.
The middle one, alternative B, as the chart following page 7 in
the Bluebook shows, would aim at getting M1 to a place that's
relatively high in the tentative range adopted in July for 1985.
Alternative A, which has an 8 percent growth for M1 suggested, would
tend to move M1 above that cone. But the parallel dotted lines are
intended to show a range of variation around a 5-1/2 percent growth
rate over the year 1985, and it would be well within those parallel
lines.
We view the specification of alternative B, which is about a
6-3/4 percent rate of growth in M1 from November to March, with an
assumption for December on the order of 7 percent, as roughly
attainable with current money market conditions. And I might add that
those current conditions when we were doing the Bluebook were a bit
tighter than the present money market conditions.
That is, we viewed
that M1 growth as attainable with borrowing of around $400 million and
the funds rate around 8-3/4 percent.
In the last several days the
funds rate has been below 8-1/2 percent; yesterday it was below 8
percent and this morning it is very close to 7 percent, just about 71/16 percent.
So, in fact, alternative B calls for somewhat tighter
money market conditions than those that have evolved in the last
couple of days, given market attitudes and expectations. We think the
driving force behind the increase in M1 demand that would lead to this
growth under the specified reserve and money market conditions is the
fact that we expect growth in the economy to be a little more rapid in
the first quarter than it has been in the third and fourth quarters.
And we are expecting, finally, to get some effects from the drop in
interest rates that has occurred in recent months, which work with the
usual lag. At the same time, Mr. Chairman, we expect growth in M2 and
M3 to slow from the recent pace under the conditions of alternative B,
largely because we expect a drop in interest rates on money market
deposit accounts and money market funds as they finally catch up with
this drop in market rates.
So, we would expect a substantial slowing
in growth of those aggregates in the MMDAs and money market funds.
Alternative C is an effort to put the Committee at the middle of this
4 to 7 percent range.
It is our view, given the projections we have

12/17-18/84

-31-

of the economy, that this would require a somewhat higher fed funds
rate and tighter reserve positions than alternative B.
I ought to add, Mr. Chairman, that I do have some additional
monetary figures for the week that we haven't published, the week of
I don't have any data for the following week now, but I
December 10.
We had expected an increase of almost $5
will have some later.
billion in M1 for that week and it now appears to be $3.6 billion,
somewhat less of an increase. So, it looks like December will be
lower unless the figures for the 17th, which we'll have later, turn
It is a somewhat more
out to be stronger than our expectations.
moderate M1 picture for December as of this moment than we had at the
time this document was written.
MR. CORRIGAN.
the month as a whole?

What's your best guess now for that number for

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'd really rather wait until a little
later when I get [some data for] the 17th.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. December will turn out to be lower unless
it's higher! That's about what that projection is worth.
MR. AXILROD. The only other thing I should mention, Mr.
Chairman, is that we did suggest some bracketed language in the
operating paragraph of the directive because the Committee had in the
last directive wanted to take account of the shortfall in M1 growth in
October and in the fourth quarter relative to the 6 percent it had
We have suggested language that
decided on early in the quarter.
If you adopted
would continue [to convey] some of that concern.
alternative B, for example, it would permit more rapid growth in M1-above the 6-3/4 percent--from November to March should you want to
continue to take account of the fact that M1 did come in quite a lot
lower than the original [objective of] 6 percent. Alternative A in
some sense tends to allow for that more than alternative B and we
wouldn't consider that language necessary if the specifications were
as high as those of alternative A.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the time has come for some general
reactions but before you do that I would like to suggest that you
comment on several specific things. We are approaching the time for
Indeed, in a couple of weeks we
[setting] long-term ranges for 1985.
We have some preliminary long-term ranges
are going to be in 1985.
for 1985 and I think you ought to put your comments in the context of
what you think the appropriate longer-term ranges should be in a
general way, whether similar to or the same as we had in July or, if
different, in what respect different. In the same vein, [views] about
the relative weight of some of these monetary aggregates or other
You can add anything on operating
factors might be relevant.
techniques that we discussed a bit yesterday; that would be relevant
too.
We also are going to have to present some forecasts for next
year and we will get those between this meeting and the next meeting.
There is a question of
Let me make a couple of comments on that.
where we're going and, at this long distance from the end of next
We have a projection of a little less than
year, where we want to go.
3 percent [real GNP growth] next year, if you take the staff estimate.

12/17-18/84

That presumably is based upon certain assumptions as to monetary
growth. The assumption on interest rates seems to keep changing from
meeting to meeting and getting lower, I would think, consistent with
those monetary growth estimates. In any event, we're going to have to
put forward a projection. And I think that we should consider at this
stage at least, since we're making up policy, where we want to be, as
they say, as well as where we think we're going to be.
If you take
the staff's 3 percent [real GNP growth forecast] as a starting point,
is that satisfactory or not?
I would put it this way:
I would have
to be persuaded that that's the ideal outcome for next year.
It seems
to me that the economy has a little more room to grow than that,
ideally. Now, I'm not saying we can arrange this all ideally.
But if
we don't think it is going to grow 3 percent or faster, say 4 percent,
I guess the question that arises is:
Why aren't we easing? And what
are the things that are inhibiting that, if any?
Maybe there are
some.
If we were in a strongly inflationary period, for instance, I
Is
Is that where we are?
guess that would be an obvious inhibition.
that a risk?
I think some commentary about that would be desirable
just in the sense of where the risks are in the economy. As a
benchmark, if you are in agreement about taking that 3 percent as a
benchmark, Mr. Kichline says that in his judgment the risks [to that
I'd like some comment as to whether
forecast] are evenly balanced.
that's what you think they are in some economic sense. I think
there's a question of whether the implications are equally balanced
and whether the risks and dangers in the larger sense of overshoots or
undershoots from, let's say, 3 percent or wherever you think we're
That comes back to the question of what
going, are evenly balanced.
the risks are of inciting inflation on the one side, I suppose,
against inciting [growth] considerably weaker than 3 percent. And
some of those quarterly figures that are already in the staff's
projection are quite anemic.
What are various bits of economic
information including, I suppose, the condition of the oil market,
commodity markets, gold markets, and exchange rates telling us about
that?
Finally, I think some discussion of how this all fits into a
larger world setting is relevant.
The United States certainly has
been propelling, I think almost single-handedly, the world expansion
for the past two years. There are not strong signs of self-propelling
growth abroad that I can see at the moment. Japan seems to be slowing
down a bit from a relatively rapid rate of growth. Europe seems to be
talking about--with the help of a large amount of exports to the
United States--a growth pattern probably barely sufficient to keep
unemployment from rising further.
That means growth of maybe 2-1/2
percent.
But are we looking at prospects in the United States that in
a sense remove a motor from world growth and what are the implications
of that?
Who's going to make it up, if anybody?
If nobody is, what's
the implication for policy?
I think this inevitably gets involved
with the exchange rate question because the strength of the dollar and
the converse weakness of other currencies--particularly as that
affects prices of imported raw materials, especially oil--and the
inflationary impact it has in varying degrees in other countries is a
factor in their own policy direction and policy mix and certainly is
an inhibition on their monetary policy in terms of moving in an
expansionary direction.
So, with all those questions on the table,
let me open up the [discussion].
Mr. Morris.

12/17-18/84

-33-

MR. MORRIS.
Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast is
too pessimistic on growth. I would expect growth to be more like 4
percent than 3 percent, primarily coming in the first half, because I
think we're going to get a very big response to the decline in
interest rates that has already taken place.
I think we have to
remember that the economy and M1 respond with a lag to a decline in
interest rates.
We're already seeing some beginning signs such as the
rise in permits.
We've already had a couple of months of increase in
new home sales.
There is some auguring that the consumer is coming
out of his summer lull, particularly the new car sales in the first 10
days in December.
The only sector I'm concerned about is capital
spending because of the impact of the tax program--that is, the
discussions suggest that the tax program will not go through.
I don't
really think we have a very good fix now on whether we're going to get
an impact--at least a short-run impact--on capital spending plans or
not.
I would assume that that will be resolved pretty quickly by the
President's State of the Union and budget messages.
He will have to
take a position one way or the other on accelerated depreciation and
the investment tax credit.
And if he should take the position of
rejecting the Treasury's program, I think the decline in interest
rates will reinforce the extraordinary incentives and produce another
great upsurge in capital spending.
So, I'm very optimistic about the
first half--much more so than the staff.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are you unhappy about that?

MR. MORRIS.
No.
I think we can handle a 4 percent growth
rate.
The big problem, or the big imponderable, is what is going to
happen to productivity growth.
I've been very optimistic on
productivity, but I must say I haven't gotten much statistical
comfort.
My optimism is relying on the intuitive rather than the
statistical because the big jump in employment in the last two months
in an economy that's not growing very rapidly surely leads me to
expect very poor productivity numbers for the fourth quarter.
But I'm
not sure that we're going to get in 1985 the pretty good productivity
performance that would make a 4 percent real growth rate very easy to
attain without putting inflationary strains on the economy.
If we
don't get it--if we get a poor productivity record--then I'd have to
change my mind on this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You'd want to put a lot of emphasis on M1,

I bet!
MR. MORRIS.
No, sir!
As I say, I've concluded that M1
velocity is a random walk and I think we have to look at other things.
If we ever get back to a point where M1 velocity becomes reliable
again, I'd be quite delighted.
But I think it would hazardous for us
to make the assumption that that time is now.

in the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
You're not thinking of radical differences
ranges for next year?

MR. MORRIS.
No, I think the ranges for next year are
compatible with, say, an 8-1/2 percent nominal GNP rise, within which
I think a 4 percent real growth rate would be comfortably encompassed.
So, if we're going to continue to have targets for the aggregates, I
don't see any reason to change any of the ranges.

12/17-18/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me respond to the
questions to us in the order you raised them. First of all, in terms
They look fine to me; I don't see
of the tentative ranges for 1985:
any particular reason at this point to change them. On the question
As I mentioned
of relative weights and operating techniques:
In
yesterday, I'm not dissatisfied with our operating techniques.
fact, despite the surprises we've had in the economy, I think the
performance of monetary policy, as best I can judge it over the past
year or maybe two years, probably has been as good as you can get it.
Despite the fact that M1 growth has popped around, 1984 is the first
year that I can remember, Steve, where we've never actually gone
outside the cone; we've been in the cone for the whole year. You
raised the question yesterday, Mr. Chairman, about primary emphasis on
M1.
Part of the problem is that nobody knows quite what that means.
I do think that in the fullness of time and over long enough periods
of time the behavior of M1 should get a relatively heavy amount of
But I don't think it should get
weight, which I think it gets.
primary weight if that means chasing it around in the short run.
Again, looked at in the fullness of time, the behavior of M1 even for
1984 at 5 percent or so doesn't seem to me to be very far from
something that I would consider quite acceptable.
In general, I'm pretty
On the question of the forecast:
close to Frank. I certainly have been quite wrong in terms of my
near-term expectations for the last couple of months. But as best I
can weed through everything, I still think that the prospects for 1985
are on the stronger side of the staff's forecast, which is fine to me.
If I were to try and articulate an optimal--I shouldn't say optimal
but rather acceptable--set of goals for 1985, something in the area of
4 percent real growth with an inflation rate holding about where it is
looks like a pretty result from my point of view. One thing I would
stress, though, is that by a lot of standards inflation, even if it
Indeed, when you look at
were to stay at 4 percent, is still high.
what has happened this year, there is still a question as to why
I think
inflation is as high as it is, not why it's as low as it is.
that has to remain a consideration in our minds, particularly going
As Jim pointed out yesterday, the pressures from
out into 1985.
profit margins are going to increase at least in a behavioral way.
Whether they can reflect themselves in higher prices is another
I think the two wild cards of note, in terms of the economic
subject.
outlook, are the trade situation and the tax policy questions. The
staff forecast and most other forecasts basically are saying that the
trade position will stay about where it is right now. I don't know if
Certainly, as a general proposition, that
that's a safe bet or not.
situation continues to be a source of great uncertainty in my mind.
And I don't know how to judge the uncertainties coming out of all
these tax policy questions. My hunch is that they will hurt rather
than help.
The one other point I would make is that I now have the
sense that--reflecting the relatively good performance of wages and
prices and maybe especially wages--we may in this period have achieved
something of a more permanent downward shift in inflationary
That, again, I think can be a
expectations and in the yield curve.
positive development in terms of the real economy in 1985.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

12/17-18/84

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman,
I'll try to answer all of
your questions in order as well.
But first I'd like to say a word
about the forecast.
Unlike Frank and Jerry, I'm very comfortable with
the staff's forecast; I think it's just about on target.
I do not see

any danger of a recession.
I don't see any of the usual signs or
conditions prevailing which usually precede a recession. On the
contrary, the basic conditions appear to exist for continued moderate
expansion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Let me just be clear.

When you say you're

comfortable with the forecast, that means you're comfortable with it

as a forecast.

And is it also desirable?

MR. RICE.
taking too long to
"no. "

That means I agree with it as a forecast.
If I'm
get to it, I guess I could give you a "yes" or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No,

I just wanted to be sure.

MR. RICE.
Although there are good reasons for expecting a 3
percent rate of expansion next year, again unlike Frank and Jerry, I
don't see anything in the economy that's going to spark an expansion
at a rate beyond 3 percent.
It may be, as Frank suggested a moment
ago, that the recent decline in interest rates has been of such a
magnitude as to stimulate further expansion.
The decline of the
federal funds rate to around 7 percent, as we had today, is something
And I'm sure the staff forecast is not based
I had not anticipated.
on interest rates at these levels.
So, one question is whether the
funds rate and other short-term rates should stay in the 7 percent
area or not.
With rates in that area Frank may well have a good point
about sparking a faster rate of expansion.
But if they don't stay
around that level--if funds rates go back up to where they were a few
weeks ago or to the 8-3/4 percent rate recorded two days ago and the
short-term market rates associated with that go to 9 percent, I really
don't see what is going to spark a faster rate of expansion.
I don't
see it in consumer expenditures; I don't see it in the various
I don't know
components of investment; I don't see it in net exports.
where it would come from.
As the Chairman put it, if the staff forecast is about right,
And my answer
the question arises as to whether that is satisfactory.
is that if that is absolutely the best we can do without inflation,
yes, I would settle for a 3 percent rate of expansion.
However, I'm
not sure that that is the highest rate of growth that is consistent
with low inflation.
I'm not at all sure.
My own inclination is to
I'm not at all sure that 4 percent is a rate
try for a higher rate.
that is consistent with low inflation; 4 percent growth may be too
high and may result in capacity or resource pressures.
But I think we
ought to try to pull for the highest rate of growth that is consistent
with low inflation and keeping the risks of igniting inflationary
I think we're in a good position to do that
expectations very low.
right now because the Federal Reserve has an unusual amount of
credibility. And I think it's a time that we could use some of the
To put it
credibility in the interest of getting some further growth.
simply:
We can play it safe or we can take some risks toward more
As a matter of fact,
growth.
I don't think the risks will be high.
as I've already suggested, the moment we see some danger of capacity
or resource pressures or wage/price pressures developing or the moment

-36-

12/17-18/84

we see some ignition of inflationary expectations we can and should
pull back. Now, let me say that I'm simply trying to suggest an
How does this translate into policy? As I
attitude we might take.
said earlier, interest rates have come down much more in recent weeks
I'm perfectly prepared, with interest
than I had thought they would.
rates at this level, to sit back and wait and see what happens and not
push them any further.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say this level, I think maybe we
ought to discount today's federal funds rate for the purpose of this
It's the last analysis, but-discussion.
MR. PARTEE.

7 percent in the--

MR. RICE. What I'm trying to convey is a feeling that things
have eased quite a bit, and a lot of what I'm saying applies to an
interest rate level that was higher than I thought was good for the
economy.
So, I would be prepared to sit back and see what effect this
And if it isn't producing some kind of
[easing] has for a while.
support for the economy, why then I'd be in favor of easing somewhat
But what I'm saying doesn't translate into doing something
further.
wild and pushing interest rates way, way down. That's not what I'm
talking about; I'm talking about a cautious, probing attitude. We can
talk about how to do that, which means numbers like "B."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"B,"

okay.

I'm impressed
MR. RICE. To answer you question about M1:
with what the staff has found about the increased reliability of M1.
If it has become more reliable in the last 18 months, let's recognize
it.
That is not to say rehabilitate it completely but recognize it
and perhaps consider putting it on equal footing with the other
aggregates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We have it on equal footing right now.

MR. RICE. No, I've never hear anybody say it's on equal
footing or is given equal weight.
Two meetings ago we put it rather
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
explicitly on equal footing.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the way the directive is
If
written and that's the way the markets are interpreting it now.
anything, they're giving it more [weight].
MR. RICE. Well, the markets were giving it more. We're
saying we are giving it more importance, even more importance than a
The markets have long since been giving it greater
month ago.
Anyhow, if everybody agrees that we put it
importance than we have.
on equal footing with the other aggregates, that's as far as I'd like
As for the ranges for next year, I'm
to go at the present time on M1.
However, if we
comfortable with the ranges that we've established.
implement this probing attitude that I've suggested we should push
for, we should be prepared to see growth in the upper parts of those
Is there something I haven't covered?
ranges.

12/17-18/84

-37-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you and Mr. Corrigan started out by
You haven't
saying you were going to answer all my questions.
answered the international questions.
What I'm suggesting is to try to get as
MR. RICE.
Oh, yes.
fast a rate of growth [as is consistent with low inflation], which
And lower interest rates are very
means lower interest rates.
As a
consistent with what needs to be done on the international side.
matter of fact, I think one could make a case for easing monetary
policy purely on the exchange rate situation now because of its
effects on and ramifications for our domestic economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to your question as to
the "satisfactoriness" of the 2.9 percent Greenbook projection for
next year, I have some discomfort with the confidence factor around
It's so difficult to forecast today. We have good
that 2.9 percent.
I would move away from
forecasters here and they have difficulty.
Jim's position that the risks are balanced. It seems to me that there
are some areas that point toward downside risks--notably the reliance
on the consumer rather than a BFI-led third year [of recovery], which
was the scenario not too long ago. Now we have in our scenario,
understandably, the consumer coming back in 1985 and continuing to
accumulate debt very substantially, albeit not at as great a rate or
for as many dollars as earlier. That curve is very steep, as you will
So, we have the consumer, who has been buying cars and
recall.
durables and buying on credit and accumulating considerable debt,
looked on to come back in 1985 and add to that debt very
substantially. I'm not sure the consumer is going to do that to that
degree. I'm certainly not sure the consumer is going to continue to
accumulate that kind of debt in housing, despite some of the positive
It's true that housing
things that have been said about housing.
It's true that
starts didn't fall much last month, only 0.7 percent.
But housing
there have been some positive figures on house sales.
prices are not rising in many of the key submarkets around the country
and that motivation for taking on housing debt and for trading up in
housing is missing. The delinquency rate on the residential mortgage
portfolio is at unprecedented highs for this stage of an expansion-There is no sign of that coming down. Foreclosures
over 4 percent.
are very high. Add to that the need, if you're going to have housing
sustained or rise, for an annual rate of 500,000 plus multiple units
to the supply in '85 in the face of the syndicators who have been
putting up much of this apartment property backing off because of tax
uncertainty. Who is going to finance the massive blocks of apartments
needed to maintain housing starts at 1.7 million units or some number
like that when a third of it has to be multifamily units and the
syndicators and the other speculative builders are somewhat deterred
by the discussion of a change to the tax situation?
So, I don't think 2.9 percent [real GNP growth] is
satisfactory. I think that has a policy implication, Mr. Chairman. I
would be a lot happier with a 4 percent plus or minus number rather
It indicates to me that we should address our
than 2.9 percent.
I think
policy in that direction. You raised the question of risks.
I think there are also risks in the
there are risks to the forecast.
broader sense.
I note that when we reviewed the two graphic
depictions of unemployment that we tend to use, the curve showing

12/17-18/84

-38-

insured unemployed has been rising since October, if I can read the
graph, and it looks like the number on initial claims for unemployment
has been rising since about midyear or July. And we're talking about
2.9 percent growth following two quarters of growth under 2 percent.
In real terms we have those two quarters behind us and then an
expectation of under 3 percent for a target long term. Take the
Let's
confidence limit around the 2.9 percent in a broader sense.
consider the Congress returning and starting to talk about spending
cuts with unemployment rising or at least unemployment claims high.
What about the group of political people in and out of the
legislatures who would like to take a crack at the Federal Reserve-who would like to restrict our independence or who would like to have
us report in a different way and so forth. Are we willing to take the
risk of unemployment and very slow economic growth as those folks
To me
begin to look at the Federal Reserve and what should be done?
I may be exaggerating.
that's a risk.
In terms of the world context, I saw a figure somewhere,
though I haven't verified it, of 19 million unemployed in the EC.
Maybe that's not quite the figure but we know what the unemployment
rates are in those countries and the Chairman indicated the outlook
for growth there. There are some political and social risks in those
countries of continued unemployment at this stage.
The question was raised as to what importance should M1 have.
Well, I think among the monetary aggregates it should have the premier
position. But I think too that for us not to weigh more heavily the
weighted average exchange rate borders on the irresponsible [given]
that the exchange rate and the flood of imports into this country
As Ed Boehne was saying,
impact upon employment and the market share.
once that market share is gone, it's gone for quite a while. And what
So,
does that mean for employment and unemployment in the next cycle?
it seems to me that we need to put more emphasis than we have been
We need to put emphasis upon M1, certainly.
upon the exchange rate.
And those indicators that have some reliability and which point toward
I don't know
future inflation, of course, have to be very important.
whether they are more important than M1 or not, but obviously those
signs of future inflation are important--the wage and benefit
settlements and indicators such as productivity that Frank mentioned.
Well, productivity is coming back. Remember that we've had such a
disappointment in real growth that, as Frank said, with the services
industries hiring people and real growth so low, of course, we have
But I think that the staff's
negative productivity figures.
productivity figures are still too low, although I'm delighted to see
But
that they have raised the trend number a touch. Thank you, sir.
the people I still have occasional contact with have changed their
organizations substantially and they are going to get the
productivity.
Now, that leaves me to question the ranges for 1985 as the
Chairman asked. There I am greatly troubled by our implicit treatment
I'm not sure that 6-3/4 percent will be enough,
of velocity for 1985.
I'm not sure if velocity behavior is so hard to forecast.
frankly.
That's somewhat of a
I've got 4 percent M1 and V1 for last year.
surprise, I believe. Talk about confidence level plus or minus around
trend velocity! What trend velocity do we need to have 6-3/4 percent
be an adequate increase in the short run? What velocity do we need to
get the midpoint of the range, to have that 5-1/2 percent be adequate

12/17-18/84

-39-

for M1 in 1985?
At 7 or 7.1 percent nominal [GNP growth] for '85, it
seems to me the implication is that the top of the range for M1 for
'85 may be too low; I would be much more comfortable if we had a
little more flexibility there.
I don't know whether we ought to go to
8 percent.
I know it's the wrong signal in terms of Fed policy whose
primary job over time is to bring down the rate of growth in the
monetary aggregates in order to counter inflation. But why start off
with a situation in which, if we use that darn geometric cone, we're
so liable to start out above the upper limit?
I'm a parallel line man
myself.
If these are the categories we're talking about, I think we
should seriously consider a higher upper limit for M1 for 1985.
And I
think we should seriously consider that [complex] of short-term
targets which would begin the process of getting a 4 percent plus or
minus real growth in the near future.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, there are a lot of things out there in '85
that are going to happen that we don't have any notion of today.
It's
looking pretty far ahead and I think all we can do is go on the basis
of central tendencies and realize that there will be many surprises to
which we'll have to react as the year goes on.
I would say that as we
go through the third year of expansion, I would have a presumption
that the risks are on the side of falling short rather than going over
the rate of growth. As the expansion gets older it gets a little more
dubious, a little more treacherous to continue to project that we will
follow along those lines.
In particular, there are two things that
bother me about the outlook. The first--and I somewhat tentatively
submit it to you--is that there has been a considerable income
redistribution in the country both because of the tax changes and
because of interest rates.
As a result, I'm not sure that we can
count on the personal saving rate dropping as it does in the
projection. The staff didn't know why it went up, so they are putting
it back down again. But if I look around for a reason why it might
not go down, it would be that this is becoming a society that is very
divided in terms of income results and wealth effects and that kind of
thing, and I would expect a higher saving rate because of the fact
that a lot of people are prosperous. Now, that doesn't necessarily
mean more consumer credit because I would submit that the people who
borrow are usually not the ones who have the wealth.
They are the
ones who need to do the spending. And that makes me somewhat
sympathetic to Preston's point that maybe housing won't do so well and
maybe automobiles won't do so well as the year goes on.
The second and even more disturbing thing to me is the effect
of net imports on the economy that we've seen this past year.
It
really has sapped the strength of the economic expansion as this year
has progressed.
The projection says net imports aren't going to go up
much more and it could be right, but I really can't see that the
situation has changed.
It seems to me that the rising tide of imports
is just not in the process [of stopping] unless something happens to
stop it; it's going to grow and grow more and that's going to sap the
strength of the economy as the year goes on.
So my inclination,
without having a specific forecast, would be to say that the chances
are, if anything, that we'll end up on the low side rather than on the
high side of an inadequate forecast. The growth rate specified for
the year is inadequate.
It's inadequate in terms of capacity
utilization, which doesn't do a thing as the year goes on; it stays at

12/17-18/84

82 or a little below 82, as I recall.
And it's inadequate in terms of
the kinds of stimuli we need in order to get increasing capital
spending.
Profits aren't going to be doing much according to the
forecast; markets aren't going to be improving. We're almost certain
to have a gradual shutting off in the business investment expansion
So, I think we ought to have in mind 4
with this kind of forecast.
percent.
I would have said 4-1/2 percent real growth from the fourth
I think this kind of forecast is too
quarter to the fourth quarter.
poor to come forward with, especially when we recognize that we may
fall short.
I've given up forecasting
I don't know about interest rates.
interest rates or even saying what they ought to be because there are
so many variables in the equations. For example, someone commented--I
think it was Jerry--that maybe inflationary expectations have changed.
If they have, these interest rates aren't going to stimulate anything.
We are going to [need] lower interest rates because [the current
rates] just won't bring forth the demand for credit to spend if people
have a lower expectation for inflation and, therefore, a lower
anticipation of what they will realize in terms of profit payoffs or
appreciation payoffs on the investments they have made. Therefore, I
I've had that
just don't know where interest rates ought to be.
That
feeling now for some while and it has grown as the years go on.
reinforces my view that we really have to look at the monetary
I'm
aggregates, not interest rates, as what we hope to control.
trying to remember to answer the Chairman's questions, although he's
left the room. My view is that M1 ought to have primary importance
among the monetary aggregates.
That has been my view and there is no
change in it.
I must say it was strengthened a little by Steve's
analysis yesterday but I have felt that for some time and I continue
to feel it.
I don't know, but I suppose we have selective memories.
Lyle can remember the times when M1 didn't tell us anything.
I can
remember the times when it did-MR. GRAMLEY.

The two of us make a great team!

MR. PARTEE.
--and somehow the latter times strike me as
being more important.
But we always have to be very careful in using
M1 because there can be--as there was, I think, in 1982--shifts in the
demand for money and we have to be sensitive to that. We don't want
to ride our money supply target without regard to what is happening in
other elements of the economy or in other aggregates or credit or in
But among the aggregates I think it is the most
market conditions.
reliable and the one that we ought to put the most confidence in.
I
agree with Pres that we ought to reconsider the long-range targets for
1985.
I'm inclined to think that we ought to put M1 growth back to 4
to 8 percent as it was for this year both because we have room for 4
to 4-1/2 percent real growth in the economy and because we've fallen a
One way to make the adjustment for the base drift would
little short.
be to say "All right, we had growth a little lower than we expected
this year and we'll take a little higher growth next year if necessary
to bring about this 4 to 4-1/2 percent real expansion in the economy.
I think that makes a lot of sense. And I don't think in that context
that it would be taken as a backing away from our inflation fighting
attitude; I think it would be quite acceptable.
I also agree, and I've never said this before in a meeting,
that we ought to pay considerable attention to the exchange rate and

12/17-18/84

-41-

we ought to do what we can to bring the exchange rate down. That also
would suggest, other things equal, that when we can we ought to do
things in the money sector that are apt to produce somewhat lower
interest rates.
By "other things equal" I mean if lowering rates
isn't producing some kind of a calamitous result internally.
I don't
know whether it's going to bring the dollar down; certainly, it hasn't
so far.
But I suppose the weight of the evidence over time is that
lower interest rates in this country might tend to do that.
I
wouldn't say we should make the exchange rate the target of policy
[unintelligible] or something like that, but I'm very disturbed about
this import situation. I think it's just going to have to be dealt
with. If the exchange rate does come down--remembering also that a
characteristic later on in periods of expansion is that we start to
get more inflationary pressures--with lower exchange rates going
through the third year of expansion, it seems to me that prices might
be on the high side of the staff forecast.
I guess I'd be prepared to
make some price concession for getting the exchange rate down because
I think it's that important a problem.
I think I've answered all the
questions, so I'll end at that point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I believe the staff forecast represents what is
probably the most likely outcome.
I'm still uneasy about the outlook,
particularly for the next couple of quarters.
The pause or the growth
slowdown has been greater than I expected and greater than a lot of us
expected. In analyzing that, I came up with a couple of events that
in retrospect maybe weren't so surprising to me and a couple of events
that caused me to focus anew on some existing issues in the economy.
The ones I put in the class of maybe being more [surprises of] timing
rather than real surprises would be consumer spending and the
deterioration in the trade accounts. Those may well smooth out over
time. A couple [of developments] lead me to a new focus on old
issues. One is that I really do find surprising the extent to which
the slowing in the national growth rate is represented in a stalling
out of the economic recovery in the Midwest.
To use the Ohio state
numbers as representative of the Fourth District, employment in Ohio
hasn't risen all year and unemployment is now beginning to inch
upward.
If you look at business in our area, particularly heavy
manufacturing, you see the marking down of expectations.
They still
think the national recovery is going on but they don't think it's
going to be reflected in their business, particularly in the
So, they're focusing instead on
traditional capital goods area.
expansion of cost cutting and survival now.
The second set of issues, which I find particularly
worrisome, are those surrounding the situation in the farming, mining,
and energy sectors.
I really see little in recent developments to
Of course, not
suggest the end of the income squeeze in these areas.
surprisingly in that respect--because really only time will deal with
those problems--I think the time [will come] to write down some of the
inflated asset prices from some of the decisions that were taken under
But this remains a problem
a different set of economic [conditions].
in many small towns and even some large ones in that we really don't
see the spillover, if you will, of the national recovery even if we do
expect it to continue on at about the 3 percent rate.

12/17-18/84

-42-

I have two comments specifically on whether I think the 3
I'd like to comment on both 1985 and
percent rate is adequate or not.
I think probably there is room for more than
then a bit beyond that.
But as we look
3 percent growth in 1985; I might say 3 to 4 percent.
at the long-term trend of the economy and, therefore, at what
productivity increases are likely to be, I'm one of those people who
Some
are very impressed by some of the productivity stories I hear.
of the remarkable cost-cutting stories and productivity changes that
But they do
we have seen in our District are really very exciting.
take time to have their effect and I think they take more investment
in order to have their effect, and the time periods can be significant
So, as I look beyond
before we really reap the full benefit of this.
1985, I wouldn't like to place too heavy a bet on a really significant
For that reason, if we're talking
change in the productivity numbers.
publicly about something bigger than 3 percent next year, I'd like to
be sure we don't put ourselves in the position where that sounds like
more than 3 percent forevermore, because the forevermore numbers I
I
tend to be more comfortable with are in the 2 to 3 percent range.
think if we get involved in more than the 2 to 3 percent range long
term, we're counting on a faster quickening of some of the
productivity improvements or we're counting on continued enormous
numbers of imports to mop up the large demand, and I wouldn't like to
be betting on those too far into the future. As far as the longerterm ranges, particularly the M1 range, as I look at them now they are
not unreasonable in line with what I just discussed.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the Board staff forecast is
about right in terms of the level of economic activity, but I would
side very much with Pres and Chuck and Emmett on the risks on that,
I am fearful that the
particularly concerning Chuck's last point.
foreign trade deficit is going to take a bigger bite out of our
If there's
production and employment than we probably have assumed.
any risk, this strength of the dollar in the face of the narrowing
interest rate differentials has impressed me a lot and that's where I
I think Jerry made a very important
would think the main risk lies.
point on the inflation side in saying we ought not to be complacent
I remember that in 1971 when
about an inflation rate of 4 percent.
President Nixon put on the wage and price controls that [level of
By the same
inflation] was serious enough to be a national calamity.
token, I think we can pretty well count in our own productive capacity
that which is abroad since we have such an open economy now that we're
not apt to hit bottlenecks quite as quickly; I think the threat of
foreign competition and actual foreign foreign competition have been
one of the key reasons why inflation has not risen as much in this
Jim said about
upswing as some of us thought earlier that it would.
the risk of inflation that he thought it would be less next year; I
would guess it would be roughly about the same, but certainly less
than I earlier thought it would be at this stage.
On the long-run targets, I would come out about where Karen
So far as the aggregates
did and would leave those ranges unchanged.
are concerned, I'll take a page from Orwell's Animal Farm and say that
all aggregates are created equal but some are more equal than others
and I would emphasize M1 since I think it really, despite its
limitations, conveys more information than all the others do and
certainly more than any one of them does. To your fourth question

12/17-18/84

about whether 2.9 or 3 percent growth is satisfactory or not, I think
Emmett gave the appropriate answer when he said that that's fine if
that's all we can get without inflation. Historically, our long-run
growth rate has been around 3-1/2 percent and 3 percent would not be
that unusual at this stage of a recovery. But in the peculiar
circumstances in which we have found ourselves, I believe that we
But anything much
probably could stand a little more than that.
beyond 3-1/2 percent or so I think would spell problems for us down
the road.
And to your final question about how this fits into the world
situation:
If we don't provide the impetus for expanding world trade,
I suppose that foreign economies look a little
who is going to do it?
better now than they did the last time we met but they still don't
look very strong. So, I would expect we're going to have to carry the
brunt of that burden; and for that reason I would agree with Chuck
that we ought to take a little harder look at exchange rates this time
than we've traditionally done around this table.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. On the outlook, my views have been a little
more optimistic than those of others and that has not been very
successful so far.
I still think there are reasons to think that '85
might come out a little better than the staff forecast. We have the
very large budget deficit; we have the diminishing probability that
We've given the economy some kind of
something will be done about it.
a push with lower interest rates in the last few months. But it's
also true that one can look at each sector and find something
Consumer debt is rising; in business fixed investment
negative.
there's the tax program and the obvious slow-down; there's the heavy
So wherever one looks, there are considerable
drain from exports.
doubts. That leaves me somewhat agnostic and willing to assume that
we are most likely to do a little better than 3 percent but with no
great assurance.
Now, as to what is desirable, I would rather not couch that
in terms of a rate of economic growth. I would prefer to couch it in
terms of certain conditions that are desirable to achieve.
Unfortunately, the various conditions, which are very familiar, do not
I think we should get the dollar
all pull in the same direction.
down. At the present level of the dollar we are ruining our trade and
we're burdening the country with an international debt, the service of
which is going to be a continuing burden on the exchange rate itself.
The longer this goes on the lower the dollar will have to be in the
long run in order to get anywhere near making income and [outgo] meet.
We also, I think, need to get interest rates down. While I agree with
Chuck that one can never be sure what interest rates are right--that's
why we have aggregates targets--I think it is fairly clear that
interest rates in this country and around the world are very high in
They are a drag and are problems for developing countries
real terms.
I would like to see something happen that would bring
and their debt.
interest rates down. These are all things that call for expansion.
But on the other side there is the inflation rate situation.
I share with Jerry and you the view that 4 percent is not good enough.
We have to keep bringing it down and we have to realize that this has
a cost both in terms of real growth and in terms of the level of

12/17-18/84

unemployment, capacity utilization, and also in terms of the
objectives that I just listed. That is to say:
If we want to get the
inflation down, it is not helpful to do something that gets the dollar
down.
If we want to get inflation down more, it is not helpful to do
something that brings interest rates down.
It is a very difficult
compromise.
And I lean for the long run toward doing what brings the
inflation down, although in the short run I think we may have a window
here in which the combined fact that we have a weak economy and weak
M1 and weak inflation gives us an opportunity for doing something that
would give interest rates a downward push. But that's a short-run
evaluation; it's not for the year.
In terms of the rate of growth, I
agree that over time we have to get unemployment down.
But we're in
the third year of an expansion and historically it has proved
dangerous to try to accelerate [economic growth] in the late stages of
an expansion.
It has been tried before and it has led to inflation.
Sooner or later we're going to have a pause; this economy is cyclical.
Whether this pause comes in the third year or the fourth year and
whether it means a growth recession or one or two down quarters it
seems to me is not unimportant but it is less important than to do the
structural things right--that is, inflation, interest rates, and the
dollar.
Turning to the ranges, I would keep them as is, recognizing
that that means tightening them relative to [those we adopted in] July
because we didn't anticipate the down-drift of the base.
This will be
helpful for inflation.
It will not be helpful for growth or the
dollar or for interest rates.
I think that is the right thing to do,
nevertheless. As far as the aggregates are concerned, intuitively,
like many, I always look to M1.
It's published every week.
So, there
it is.
I think we need to look at each aggregate each time it makes
its appearance and ask ourselves whether there is anything untoward
about it.
There is surely something untoward about M1 at the present
time.
It looks like an incipient shift in the demand function.
I do
think that at this time the [broader] aggregates, particularly debt,
deserve a careful look.
I would weigh all of these and I would give
them different weights at different times.
Usually I'd give M1 the
highest weight but at the present time I would like to have some
understanding of why it is weak--whether that is really a weakness
that deserves to be corrected or a weakness that has some [causes]
that will keep M1 at a lower level.
Finally, as for the international aspect, I think it's
enormously important from the point of view of the world to get the
dollar down and avoid a situation in which the dollar later may
collapse in disorder. That isn't going to be helpful to the world in
terms of our current account deficit because our locomotive function
But it's
in good part depends on the dollar being excessively high.
for us an unsustainable and intolerable situation, and the world too
in some respects would be better off with a more sustainable level of
the dollar. Moreover, I'm not convinced that what we do has all that
much of an impact on the dollar.
We can, of course, conduct monetary
policy in a way that targets on the exchange rate by trial and error:
If a little expansion doesn't bring down the exchange rate, a little
more expansion can be tried and still more and there is no doubt that
eventually monetary expansion will bring the dollar down.
But that's
not the way I think we want to do it.
If we do it in a moderate way,
we have to realize that whatever we do is of doubtful effect in the
short run as we've seen in recent months when interest rates came down

12/17-18/84

and the dollar rose.
If we could bring interest rates down, that
would be the greatest thing we could do for the rest of the world in
terms of investment--for other countries in terms of their expansion
and in terms of their debt.
This is something that we can do only
very marginally. If something happens on the budget deficit, I think
we should be prepared to respond to that--not by a permanent increase
in the rate of growth of the aggregates, which would just mean more
inflation, but a temporary increase that would increase the money
stock and help to depress interest rates somewhat more than the mere
action of a reduction in the budget deficit and in the Treasury's
borrowing could be expected to accomplish.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all this talk about getting the
dollar lower and improving the trade balance, let me just introduce
another complication. If we don't have a big trade imbalance and a
big capital inflow from abroad, how are we going to finance the budget
deficit? Mr. Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. Let me start with the ranges, Mr. Chairman.
I don't think there is any need to do anything at this time about M1
or M2.
I think 7 percent at the top of the range for M1 is sufficient
to allow for adequate growth in 1985, provided we keep inflation about
where it is and provided that we don't have an unusually low level of
velocity. We should not lose sight of the fact--and I think we need
I think we did
to remind ourselves--that 1984 was a pretty good year.
very, very well in terms of growth and, certainly, we did well in
terms of inflation. And if you believe, as I guess I still believe
but with a greater degree of uncertainty, that what we are in now is a
pause and not a permanent decline in the economy, I really don't think
I guess we're
we need to do anything with the ranges for M1 and M2.
not giving a lot of weight to M3 but I wouldn't be concerned if we
moved that range up a bit to reflect the reality of what happened in
1984, though I really don't care all that much about it.
With respect to the staff forecast, I think it's a little
pessimistic in terms of growth. I think that growth will probably be
I would not be terribly
around 4 percent, but I believe that's good.
I
comfortable with 2.9 percent growth for '85; that's a bit anemic.
think we can support 4 percent without reigniting inflationary
I think
expectations. Why do I think we might get greater growth?
the saving rate is somewhat important and, unlike others, I believe
the consumer is going to break out of this pattern of saving to some
extent and we're going to get a return of the consumer to the
marketplace. We've seen some evidence of that already in terms of the
November retail sales.
Perhaps I'm just reflecting my own District
where retail sales are holding up pretty well and, in fact, some
I should say that some
retailers are even changing their forecasts.
The deficit, of course, is still with
are moving them down as well.
us and that is having a stimulative effect on the economy, obviously.
I think that we have eased considerably. We have had a drop in shortI think that's still going to
term rates of roughly 300 basis points.
work its way through the economy. We're expecting more rapid growth;
we had more rapid growth of M1 in November. I don't know what Steve
is going to tell us about December, but the last number I saw was 6 or
So, I think those things are still in
7 percent growth in December.
the pipeline and are going to push us to healthier growth--and by
With that greater growth I would
healthier I mean 4 percent in 1985.
expect a little higher inflation than the staff is forecasting. The

12/17-18/84

other thing that I looked at that I think is rather interesting is the
fact that long-term rates have not moved down all that much. What is
Is it indicating a revival of inflationary
that telling us?
expectations on the part of markets or does it suggest an expectation
I think it's probably the latter. I
of greater economic growth?
think the markets are looking for healthier growth in the long run.
The other thing that influences me to some extent is the money numbers
that I'm seeing from the private forecasters, who are suggesting a
fairly healthy growth in M1 in the first quarter of '85.
With respect to the dollar, as others have said, this trade
imbalance is a very, very distressing feature of the economy. And if
we want to get the dollar down, or at least to help the dollar come
down, I suppose one could argue that monetary ease is the way to do
it.
However, if we do that, the thing I'm concerned about is first of
all that we haven't seen the dollar come down at all as a result of
the decline in the differential between rates abroad and in the United
I would have expected
Interest rates have come down here.
States.
the dollar to come off but it didn't. And the question in my mind is:
If we ease policy to bring the dollar down, are we going to reignite
inflationary expectations, increase interest rates again, and then
In other words, we may get the
bring the dollar back to where it was?
So, I'm not sure there is very
opposite effect of what we anticipate.
much we can do on the monetary policy side with respect to the dollar.
I really just don't know.
One other thing I want to mention is that in terms of the tax
proposal, I think--as others have said as well--that it can cut either
way.
I find it very difficult to get people to say which way they are
going to jump:
whether they are going to accelerate their business
fixed investment upon anticipation of being grandfathered or whether
they are going to hold back. It could go either way, so that is an
uncertainty.
With respect to the operating techniques that you asked
about, Mr. Chairman, I wouldn't know how to answer your question about
I think M1 deserves a lot of attention
placing primary emphasis.
among the aggregates and I personally would pay more attention to M1
than to the others. But I do think it is very important that we keep
our eye on all of the other factors, including economic growth,
interest rates, and so on.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

Based on very recent information, it seems to me
MR. BOEHNE.
that, at least in my District, the retail situation looks a little
better.
It's nothing to write home about but I suspect December might
The more interesting
turn out to be a touch better than November.
point, as we go out into 1985, is that I believe the risks are on the
One is just
down side from the staff forecast for two broad reasons:
the anatomy of a recovery and the second is the level of interest
The point has been made in several different ways, but there
rates.
That rhythm is
is an anatomy to a recovery; there is a rhythm to it.
not constant from one recovery to another, but it usually starts with
housing and moves into consumption and then it gets a kick from
To count on a big boost
inventories and then investment and so on.
coming from consumption in the third year of a recovery it seems to me
It might
is at odds with that usual anatomy and that usual rhythm.

12/17-18/84

-47-

In the second area,
happen, but I don't think it's a good bet.
interest rates, I think most of us around the table say that we've had
a drop in interest rates, we've eased and we feel good, so why don't
I
It takes a little time; we know there are lags here.
we just wait?
don't think we have lowered interest rates as much as we think we have
I think we have seen a bigger
in terms of the impact on the economy.
I think we are
drop in nominal rates than we have in real rates.
seeing a downward adjustment in inflationary expectations and I think
interest rates are still very high. There is nothing about an 8
percent Treasury bill rate or a little more that is particularly low.
So, in
And if you look at long-term rates, [they are up] there too.
terms of interest rates, I think we still have fairly restrictive
restraint on the economy.
So, for both those reasons--the anatomy of a recovery and
interest rates--the odds favor a weaker economy than the staff has
forecast.
I think those kinds of risks are unacceptable, and I think
I don't
the forecast that the staff has put together is unacceptable.
I have a hard
think 3 percent, or 2.9 percent, is acceptable to us.
I think it would be even more difficult to
time selling myself on it.
sell that to the public or the Congress or to our friends overseas.
So, it seems to me, we have a forecast that is unacceptable. The
risks are unacceptable and the policy implication is to try to have a
somewhat more stimulative monetary policy to at least move us in a
I have trouble pinpointing a
direction that we find more acceptable.
number but with all the hazards it seems to me something closer to 4
percent or a little over in terms of real growth would be a much more
salable outlook and policy target.
On the long-term ranges, I
As far as the other questions:
must say that my doubts about the ranges that we agreed to last July
are on the rise.
I'm not at this point prepared in an outright way to
advocate raising them, but I think at a minimum we should indicate
that growth would be at the upper end and perhaps exceed the ranges,
particularly in the first part of the year when we get into the
But between now and February, I
parallel lines and the cone business.
may very well change my mind and come down on the side of raising the
upper limit both as a way of handling the undershoot and as a way of
As far as the
providing some breathing room to deal with the risks.
I don't
weighting of the aggregates, I have never loved nor hated M1.
But it
have any particular loyalty to it; I'm very agnostic about it.
does seem to me that it has looked a little better recently. These
weekly gyrations are certainly funny, but it seems to me that the case
that M1 is better than it was a few months ago is a convincing case,
I would give it an extra bow
so I would put it first among equals.
I, too, think--and I don't think
compared to the other aggregates.
I've even ever thought this let alone said it, Chuck--that the
I
exchange rates and the commodity prices are telling us something.
don't know what kind of weight to assign to this but when so many
signals in the economy are going one way or another and the aggregates
to some extent are giving mixed signals, it seems to me that in a
world with that kind of uncertainty there is information to be gleaned
from the exchange markets and from commodity prices. And I think both
of them tell us that our interest rates are too high.
As far as the operating procedures are concerned, I'm much
happier with the way we have been conducting ourselves in recent
months than we were a couple of years ago when we were in a much more

12/17-18/84

-48-

It does seem to me that while we ought to carry on
mechanistic mold.
more or less as we have been with some equal to primary importance to
Ml and looking at borrowings, I would not keep both eyes on borrowing.
I would look over at reserve growth and if we get ourselves in a
situation where reserve growth either shoots way up or begins to fall
I'm not
off, it seems to me that, too, would be telling us something.
for any formal modification, but I think we've got to look at both
sides of how we get at this--both reserve growth as well as borrowing.
I think that's everything, or at least all you want to hear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. If I were to write down a forecast today, it
would look very much like the staff's with about 3 percent growth.
And I would agree with the staff's judgment that the risks are roughly
balanced as to whether or not growth would exceed that or fall short.
My thinking
So, I don't agree with Frank or Jerry in that respect.
has changed over the past several months and I hope it's not because
I think the worst way to
the news has been coming in rather poorly.
forecast is to assume that tomorrow will be just like today. We all
But some things have been
know that we can do a lot better than that.
happening that have affected my own judgments. The most important is
the fact that the drag from the international sector is turning out to
be a lot larger, a lot more pervasive, and a lot more persistent than
I had anticipated. And the second is the evidence coming in over a
series of months suggesting that the process of very rapid growth in
business fixed investment is behind us.
Turning to the desirability of this forecast, I certainly
would agree with those who say that it would be much more desirable
for growth to come out on the plus side of 3 percent than on the minus
side.
And I say this less for domestic reasons than international
ones.
Growth of 3 percent is still above my estimate of potential.
It's also above the staff's estimate, which is why we make further
progress in reducing unemployment with this forecast in 1985 according
to the staff. But I don't think a 3 percent growth rate is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the international economy. There
is just no evidence of any developing dynamism or cumulation of the
And if our economy grows at 3 percent or
recovery in Western Europe.
less, I think the risks increase that maybe the international economy
generally is going to begin to stall, with consequences that I think
Let me just say a word or two about the exchange
are quite serious.
I think all of us want to see a lower exchange rate and I
rates.
assume we all mean a lower real exchange rate. We all know that it's
All we have
very, very easy to produce a lower nominal exchange rate.
to do is dump out money in buckets and gin up double digit inflation
All we would have to do is signal
and the exchange rate will fall.
that we intend to do that and we would get some anticipatory
movements, I'm sure. But what else we could do from the standpoint of
monetary policy to bring the real exchange rate down, I don't know.
If we foster more growth in the U.S. economy, will that raise or lower
We're told that one of the reasons
I'm not sure.
the exchange rate?
the exchange rate is as high as it is is because the investment
prospects look so much better here than they do in Western Europe. If
we lower interest rates in the short run, will that do the trick?
Well, we've done that in recent weeks, and lo and behold the exchange
rate turns around and goes back up again--according to some arguments,
at least, because holders of dollars figure that interest rates have

-49-

12/17-18/84

reached a temporary floor and may turn around and go back up again.
I'd like to know what to do to bring the exchange rate down, and I
think there is a way to do it, but the policy lever is not in our
It's in the hands of those who set fiscal policy. What do we
hands.
If I may take a
do about the desire for more growth than 3 percent?
page out of your book, Mr. Chairman, let me remind us all that
It may happen that we will get more
forecasts are often inaccurate.
growth than that 3 percent.
MR. PARTEE.

Or less.

It's not clear at this
MR. GRAMLEY. Or less, that's right.
point.
I would note also that the staff forecast is for price
And, as has been
inflation in 1985 at about the same rate as in 1984.
But I would
mentioned earlier, this is still above our long-run goal.
be prepared, over time, to try to conduct monetary policy in a way
that would foster more growth than 3 percent if in fact evidence is
produced as time goes on that more than 3 percent is not
materializing. Now, that to me doesn't call for any changes in the
I don't like M1,
ranges for the monetary aggregates in 1985.
Chuck and I are going to average one another out here!
particularly.
I wouldn't change the weight we give M1 in our implementation of
But I can express my views on the ranges either in
monetary policy.
terms of M2 or M1 and I get the same answer. We have ranges; I think
we ought to use them. That's what they are for. We don't have to hit
But the upper limit of the range for M1
the midpoint; we rarely do.
If you add to that the 1-1/2 percent increase in
is 7 percent.
velocity which is a trend increase independent of interest rates, that
gives you 8-1/2 percent in nominal GNP. And with a 4 percent
inflation rate that gives you 4-1/2 percent real growth, if the
Or, with a 6 to 9 percent range for M2,
expansive forces are there.
an upper limit of 9 percent with no trend in the velocity of M2
So, I
independent of interest rates gives you 9 percent nominal GNP.
think we ought to sit with these ranges; I'm happy with them.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. MARTIN.

Isn't it 6 to 8-1/2 percent?

Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. Make it 8-1/2 percent.
M1 and M2 are completely symmetrical.
MR. PARTEE.
both ranges.

Then my arguments for

They're exactly the same for the upper end of

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

I would have
Starting first with the economy:
MR. KEEHN.
said a month or six weeks ago that there was every opportunity that we
could fall back into a recession. And though the recent indicators
have been somewhat ambiguous, [not] doing a lot, I certainly have
changed my view. I think there is every opportunity here to stabilize
With regard
and, indeed, to begin to come out a bit on the high side.
to the forecast, I think the staff's forecast is a very reasonable
assessment of the way 1985 may actually work out, though some of the
underlying statistics in the forecast seem a little on the high side.
For example, they are suggesting auto sales next year of about 11
million. That would go back to the rate in 1978 which, if you

12/17-18/84

-50-

remember, was a very, very strong year.
I think that looks a little
high. Housing starts of 1.8 million also look a bit high. I think
the tax bill will cause considerable uncertainty in that area. But
net, I think 3 percent is a reasonable assessment of what may work
out.
With regard to inflation, though I certainly agree with Jerry
that the level is high, on the current trend I think the news is
uniformly good; I am extremely impressed on both the price and the
wage side.
People I talk with are simply unable to get price
increases of any magnitude to stick at all, even in some of the
tighter industries.
On the wage side, people I've talked to say that
contracts that have been renegotiated in 1984 are continuing very
favorable trends--better than those that were renegotiated in 1983 in
terms of the length of the contract and the wage costs.
I think the
productivity side of that is going to continue to be good and,
therefore, most people are going to be able to go into 1985 without
increases of unit labor costs.
I think the trends [in inflation] are
I would have said that is the most important
very, very positive.
thing that we're trying to do. Even if we deliberately gun the
aggregates to try to increase the growth beyond what is suggested, it
seems to me we run a very substantial risk of losing what we have
already accomplished on the inflation front. So, that leads me to say
that I would leave the ranges where they are, based on what we know
now; things may change between now and February. There have been some
compelling arguments to raise them and I understand that; nonetheless,
I would leave them where they are now.
With regard to the relative weights, I would not be slavish
to M1 but among the aggregates that we use it seems to me M1 has the
greatest reliability in terms of how we operate monetary policy and,
therefore, I would place greater reliance on M1 next year than we
have. The risks here, and I think everybody has said it, are
Clearly,
certainly in the exchange rate and the balance of trade.
there are some excesses here that cannot continue. I don't know quite
why they have continued as long as they have.
An aside for a moment
on the foreign trade side:
As we look at the agricultural sector--and
I won't spend any time on that--the conditions in the agricultural
sector are much, much worse than they have been.
Indeed, we are
facing some very serious risks in that area. We think that the loss
of the foreign market was the single most important cause of the
problems that the agricultural sector is currently dealing with. So,
the risks as I look at '85 are in the exchange rate and balance of
trade areas.
If that unwinds, particularly in a hurry, it could cause
some unfortunate reactions.
I hear what you're saying, Mr. Chairman,
with regard to the need to have this imbalance to finance our fiscal
deficit.
I wouldn't mind bringing that problem into greater exposure
as a way of trying to get Congress to do a little more than they are
Finally, on the
likely to do to bring down the fiscal deficit.
international area, if we have continued growth of about the magnitude
that we're suggesting, if inflation remains at the level that we
anticipate, and if rates continue to come down, it does seem to me
that we ought to be providing the stimulus for a continuation of the
worldwide recovery. Therefore, that would not, on balance, be a bad
performance.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Solomon?

Have you prepared your swan song, Mr.

12/17-18/84

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe it would be more appropriate to
skip it.
I find Lyle Gramley's analytical reasoning very close to
But it
mine with one or two very minor exceptions, so I won't repeat.
seems to me that there are too many uncertainties. They are unusually
high in '85, higher really than in the first two years of recovery.
[The outlook] is complicated now by the tax program, correction of the
Under those circumstances, since we
budget deficit, the dollar, etc.
can't really know what the results of our actions will be, I would be
in favor of very moderate moves--feeling our way as we go along.
Under those circumstances, I obviously feel that we ought to maintain
the present operating approach and not return to any degree of
automaticity, no matter how marginal, because I think that tends to
give us a psychological framework that is not conducive. I have
absolutely no ability to predict whether the present level of interest
rates or a level 1/2 or 3/4 of a point lower is going to give us 3
So, I don't understand the
percent [growth] or give us 4 percent.
I know there's a need to
policy implications of posing that question.
On the other hand, if the
present to the Congress some ranges.
Congress is going to beat the heck out of us because we say 3 percent
rather than 4 percent, what are they going to do when we have to tell
I don't think
them about a dip in the economy coming along later?
So I don't know if that means
we've abolished the business cycle.
Maybe I'm not being sensitive to the situation in
that much to me.
Washington. But I don't have a clear view that 4 percent is that much
more significantly desirable than 3 percent, although I certainly
agree that a 3+ percent is better than a 3- percent.
The international case for some moderate easing is much
Even though I don't think that a
stronger than the domestic case.
moderate easing of rates is necessarily going to change exchange
rates, I think in the very long run the level of interest rates will
In the short run I
be a very important determinant of exchange rates.
think a moderate easing may not have any significant effects. But
there are other international objectives to be achieved from a
So, it seems to me that we ought
moderate easing of interest rates.
to maintain the ranges where they are and I think they're permitting
I'm not quite sure why we continue to
enough growth in M1 and M2.
leave an M3 that seems to be misaligned on the low side year after
year.
From what my staff tells me I believe we have tended over a
rather longish period of time to see higher M3 than we would normally
I don't see any tactical problem or public
expect in relation to M2.
I don't think it's
relations problem in upping the M3 figure.
I
[necessary] by any means, but I throw that out for what it's worth.
think I've touched on all the points that I find significant.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Things are much
clearer to me now as I return to the room. Let me say that I'm
grateful to Jerry Corrigan for having captured, I think rather fully,
my view of what will happen in '85 and what is appropriate to happen
Let me just recap, because it has been a while since he
in '85.
spoke.
With respect to the outlook for the economy, I believe that
the staff forecast is a bit conservative; I would look for something
And that comes from the
more in the range of about 4 percent in '85.
fact that the interest rates have come down. Given the lag effect, I
think that we're going to see the consumer come back into the
marketplace in the first half and that the first half will be somewhat

12/17-18/84

-52-

stronger than is now being projected and the strength will carry
through a good part of the year. As a result the 2.9 percent, I
think, is a little low.
I'd rather we focus someplace between 3 and 4
The
percent, and closer to 4 percent for the year as a whole.
question is whether that's an appropriate growth.
I think we would be
right on track if we could achieve that kind of performance in 1985.
With regard to the ranges for 1985, I think what we adopted
in July would be quite appropriate and it seems to me that there is
latitude within those ranges. However, I would also give some
recognition, Mr. Chairman, in your testimony or otherwise, to the fact
that unless we rebase we would be in the upper half of that range or
near the top and perhaps even [above it] for '85 because of the
With regard to your question on
shortfall we've experienced in 1984.
M1, some may have misunderstood what I said yesterday with respect to
I believe it has greater
the importance I would place on M1.
informational content than the other aggregates, either M2 or M3 or
credit. As a result, I would look at it a little more closely, but
that does not mean to suggest, along the lines of the question we were
I would not do
asked yesterday, that I'd place primary weight on it.
that because I think the aggregates in and of themselves are only one
of several informational variables that we should be looking at in the
I think what we've been doing in the
economy and everything else.
I wouldn't ignore M1; I'd just
most recent past is quite appropriate.
put a little more weight on it than I would on M2, M3, or credit.
With regard to the exchange value of the dollar, everybody
has spoken on the importance of moving its value to some lower level,
and I think we all would agree that that would be helpful to the
United States and in a sense helpful to the debtor nations around the
world. But I'm not convinced that we can do very much to correct that
problem.
As others have said, if we aggressively target monetary
policy with that as an objective, it seems likely that it will
backfire on us and we'll be back with a problem at least as serious as
we have now and perhaps even more serious. The point I've come to is
that it certainly is not totally within the power of this Committee or
monetary policy to correct the excesses that now appear in that
market.
To the extent that we run U.S. monetary policy in a way to
benefit our economic activity domestically, I think we have to leave
it to the politicians and to fiscal policy to do the remainder. That
does not suggest that we shouldn't nudge interest rates a bit more
with that being one of the primary objectives.
But if we were to set
upon a course to correct the imbalances in the dollar vis-a-vis other
currencies, I think we would be making a very great mistake. And
that's said in the context of looking at my own District in which
agriculture plays an important part and, as Mr. Keehn has already
observed, the dollar itself is perhaps the only remedy to the
situation--and it is a very serious one--that we find in the
agricultural sector.
But still, with that kind of background, I am
not convinced that what we do with monetary policy will affect the
exchange rate in any long-term beneficial way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

Is 3
Is 3 percent enough? Probably not.
MR. BALLES.
I think my staff would agree
percent likely to be what we achieve?
that that's probably the best we can hope for, given the present
circumstances. The reason I take that view is that we do have some

12/17-18/84

-53-

barriers to getting higher than 3 percent in growth.
Just yesterday
when the huge current account deficit of--what was it?--$32 billion
for the third quarter was announced, the Secretary of Commerce again
pointed out, to his credit, that the real cause of this strong dollar
against the huge trade deficit was the federal budget deficit.
Unless
or until something is done about that, I'm afraid we're pretty limited
in our ability to bring down exchange rates and to eliminate that
great source of distortion in our whole economy.
I continue to feel
that we're not capturing what the whole problem of the U.S. economy is
by simply distinguishing between a 3 percent versus a 4 percent
economic growth rate for next year. There are sectors of the economy
--and we're all aware of them--that simply haven't participated in the
upsurge of 1983 and 1984 and prospectively for 1985.
That's true of
many kinds of agriculture--as has already been observed around the
table--most parts of the mining industry, and the whole forest
products industry. And many types of manufacturing that either
compete against imported goods or that rely heavily on export markets
haven't participated in this prosperity; they wonder where the
prosperity is.
There's so much I'd like to see done in the U.S.
economy, but as several people have already observed--Lyle Gramley
among others--we simply don't have all the variables under our
control. And those variables have to do with the huge size of the
federal budget deficit for starters.
That has been exacerbated
further, I'm sorry to see, by the tax reform proposal, which has now
placed an additional element of uncertainty out there in the business
community. I keep hearing, quite recently now from our own board of
directors, that greater uncertainty hangs over the outlook for
business capital spending and for certain parts of the housing
industry, especially second homes which, if this tax reform goes
through, would lose some of the present tax benefits in terms of
deductibility of interest.
It's frustrating in other words, Mr.
Chairman, to want to do better and to think we could do better than 3
percent but to realize--which is where I come out--that we don't have
our arms around all the problems in the sense of having the controls
at our fingertips.
In terms of what we ought to do on the ranges for next year,
I am a strong believer in M1, as I think you all know, and because of
the undershoot in M1 we've seen thus far this year I think there is a
possible case for rebasing even though it has been very unpopular
around this table so far.
Simply put, it would permit us to bring
down the ostensible range of monetary growth for next year because
we'd be taking off from a higher base.
That is, a 4 to 7 percent
I'm
range would be appropriate in my view only if we were to rebase.
concerned by the fact that I think the drop in interest rates, which I
welcome, will have the effect of reducing the velocity of money in
1985.
Unless we're prepared to offset that, we could have an
unintentionally restrictive effect on the economy, as was the case to
a much larger extent in 1982 when we were too slow to recognize what
was going on in the very sharp drop in the velocity of money that
year.
So, if we were to stick with the fourth quarter as the base for
ranges for next year's monetary growth, I would certainly hope that
you would make it clear in your testimony that we would aim for the
I
upper part, if not the upper end, of that 4 to 7 percent range.
would be a little happier if we could rebase and have a higher takeoff
point for the 4 to 7 percent.
If we don't do that and we're going to
use the fourth quarter of this year as the base, which now seems

12/17-18/84

-54-

likely given the views already expressed, then I too would favor, as
some others have, moving to a 4 to 8 percent range.
With respect to the world economy, I just don't know how much
further we can go than we have already in encouraging strong economic
activity abroad [through] this tremendous surge of imports we've had
in the United States.
That has been good for other countries; it has
been perfectly bad for a lot of our own industries. And I for one am
going to start worrying more about the health of our economy at home
in 1985, in view of at least the four major depressed sectors I've
already talked about.
I think there's a real limit on our ability to
do something about bringing down those exchange rates and interest
rates without some major risks of over-expansion on the monetary side.
Coming back to what Jerry Corrigan and some others have said:
That 4
percent inflation outlook is not exactly the best of all possible
worlds; I'd like to see the inflation rate somewhat lower than that
over a period of several years ahead.
I come out, bottom line, that
while I recognize all of these things I'd like to do, I'm afraid that
until federal finances get straightened out we're pretty much limited
in our ability to do what many of us would otherwise like to do.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the economy,
my own position would be that growth is likely to be closer to 4
percent than to 2.9 or 3 percent.
I don't say that with a great deal
of confidence but that's where my bias seems to be.
For one thing,
I'm not entirely sure what the full effect will be of the ease that
we've undertaken recently.
I don't think we've seen the full effect
of that.
I think we're seeing some positive effects, but I'd be a bit
cautious in terms of trying to do a whole lot more at this time until
we can assess that a little better.
Reference has been made to all
the uncertainties over which we have no control, uncertainties about
which it is questionable exactly what, if anything, monetary policy
could do.
As for the long-term ranges for '85, they continue to look
okay to me.
I don't have a strong view one way or the other on Tony
Solomon's point about the cosmetics of M3, but basically I'm satisfied
with the tentative ranges that have been established.
I do think M1
is important.
I wouldn't characterize it as primarily important.
It
is something, though, that I would be inclined to pay a little more
attention to.
On the operating procedures, as I tried to indicate
yesterday, I think the conduct of operations has been really quite
satisfactory; if a slight adjustment would help the mechanical day-today process, I wouldn't have any really serious question about doing
that.
On the exchange rate problems, I agree with the views that
have been expressed.
It's one of the most serious issues that we have
out there.
It's a very, very real dilemma because anything that we do
will cut both ways.
I just have no satisfactory solution to suggest,
although I have some feeling, much as John Balles said, that maybe we
ought to be trying to do something about that over which we do have
some control, which is our own domestic situation. My bottom line,
Mr. Chairman, is that the word that keeps coming to me is patience.
I
think we're in a period now where patience is extremely important.
There's always the desire to do something and I'm in favor of doing

-55-

12/17-18/84

something provided that we get the desired result.
Since I'm not sure
what doing something would mean, I would be inclined to be very
hesitant and, as Tony said, if we do anything, to do it very carefully
and in very small steps.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Garbarini.

MR. GARBARINI.
Mr. Chairman, with regard to the forecast,
the Board staff's analysis may very well be what we'll see next year.
However, I believe the odds are somewhat more on the side of a
shortfall. Why do I say that?
Well, I guess we all have a tendency
to be parochial as well as having biases and in our District, although
signals are certainly mixed and this could be considered just a pause,
I think we're seeing what was a relatively nice growth in employment
slowing considerably and at least two states have seen unemployment
begin to rise.
Also, while the tax proposal could easily cut both
ways, in the short run it probably will have a tendency to cause
uncertainty. And from our discussions with business people, the
uncertainty is certainly leading to some inaction. With regard to the
satisfactoriness of 2.9 percent, I don't see it.
I would prefer that
all my colleagues who think that it might be higher be correct.
I
think the 3 percent level is still not satisfactory.
I am particularly interested in commenting on the operating
techniques.
I would certainly like to see M1 on an equal footing and
would have to say that I'd like to see it on the podium where it could
talk to us.
However, I would not leave it on that podium and let it
talk without paying attention to other things.
In that regard, if I
may paraphrase the Chairman, I do not think it would be appropriate to
give a Mickey Mouse signal by going to absolute weight on M1, if that
is not what is going to be done. And I don't hear around this table
that that would be the case.
I would say again that I believe it
should give us some great information.
I share the concerns about the exchange rate and commodity
prices, perhaps again [reflecting] parochial considerations in the
Midwest. However, I am not sure that this body is in a position to
effect any real changes in that regard and any psychological changes
that we might see, if they were at the risk of inflation, I would not
do.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms.

Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I don't want to repeat what I have said the last
couple of months about my concerns about the slowing economy because
it would just be boring.
I have hoped that the pause that we might be
going through would certainly disappear and that the growth rate would
speed up, but it hasn't so far.
I've not felt that we really were
risking a recession, although I do think we were flirting with one or
skating on thin ice, you might say, where we'd need a lot of good luck
and a strong tail wind to get across in a hurry before the ice breaks
I think the staff
through. And that's sort of the way I feel.
forecast that Jim and his people prepared is probably about right,
I would like to see more in the
given what our policies have been.
way of economic growth, certainly. Also, I think the staff is relying
heavily on the revival of consumer spending and I would hate to look
at the advance monthly retail sales figure or the auto sales report
for the first 10 days in December and conclude from that that

12/17-18/84

-56-

consumers are back on a spending spree because I don't put much faith
in either one of those statistics.
In terms of what we should be shooting for, I would like to
see economic growth that's closer to 4 percent than to 3 percent.
The
reasons are a whole long list.
One is that if you look at our
commodity prices just about any one I could pick--copper, lumber, oil,
and even gold, which is getting down close to $300 an ounce--has been
weak and they are still weak. And I think having faster growth in
this economy first of all would stabilize some of these prices that
have been falling rapidly and in effect would help the industries that
produce lumber or copper, for example. Also, I think that faster
growth amazingly would help corporate profits--maybe not so amazingly,
When you
since that's the way it usually has happened in the past.
get faster economic growth and more rapid growth in sales volume,
since companies today tend to have a tremendous amount of more or less
fixed costs, the additional volume tends to drop through to the bottom
line.
That, in turn, relieves some of the pressure on businessmen or
women to raise prices because their profits are rebounding without the
Believe it or not, this also helps
benefit of higher prices.
productivity. If you look at corporate balance sheets and income
statements over the last 20 years in which this move toward a larger
chunk of fixed cost and capital investment has occurred, when there is
more rapid growth and faster output, the person standing there is not
[only] pushing a button that starts a machine but the machine [also]
produces 10 percent more an hour and the one guy is still standing
This does tremendous things for productivity growth as well as
there.
for profits.
By the way, both of those factors, I think, would be a
positive in the capital spending picture. With the negatives in the
capital spending picture--namely, the question mark about possible tax
hikes or how the tax reform measures will actually shape up when
Congress and the Executive branch get through--I feel that the
uncertainties have been forcing many businesses to set their plans on
But I
the shelf until they see exactly what is going to materialize.
think we can offset some of that uncertainty by having the better
profit performance. And, for sure, a lower interest rate would help
to get some marginal projects, short payoff kinds of projects,
approved and through the mill even with the uncertainties about taxes.
It seems to me that we would have to change monetary policy
more toward ease in order to achieve the 4 percent or 4 percent plus
But if
There's no doubt about it.
growth that I would like to see.
we did, then I think the declining interest rates would have some
additional benefits besides helping on the growth side--namely, we
still have to deal with this problem of the fragility of the financial
system worldwide and particularly in this country where we still have
thrift institutions with big problems. We have the third world debt
I just
situation which, as I understand it, has not gone away.
visited both Kansas City and Dallas and those people tell me there are
problems [in their regions] with agriculture and with the oil
industry. This is a minority view, but I also think lower interest
It may not help immediately, but
rates would help on the dollar side.
if we drop our interest rates or pursue an easier monetary policy
here, then that would allow other countries to pursue an easier
monetary policy.
Even if they matched us on the down side basis point
for basis point, it still would help each of our economies even if the
differential did not change at all.
Ultimately, if that did lead to a
speed-up in the economic growth of, say, the major European countries,

12/17-18/84

-57-

I think that should help our export situation and eventually might
even have some positive impact on the so-called super dollar.
Let's see, there's one other thing I wanted to mention.
Should we emphasize M1, M2, or M17? As I indicated yesterday, I'm not
particularly a narrow monetarist; in fact, I'm not a monetarist at
all.
But I've talked to a lot of people who do follow what the Fed is
doing, the so-called Fed watchers. Many of them advise major
They are movers and shakers on Wall Street and in
investors.
commercial banking. And my feeling is that, as long as they think M1
is important and they emphasize it and they hang around every Thursday
afternoon a little after 4:00 p.m. with bated breath waiting for that
number to come out, then it has achieved an importance even when we
don't want it to.
Certainly, I would never argue that we should look
just at M1, but I think we should pay plenty of attention to it and
particularly when we set the targets for next year make sure that the
bands for M1 growth are adequate to give us some faster economic
growth.
I would argue, too, at least in the early part of the year,
for viewing this in a parallel line fashion rather than as a cone just
to broaden out those numbers and for suggesting that it's okay to hit
the upper end of the range rather than shooting for the midpoint or
That's a lot; I think I've hit everything I
cruising at the low end.
Thank you.
wanted to say.
I think we can have some coffee. The
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
preliminary indications we have for the following week on the money
supply are for a negative figure, which does not make December look
particularly high at this point. Let's go have some coffee.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may, I will make some preliminary
comments in reaction to the go-around this morning. Really, I just
One is that I heard a lot of talk about getting the dollar
have two.
down and there was a certain amount of talk that that may not be the
It worries me a little to talk too casually
easiest thing to do.
about getting the dollar down, and I do think that we may have more
difficulties in the future than we have now with the dollar beginning
to go down too fast. We have this basic dilemma of how to get the
budget financed, and we're going to have a big current account deficit
Maybe to put it too
no matter what happens for the next 12 months.
starkly, if we have a lack of confidence in the dollar, we're going to
have a real picnic in maintaining a decent level of interest rates or
I
a degree of confidence in the inflation outlook in the next year.
do think we have a problem internationally and much of it is of our
Perhaps the
own making; and we have the disequilibrium in the budget.
best thing that can happen is along the lines of what Ms. Seger has
suggested:
If there is a tendency for the dollar to decline, I
suspect that other countries will ease; and given that they have
enough room to ease, that might be healthy not only in their own
context but if they expand a little more and have a little more
confidence in their own currencies, that might over a period of time
help to relieve the pressure on our trade position through greater
expansion abroad and the dollar may come down in a healthier
I simply am a bit sensitive to saying that it's an
atmosphere.
objective of policy to get the dollar down regardless; I don't think
I have no problem at all with
that puts us in a very good posture.
the view--and in fact I strongly believe--that the strength in the

-58-

12/17-18/84

dollar gives us room to ease, all other things equal. And that ought
In listening to most people, I
to be a factor in our considerations.
get the feeling there's more concern that growth will turn out a
little less than the staff has projected than a little more.
Combine
that with a view that it would not be totally satisfactory even if
growth ended up precisely where the staff projected it, and it seems
to me that gives you a bias toward some degree of further easing.
We've spent a long time discussing all these general problems
this morning. Let me try to shorten the process now and see whether
I'm successful in that by suggesting something like alternative B so
far as those numbers are concerned. But I certainly wouldn't mind
rounding them off, given a healthy skepticism as to whether we're
going to meet any of these numbers anyway and how precisely we're
going to meet them. Consistent with that--or maybe inconsistent with
it as now written but I will assert consistent with that, particularly
if we're willing to see some greater growth than what we provide for
here, which I assume the directive will say--I would ease the
pressures on reserve positions to the point of almost no pressure.
Borrowing would be, let's say, on the order of $250 million. And I'd
be inclined to put down a federal funds rate range [of 6 to 10
percent, which is] consistent with alternative A, since the current
rate is about halfway in between [the "A" and "B" ranges] now and I'm
In
not sure I'd want to contemplate the rate going up to 11 percent.
terms of the directive, without getting into the precise language, I'm
assuming some sentence along the lines of what we have in there now to
the effect that because of the shortfalls we've had, more rapid growth
in M1--or we could say somewhat more rapid growth in the aggregates
generally--would be acceptable, particularly in the absence of
evidence of a strong rebound in economic activity and in view of the
strength of the dollar in the exchange markets.
It would say
something to the effect that we would accept more rapid [monetary]
growth unless we saw the economy moving ahead more strongly-distinctly more strongly--than the projections suggest now, as long as
the dollar remains reasonably strong in the exchange markets.
So, in
general terms, that would be a proposal to shoot at.
MR. PARTEE.

Would you round alternative B down on Ml?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was thinking of rounding at least
the M1 figure to 7 percent.
We now
MR. PARTEE.
It will be tough [to achieve], though.
have indications that December [M1 growth] is sub-par.
I think it
would be safer, in terms of reaching it, to make it 6-1/2 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, but this is November to March.

And includes December as the first month.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. Is your proposal that we start with $250
This isn't "B," then?
million as the borrowing number?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

It's

"B" on the monetary specifications.

Just take the aggregates specs?

-59-

12/17-18/84

MR. PARTEE.

And the money market specs of "A."

I am asserting, based upon lengthy
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
economic analysis and a presumed shortfall in December, that we've got
to go with less pressures [on reserve positions] in order to even meet
"B. "
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're assuming that if we start with
$250 million, we'll get a funds rate of 8 to 8-1/2 percent or
Right?
somewhere in that range?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, of course, that would depend upon
where the discount rate was.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
discount rate.

Yes, assuming no action of the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own guess--and other people tell me I'm
wrong--is that it probably would be hanging around a little less than
8-1/2 percent.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask where the assertion of $250 million
Does
in borrowing being consistent with the specs of "B" comes from?
one assume that the economy is not as robust as the staff has forecast
and, therefore, transactions demand for money balances does not grow
Or does one assume that,
along the lines that the staff has forecast?
given the state of the economy, the money demand function has been
In
misspecified or fallen or something so we get slower growth of M1?
I just
[the latter] case why do you want to go in this direction?
don't follow the argument.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My argument is very simple. We've had a
constant shortfall all through the fall; we've consistently missed the
relationship. And I didn't detect any ebullience about the economy in
listening to the discussion around the table, and people would rather
see it grow a bit faster than the projection rather than slower.
MR. PARTEE. I think it's true that the forecast has
I
consistently been marked down, too, for the near-term quarters.
don't know where we had the fourth quarter last June, but it certainly
wasn't at 1.3 percent.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a question about the operating strategy.
If we follow our operating strategy of focusing on borrowing and we
run out of leeway, given current operating procedures and the current
discount rate, we really either have to change the discount rate or
begin to look at reserve growth rather than the borrowing to have any
Is that a proper
additional flexibility on the down side.
interpretation?
I think we've got to look at reserve
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
growth at some point; we probably didn't look at it enough during the
fall, as we were constrained by a borrowing number. And this is, in
You reduce the borrowing in view of the
effect, a reflection of it.
fact that there hasn't been reserve growth or you run out of [room to
reduce borrowing] and I think at some point you just put in more

12/17-18/84

reserves.
away.

If you don't, you run into this problem of things falling

MR. BOEHNE.
Either you have to give more attention to the
reserve growth or you have to lower the discount rate to have any
additional downward leeway, or both.
MR. BLACK.
I think what you've said is very sensible, Mr.
Chairman. This illustrates quite well why I favor a total reserve
target.
Under current procedures, we choose a borrowing level and we
expect a certain federal funds rate; and to predict what is going to
happen to the money supply necessitates a knowledge of the demand
function for money that I don't think we will ever have.
So, whether
this will do what I want, I don't know. But if we were operating on
the total reserve target, I would feel that we knew what was going to
happen. And I was glad to hear you say that we need more emphasis on
total reserves.
I think that really is what has been our problem
lately.
MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's estimate of seasonal borrowing is
$100 million and the staff says on page 9 of the Bluebook that the
frictional level of borrowing--I assume this means adjustment
borrowing--is now in the neighborhood of $150 to [$250] million.
MR. AXILROD.
Yes, but that meant both adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing.
It may not have been clear, but that's what we
had in mind.
MR. GRAMLEY.
But when borrowing is getting down, do you view
the $250 million borrowing level, with $100 million in seasonal, [as]
one that approaches the low end of the frictional amount of adjustment
borrowing?
I think Ed's point is a really good one.
If you don't
lower the discount rate, you really don't have any target at all.
Interest rates could drop a ton.
MR. PARTEE.

Except for growth in reserves.

MR. GRAMLEY. But if you're willing to provide that kind of
growth in reserves--that is, if you start with a borrowing level which
is frictional, then what happens is that you just dump in whatever
reserves are necessary. And if interest rates drop down to 6 percent,
that's within the 6 to 10 percent range for the fed funds rate, so
then that's all right?
It's not for me.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree:
not for me. When the fed
funds rate drops down to, say, about 8-1/4 percent, there's going to
be such intense and widespread expectation in the market that a
discount rate cut will follow very shortly that it would be impossible
to resist that.
So, unless the Board cuts the discount rate only a
quarter of a point, when the second shoe drops then we're really
looking at something that brings it down into the 8 percent range.
Now, I realize that for good reasons you're reluctant to talk about
what the Board might or might not do about discount rate changes.
But
if we do go as far as

$250 million--[not],

say, $300 or $325

million--

I think the pressure then becomes very strong for the second shoe to
drop.
It's hard to resist it.
Whereas, if we go to the $300 or $325
million level, at least to start with, then the pressure would not be
quite as great.

-61-

12/17-18/84

MR. PARTEE.
I'm prepared to support your proposal, Paul.
It's getting so that this period of poor business news is extending
too long and I think we now have to probe.
I don't, as I said, have
much confidence in saying what kind of interest rates are appropriate
or not.
I think what we need is monetary expansion and we're not
If, in fact, that December 17th number holds up to be a
getting it.
decline, we're going to have a hard time [getting] any decent number
at all in the month of December.
That will make another month in this
long string and I think we now ought to be more aggressive in seeking
I'm not shocked at the idea of a frictional level
monetary expansion.
of borrowing at all, nor with a further significant drop in short-term
interest rates. And it may be that the discount rate would have to
move.
I don't want to prejudge that, but it may be that it will have
to go [down].
So, I think it's a reasonable suggestion.
MR. GRAMLEY. Should we not focus also on a number like M2,
which went up 15 percent at an annual rate in November?
I suppose
this downward revision of M1 means perhaps some downward revision of
M2.
The forecast that you have here for December is 13 percent?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. That's been telling us that maybe what we're
looking at is a circumstance in which what monies would have gone into
NOW accounts earlier now are going into MMDAs, giving you the same
interest rate effects.
MR. PARTEE. Well, except that I think the money is coming
into MMDAs and money market funds from the open market because of the
stickiness in those rate levels.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose one can argue that in earlier
I
days it would have gone into M1 and given us a good boost in M1.
don't think the most recent business news was so awful obviously in
the last month but it has been pretty sluggish for some time.
It was reported--I've forgotten whether it was
MR. PARTEE.
here at the Open Market Committee meeting or at the Board briefing-that Commerce is not giving much weight to that November retail sales
figure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in fact, Commerce doesn't know what
the fourth quarter will be, whatever number comes out tomorrow.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there is a danger of
overreaction here.
I feel very much the way Lyle does.
We've had a
declining period of interest rates here for only the last three
months. There are lags in the response of the economy and in the
response of M1 to that change.
I think we ought to give a lot of
weight to the fact that interest rates have declined substantially
over a very short period of time and do a little more looking to see
if we're getting responses from what we've done before we take a major
further move.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything very major here but
it's a matter of taste, I suppose.

12/17-18/84

-62-

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I would support your proposal for
a 7 percent M1 and a frictional borrowing level. We've had some
revisions in what a frictional level is; we are in a position of
making up for a shortfall that seems to be haunting us.
We must be
aware too that the way our decisionmaking has to go--properly go--is
structured by Congress [unintelligible] some decades past.
We seem to
be after the fact and late.
It seems to me that the kind of proposal
that you made gives us flexibility; we're not irrevocably committed to
a large move. And I think it is timely, considering the data both on
the economy and the monetary aggregates.
MR. WALLICH. Some kind of downward push on short-term rates
I think, is a good thing, but it depends very much what happens at the
long end.
It depends also, of course, on whether it would have to be
reversed.
What are the chances of a sharp drop in the funds rate
being followed by a rise?
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Sternlight may have a different view, but I
myself think that there's very little chance [of that] at this
particular junction, looking over the next four or five or six weeks.
But I really ought to say that if you're thinking of $250 million of
borrowing, the funds rate is going to rise from the 7 percent area;
it's likely to be somewhere around 8-1/2 percent, given the present
discount rate.
It's not the money market specs we worked out for
alternative A.
In our own minds [that entailed] an even lower level
of borrowing and somewhat higher excess reserves to drive the funds
rate further down.
I thought I would add that minor point for
clarity.
MR. STERNLIGHT. To add to that, I think the $250 million of
borrowing is likely to give you a steady state kind of situation--a
funds rate very close to the discount rate, although we're not really
in a steady state and the market widely expects something to happen to
the discount rate.
So, I expect $250 million of borrowing for the
next little while to be associated with fed funds trading closer to 8
percent on average as the market broadly expects something on the
discount rate.
As to the long-term rates, I think there will be a
slight declining effect from lower short-rates.
I wouldn't expect a
perverse effect on this occasion.
MR. WALLICH. There is the other question:
anticipate a substantial reversal at a later time?

Would one have to

MR. AXILROD. Well, the fundamental [issue], I think, is
one's view of the basic strength of demand for goods and services and
inflationary expectations. Among the staff, views differ very widely
on that.
If you view our judgmental projections and compare them with
straight model projections, things will differ.
Our forecast implied,
essentially, as Governor Gramley mentioned, velocity of about 1-1/2
percent for M1 next year. That is something like trend, probably.
Taken literally, that would mean very little change in interest rates
over the course of the year--maybe up a little or maybe down a little.
If your view of inflationary expectations and demand for goods and
services is even weaker than the staff forecast, then I would think
It seems to me
interest rates, in a sense, would be lower than that.
very difficult to come to a judgment at this point on whether they are
going to go up or down.

-63-

12/17-18/84

MR. WALLICH. But you wouldn't say that simply by putting in
reserves now one would generate a situation that tended to reverse
itself at a later time and made a rise in interest rates likely,
independently of how the economy goes?
MR. AXILROD.
It's hard for me ever to view it independently
of how the economy goes.
I really can't answer it independently of
that, Governor Wallich.
MR. MARTIN. But note the risks in what Steve has just said.
We have a 7 percent target for M1; growth has been falling short of
The instability in the velocity figure
target from time to time.
quarter-to- quarter is notable. Velocity can be 4 percent off, 5
percent off, 7 percent off.
[Unintelligible] an error of a hundred
If velocity is flat or even negative--and it
basis points.
conceivably can be negative, though obviously it's not the most likely
outcome--then the 7 percent specification for M1 is not very high in
terms of velocity.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

But that's not the key issue.

MR. PARTEE.
I would like to argue for 6-1/2 percent, Pres,
because I do think that [7 percent] implies too much for January and
February. Unless something really happens here, we're going to have 4
or 5 percent [M1 growth] in December, and if we say 7 percent for the
3-month period, that implies something in the very high single digits
for January and February and I think that's pressing too hard.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But why is it so important?
Given
the situation, the difference between 6-1/2 and 7 percent is going to
have relevance only if over a period of time--not the first few weeks,
certainly--we find that we have significant money growth. Otherwise,
it's not going to make any difference at all.
What's going to
influence everything in the next few weeks is the drop in the
So, I
borrowing level and any type of change in the discount rate.
don't think the fact that December is going to have slow growth is of
much importance, and I don't think the difference between 6-1/2 and 7
It's a small chance that we would
percent has that much [relevance].
be up in that range where it's going to make a significant difference
of any kind later in the quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just arithmetically, I guess what that
implies is 4 percent growth in December and 8 percent in the other
three months.
MR. PARTEE.

It's a 4-month span.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but if you get 4 percent in one month
and 8 percent in three months, you get 28; that divided by 4 is 7.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think the real decision that is
facing the Committee--I'm not talking now about the directive and what
happens over the period of a quarter, because we are working under a
system where there is substantial flexibility--is whether we want to
see in the very near term, say, in a week or so, as much of a drop [in
the funds rate].
I think Peter Sternlight is right, as I said
earlier, that [the proposed borrowing level] would take the rate down
close to the 8 percent level, even if arithmetically it should take it

-64-

12/17-18/84

down to 8-1/2 percent or a shade above. The market psychology is such
that it probably will drop to 8 percent because the markets will be
So,
expecting a discount rate cut and the pressures will be enormous.
therefore, does the Committee really want to see that much of a drop
I think that's the most important issue we're facing,
that quickly?
assuming we build the flexibility into the directive the way we have
for the last few intermeeting periods.
My personal view is that
that's too big a drop too suddenly. Personally, I would reduce the
borrowing level maybe to the $300 or $325 million level.
I'd make it
more gradual.

million?

MR. GRAMLEY. What is the level of borrowing now, $400
That's what we were targeting.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
It's averaging $260 million so far in this
period but we would expect to see some lull.
MR. GRAMLEY.

It's a fluky situation we're in now.

MR. CORRIGAN. When the borrowing was $400 million, what did
we think was the steady state of federal funds?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

About 8-3/4 percent.

MR. PARTEE. Of course, it's a wild number between Christmas
and New Year's anyway because of the statement date.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
lonely splendor.

Mr. Boehne, I see you on the list in

MR. BOEHNE.
I think we need to push the ease button again
and I think your approach is reasonable. However, procedurally, I
would prefer our easing to be accompanied by a drop in the discount
rate.
While I think in this period we need to pay a little more
attention to growth in reserves, I think not to change the discount
So, I would prefer to
rate would shift the emphasis too dramatically.
see it accompanied with a drop in the discount rate just on procedural
grounds and I would prefer rounding M1 up to 7 percent.
It doesn't
offend me if December M1 growth comes out at 4 percent to have 8
That doesn't strike me as too much
percent in January and February.
money growth in light of where we've been.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Well, I generally support your proposal, Mr.
Chairman. I'm generally in accord with the comments made by Governors
I think it is time, as Ed Boehne has described it,
Martin and Partee.
to push the ease button again.
I would remind you that at our Bank,
at least, we expect this recent decline in interest rates to show
through in an actual negative number for velocity. As well as one can
guess this, we think we might see negative velocity for the full first
Therefore, I don't think
half of 1985.
That would not surprise me.
we should shy away from what would otherwise appear to be an unusually
In fact, if
large jump in the M1 numbers during that period of time.
there were a mood to go toward alternative A, I would even lean in
that direction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

-65-

12/17-18/84

MR. CORRIGAN.
I don't have any problems with the monetary
specifications of alternative B. I think shading to the 6-1/2 percent
rather than the 7 percent for the reasons Chuck described may serve
our interests better.
I have just one other technical comment:
You
mentioned in your clarifying sentence for the directive, Mr. Chairman,
a reference to the economy and the exchange rate.
I personally would
prefer not to make an explicit reference to the exchange rate because
the kind of scenario where there is some suspicion in the marketplace
that the Federal Reserve is trying to engineer the exchange rate
really scares me in terms of a precipitous drop in the exchange rate,
with all that means.
So, I would prefer not to put that in the
directive explicitly but leave it understood. Now, on the money
market side-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Isn't it in there already?

Not in that particular sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's put differently, but I think it's in

there.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. BLACK.

It's in there.
Line 85 on page 4.

MR. CORRIGAN. The way he was suggesting putting it in the
operative sentence was different.
I thought you were saying, Mr.
Chairman, put it in the sentence that is in capital letters on page
12.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we do have an "international
financial market conditions"-MR. CORRIGAN. That strikes me as a little different than an
explicit reference to the exchange rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was what I was thinking of.
We had a
very explicit reference in the [announcement of the latest reduction
in the] discount rate.
But, it's a matter of debate.
I would phrase
it in a way that to me is unfrightening--say, that we might ease
further if there is continuing strength in the exchange rate. It
wouldn't say we're pushing the exchange rate down.
MR. CORRIGAN.
I perceive that situation as maybe being more
tentative than others, but I would be concerned about how the market
might react to that.
On the substance of the money market part of
this, I'm not allergic to tapping the ease button but I have a little
concern about pushing the panic button. And principally for those
reasons, I would favor a more gradual approach, along the lines that
Tony has suggested.
I do, of course, view the economy as being at
least a little stronger than many others here.
I could be right or I
could be wrong. On the other hand, if we can sneak in a further
reduction in interest rates in a context in which I now believe there
has been some kind of downward step-shift in inflationary
expectations, I think that's fine. But I would prefer to be a little
more gentle about the package and I would lean toward Tony's
suggestion of sneaking up on it rather than going for the brass ring
at one shot.

-66-

12/17-18/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to me an excessive description
of the $50 million difference.
MR. CORRIGAN.

No,

I would see it as a more than $50 million.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

It's this discount rate thing.

MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think it's a question of a $50 million
difference.
If you go back to when the borrowing level was put at
$400 million, the thought then was that the steady state fed funds
If we were to go immediately to $250 million,
rate was 8-3/4 percent.
I think the discount rate would have to go with it and it seems to me
quite plausible that the fed funds rate could settle in at less than 8
percent.
So, you're talking basically about a 75 to 100 basis point
move in terms of the operative implications of the fed funds rate.
I'd love to think that
And that to me is just a very, very big step.
we could end up there, but I think it is a very big step.
MR. AXILROD. Just as a technical comment, Mr. Chairman, none
of us is an expert on what the market is thinking, but it is not at
all clear to me, under current market conditions--the way they were
the last two days--that a drop in the discount rate of 1/4 point
It would be
wouldn't be followed by some backup in market rates.
I am not
viewed as a disappointment relative to market expectations.
certain where this complex of interest rates and borrowing would end
up, but I would think it is possible that it could be 8 percent or a
shade higher, depending a bit on how operations are conducted, as well
It's just not
as the 8 percent or a shade lower that you suggested.
totally clear to me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you something that isn't
perfectly clear to me:
that there is a difference between $300 and
The Board
$250 million, whether the discount rate is reduced or not.
We
of Governors is going to have to decide about the discount rate.
had several applications in and, as you know, some were [submitted]
I don't know how many minds were persuaded on the
with some vigor.
I would suggest that it isn't going to be very
Board of Governors.
It's not very critical in my mind, whichever way it goes.
critical.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, isn't there a possibility that a 1/4
point reduction in the discount rate might be interpreted as a last
act of the drama--that the market interpretation will be "All right,
that is far as they are going to go"?
MR. AXILROD. Certainly--or possibly as
going to go for a while.
MR. MARTIN.

[far as]

they are

Life goes on, I can see that.

Just in the interest of clarity, I would think
MR. PARTEE.
going for the brass ring, Jerry, would be to say we want an 8 percent
increase in reserves in general, regardless. That's going for the
brass ring.
Any of these things
MR. CORRIGAN. I would agree with that.
in a behavioral way postulates very substantial increases in reserves.

12/17-18/84

MR. BOEHNE. Where is the funds rate now?
We're kind of
sneaking up on something that we've already reached.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
elastic way.

The market sees it as 7 percent in an

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
drain some reserves?

Well, what happened when you went in to

MR. STERNLIGHT. We drained some reserves.
what happened to the funds rate, Mr. Chairman.

I didn't hear

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since we're totally preoccupied with this
question, why don't we find out?
MR. PARTEE.

We'll see what happens.

MR. CORRIGAN.

I don't know;

it could work that way.

Yes, it

could.
MR. PARTEE. As a matter of fact,
a good increase in money and we'll have a
that occurs.
But we have had a period of
going on for quite a while. That's why I
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

the staff projection is for
good increase in reserves if
shortfalls that has been
said "regardless."

Who else would like to say something?

Ms.

Seger.
MS. SEGER. Well, I'm an ease advocate and I could certainly
support you in alternative B and wouldn't be upset if you pushed over
into the dimensions of alternative A, using the $250 million or so
borrowing target. Also, I'd keep an eye on total reserves to make
sure that they go along and allow the kind of expansion we need.
I
realize we don't set the discount rate here but I would like to
encourage a discount rate cut of about 1/2 percentage point soon to go
with this because I'm afraid that if we don't, we are going to have
the market disappointment. Furthermore, if we cut it immediately, it
would nudge some of the commercial bankers who have been flirting with
the idea of cutting their prime rate into adopting the 1/2 percentage
point cut that was launched yesterday.
MR. PARTEE.

Did anybody else go today?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. SEGER.

I haven't heard one way or another.

They are waiting for us.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
else had gone.
MS.

SEGER.

MR. BLACK.

I checked at 10:10 a.m. and nobody

But I think this would push them to act.
What about that bank in St. Louis, Joe?

MR. GRAMLEY. Let me start by calling attention to a couple
of things in the general paragraph that are nits, but I think they
might well be picked. In line 9 we have--

12/17-18/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What are you looking at?

MR. GRAMLEY. The general paragraphs [of the draft
directive].
In line 9 it has "largely reflecting a rebound in auto
The immediate antecedent of that is "after two months of
production."
I'd start the
decline" and [unintelligible] would be a lot better.
sentence "After two months of decline, industrial production increased
My next one is going to
somewhat" and then follow with "reflecting."
"The information
be a little harder to swallow. On line 14 it says:
on outlays and spending plans suggests substantially slower growth."
"Substantially" has been put in this line even though the staff
forecast, although it was revised down from 7-1/2 percent, is 6
I think what has
percent in real terms for the four quarters of 1985.
happened here is that there is confusion between the fourth quarter,
which has been revised down an awful lot, and the longer-run future.
The easier way to handle that is just to leave it the way it was
I'm not going to fight about that.
without the word "substantially."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
fight about it?

Neither am I.

Is anybody else going to

MR. WALLICH. Well, I must say that the slowing in business
I don't know if
fixed investment is one of the big disappointments.
it fits into the exact flow of the data, but in that sense I think it
is a major factor.
MR. GRAMLEY. My point is simply that this factor is not an
awful lot different than it was the last time and to insert the word
"substantially" now when the forecast has been revised down from a
growth rate of 7-1/2 percent to 6 percent in real terms sounds like
not quite-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. PARTEE.

Use "significantly"?

Well, fine.
The increase in outlays went down quite a bit.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the fourth quarter is going to be very
low. The shipments data both from domestic sources and based on the
import data for October would suggest a very slow fourth quarter. And
I thought putting in this word "substantially" maybe reflected a mixup [between] what is ahead for the fourth quarter and what the outlook
is for the more distant future.
MR. AXILROD. We might have been being excessively specific
here but we were referring to the current quarter, the fourth quarter,
in all this. We really were referring there to the substantial
slowing that we're now projecting for the fourth quarter, taking
account of the upward revision in the third quarter. That was revised
up to a 16 percent rate of growth from the 8 percent we had earlier.
So, this is really [a substantial slowing in] the fourth quarter from
the third quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think if we say current information or
information for current outlays and take out "plans"--

-69-

12/17-18/84

MR. PARTEE.
confusing.
MR. MARTIN.

It's the "spending plans" that's really
Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Let's take out the "spending plans."

MR. GRAMLEY. That would do it.
Then the "substantially" is
needed. On the more general issue, I don't want to push the ease
button again; we pushed it the last time.
I think Bob Boykin's
prescription is the right one.
What we need is a little patience. We
need to remember that monetary policy works with very substantial
lags.
We've done a lot already. And I take some encouragement from
this housing report that came out this morning. The rise in permits
is quite strong. Permits are not a forecasting device; they don't
tell you anything about what is going to happen in the future but they
are a lot better indicator of what is happening now than the starts
figures are.
And to have the permits go up 11 percent, I think, means
that we can be reasonably sure the process of a revival in housing is
on the way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. GRAMLEY.
percent of starts.

Permits are, in fact, above starts.

Right.

They were 1570,

I believe.

Starts were 1528; normally permits are about 93

MR. MARTIN. But what we're leaving out of the housing
discussion is the considerable pressure by the central bank against
growth in mortgages and against savings and loan participation in
joint ventures for builders--reserves and net worth requirements
against rates of growth. We've left that out entirely. The funding
is going to be a lot more difficult for the builder.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, next I want to say that I thought we were
supposed to be giving equal weight to M1 and M2 and I don't think
we're giving any weight to M2.
In fact, the M2 path for the fourth
quarter is substantially above what we decided it was going to be in
September and we're just throwing that out.
Nobody is even talking
about the fact that we had been expecting 7-1/2 percent growth and now
it's 11 percent plus.
We ought to think about that.
I think we ought
to ask ourselves whether or not some of the effects of the ease we've
put in are showing up in M2 instead of M1 and if that isn't just as
good in terms of what it does for easing conditions in credit markets.
I don't think we have to go back to 8-3/4 percent on the funds rate
but I would like us to aim for somewhere around the 8 to 8-1/4 percent
range on the fed funds rate.
I don't want to take back a lot of the
ease that's been put in, but I don't want to ease further. And I
don't know what borrowing number that would be associated with, but my
guess is it would be around $325 million or thereabouts--maybe a
little less.
That would be my prescription for policy now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

As
MR. BOYKIN.
I would certainly agree with what Lyle says.
you said a little earlier, Mr. Chairman, you don't see much difference

12/17-18/84

between $250 and $300 million
for $300 million?

tribute?

[on borrowing].

Why don't we just go

MR. BLACK. Do you agree with Lyle because he paid you a
Or is that an honest-MR. BOYKIN.

No, I agree with Lyle because of his very astute

analysis.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I promised to give him a quarter if he said

that!
MR. BLACK.

I think you've each given each other a quarter!

MR. BOYKIN. No, I just think he says it better than I can; I
just agree with what he's saying.
MR. BLACK. Watch him, Lyle, because sometime he will pay you
a tribute and then he will turn around--!

this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Guffey.

Would anybody else like to contribute to

MR. GUFFEY.
I don't know whether it's a contribution or not:
I have no quarrel with your prescription on the aggregates but I do
share the concern about the $250 million borrowing level. To accept
it, one must accept the premise of the staff that $250 million is at
or above the frictional borrowing level.
I'm not at all convinced, in
view of the extent of the seasonal credit provisions, that that
necessarily is above the frictional borrowing level.
If it is not, we
certainly will be establishing a federal funds rate, it seems to me,
and I would accept Lyle's prescription that 8 to 8-1/4 percent is
about the correct range.
I would like to have some assurance that
that's what we're looking at if we're going to adopt the $250 million
borrowing level because I have a concern that if that level is below
the frictional level, we'll essentially turn loose any control other
than establishing the federal funds rate.
In that connection, I've
just observed that everybody is talking about a fourth-quarter growth
rate in M1 that's very low. But if you are willing to believe that a
seasonal adjustment factor might put as much as an additional 2
percent in the second half, that together with some benchmark
revisions could bring growth up in the 4 to 5 percent range for the
fourth quarter, which would be quite acceptable. We may be pushing
the ease button a little before we have all of that knowledge. As a
result, I would prefer to see a discount rate decrease by the Board of
Governors and then to establish a borrowing level at least above the
$300 million range with the target being a federal funds rate in the
range of 8 to 8-1/4 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there any reason to believe the change
in seasonals would add as much as 2 percent?
MR. AXILROD. Well, on the assumption that M1 in December was
going to be 7 percent, we re-ran [the seasonal adjustment program] and
the second half was raised by 1/2 percent at an annual rate and the
first half was lowered by 1/2 percent at an annual rate.
I think I
put in a footnote in that document for yesterday. But I should
mention that this is well before we have any benchmarks and you can't

-71-

12/17-18/84

tell what the variable month-by-month benchmarks are going to do to
this.
So, I don't have any evidence at this point that it would be
nearly as large as President Guffey mentioned. But the weaker it gets
in the second half, the more [the seasonal] goes up a little. But
that leads you down a very funny road.
MR. GRAMLEY. No matter what we do we're going to get the
same number for December!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think this is an opportunity for giving
interest rates a push because none of the immediate penalties that we
usually face in relation to money supply, and in fact on the exchange
I think interest rates have been
rate, seem to apply at this time.
stuck at levels that in a broad sense are not equilibrium rates but
have been carried over from the past.
So a push may get them to a
fractionally lower level that might last, if this isn't immediately
reversed by something that happens in the market. And I think it
would be worth trying. It would have to be accompanied, probably, by
a discount rate cut.
I just wouldn't want to prejudice what we should
do for the rest of the year in taking a year-out view. But in this
By
immediate window, I think we have an opportunity for lower rates.
that I mean that if we do what you propose and [also] cut the discount
rate, we might have a chance of lowering the level of interest rates
in a structural underlying sense. And then when they move again, as
of course they will, they might not make up this particular drop
altogether.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman.
essentially in a range that I'm pleased with.

It's

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I should have added in response
to President Guffey's question that of the 1/2 point increase 1
percentage point was in the fourth quarter.
So it's concentrated
there. But again, I don't know how it would work out.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. HORN.

Mrs. Horn, we haven't heard from you.

I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's look at the language a bit--going
back from whether or not the borrowing proposal is supported. What
about the federal funds range?
It seems to me that where the rate is
now makes it reasonable to say 6 to 10 percent, but I don't know
whether everybody else agrees.
Nobody else commented on it, I guess.
SEVERAL.

I would support it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume it's going to be 6 to
10 percent.
Now, let me start with some language Mr. Axilrod gave me
I suppose what we need is "In the implementation of policy in
here.
the short run, the Committee seeks to reduce somewhat..."
I think
that encompasses everybody. To say "maintain existing" may be a
little confusing, given the last statistics that came out.

-72-

12/17-18/84

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm going to respond to your question
earlier about what happened over the course of the morning. The funds
We went in to drain some reserves. We got a lot
rate was 7 percent.
Funds were
of offers--$7 billion plus--and we did just $1 billion.
last trading at 6-3/4 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

They have their bets; they are ahead

of us.
MR. MARTIN.

They are ahead of us.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, maybe that indicates that the level of
frictional borrowing is $300 million instead of $250 million. At $250
This is a
million now the bottom is falling out of the funds rate.
Interest rates can drop with no
very dangerous course of policy.
bottom. There's just no way we're going to limit them, if it turns
out that the estimate of frictional borrowing is wrong.
MR. MARTIN. But if we have 6 to 10 percent and it approaches
That's not zero.
6 percent, we limit it.
MR. GRAMLEY. If you're prepared to live with a 6 percent
funds rate, why, that's fine.
MR. MARTIN.

For how long--two days?

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't want the fed funds rate to go
I think we're going way too fast.
anywhere near that level.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. GRAMLEY.

That's the whole problem.
That's where the disagreement lies.

MR. PARTEE. That's the disagreement.
fundamental, I think.

It's really more

It would really make more sense for
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
us all to go home and you [Board members] can do a discount rate cut.
Here's another situation where there may be an
MR. MORRIS.
incompatibility between the borrowing level and the path for total
I think there's incompatibility on the other side of this.
reserves.
MR. GRAMLEY. And lowering the discount rate is only a
partial solution to the problem--that is, if the lowering of the
discount rate does, to be sure, [leave unaffected] the frictional
level of borrowing. But if what we do with monetary policy, both open
market operations and discount rate changes, is send another strong
signal to the market that we think the economy must be turning down
and, therefore, we're going to push the ease button, don't expect
It isn't going to happen that
interest rates to go back up again.
way.
It didn't happen this last time.
There's some
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay, that's true.
But on the other hand, if we do
similarity in our thinking, Lyle.
want some easing, the preferable way of getting it at this point is a
I don't think you have to read quite as far
discount rate cut.
Now, if
reaching a message; the markets will do what you just said.

-73-

12/17-18/84

you feel that there shouldn't be any easing at all in the rates, then
I think you have a consistent position in also worrying about the
message you're giving to the market.
There's no way at this point
that the market has really exaggerated expectations. I would have
guessed at this point that if we were to demonstrate pretty clearly
that the funds rate is not going to go below 8 percent, we probably
would be able to deflate those expectations significantly.
MR. GRAMLEY.

That's the wrong way to get some support.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm worried about the frictional
borrowing level, also.
And it seems to me that one way of doing it is
to do a modest cut in the borrowing level and move the discount rate
either 1/4, or possibly 1/2 point--or else just do the discount rate
cut.
MR. PARTEE. Maybe we ought to let you fellows handle the
discount rate and we'll do the open market policy here!
MR. WALLICH.
I think a discount rate cut, if it came, would
look now like a following action, not like a strong policy signal.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note that all these concerns I've
heard about declining interest rates for the last three months and not
getting the borrowing level too low have been accompanied by a decline
in reserves and M1.
MS. SEGER.

And the economy.

MR. BOEHNE. As to your specific question, before this
Could one say "seeks to
general discussion, on the first sentence:
reduce somewhat the pressures on reserve positions that have prevailed
in recent weeks" to get it away from just the last several days?
I
think that is really what we're talking about.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not sure that's very clear. I
agree that technically meets the problem, but the markets are sitting
there looking at not much more than $250 million in borrowing in the
previous two-week period, right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they may be looking at something like
that again when this comes out, but it doesn't come out for a while.
They'd say "Reduce from $250 million?"
MR. BLACK. Maybe the best thing to do is to say that $250
million was the target and say "seeks to maintain."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

We still can say "maintain."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm wondering whether that kind of
"The Committee seeks to
language wouldn't be less misleading somehow.
maintain the recently reduced pressures on..."
MR. BLACK.

I think that's a better way to do it.

12/17-18/84

-74-

MR. AXILROD. On Thursday, presuming our numbers are half-way
near correct, the borrowing level we're going to publish will be more
like $500 or $600 million for that one-week period that ends on that
Wednesday.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Theoretically, tomorrow--but who knows
about these theories--there's going to be a lot of borrowing and the
funds rate is going to be 9 percent or 10 percent maybe at 3:00 in the
afternoon.
In fact, the funds rate is going to be 18 percent and [a
major bank] is going to come in and borrow $2 billion because the
funds rate is 18 percent!
Now, there may be a miss here in the
figures, so I think this is just a question that's-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
weeks, it seems to me that-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
probably, but--.

Since it doesn't get published for 6

It doesn't make that much difference

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know; the general trend is
down. We could probably leave it simply "reduce somewhat" and not
worry about the fact that since Thursday and today there has been-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,
week period or one-week period.

[the problem]

is the previous two-

MR. PARTEE.
Say "reduce somewhat existing pressures" or we
could take out the word "existing."
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes, that would be a way to approach it.

SPEAKER(?).

I think that's probably the best solution.

MR. PARTEE.

That makes it pretty vague.

MR. GRAMLEY.
something like that.

"Seeks to maintain reserve positions" or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
reserve positions."

"Seeks to maintain minimal pressures on

MR. BOEHNE.
I don't think that sends out the right message
on what we've been talking about right around the table.
I think the
message that comes out from around the table is that we want to ease,
so I think the words that we use have to convey that view. And the
term "reduce" does that; the word "maintain" doesn't.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll leave it "reduce somewhat
pressures on reserve positions."
Then, "This action is expected to be
consistent with growth of M1"--what are we going to put in here? Mr.
Axilrod wrote in 7, 9, and 9 percent; we could use 7, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2
percent or 6-1/2, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent.
What's your pleasure?
MR. MARTIN.
MS. SEGER.
MR. PARTEE.

7, 9, and 9.
7, 9, and 9.
I do like these whole numbers.

-75-

12/17-18/84

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I'll trade you.

Why don't we do a

trade?
MR. BLACK.
fractional number.

Do it on this one instead of whole numbers and a

MR. AXILROD.
I was only technically concerned with the
specifications between "A" and "B" and I was trying to find the M2 and
M3 between "A" and "B."
MR. MARTIN.

And a discount rate

[cut] of 1/2 point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's leave that open for the
moment.
Let us try this next sentence.
I'm just going to read what
Mr. Axilrod has written down:
"Somewhat more rapid growth of M1 would
be acceptable..."
Do you just want to say M1 and not the others?
MR. PARTEE.

Well, that's the only one that's falling well

short.

also.

MR. GRAMLEY.
It's the only one we're paying any attention to
Now the truth comes out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm tempted to say "Somewhat more rapid
growth of the monetary aggregates would be acceptable in light of the
currently estimated shortfall in growth for the fourth quarter"-No, this is only M1.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, that's why it was put that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"...relative

to the Committee's

expectations at the beginning of the period, particularly in the
absence of evidence of a strong rebound in the economy and in view of
the strength of the dollar in exchange markets."
It would be more
parallel if we said "particularly in the absence of evidence of
continued strength and--.
It's the reverse; it's not the absence of
the strength.
MR. PARTEE.
dollar strong."
right.

"Particularly if business continues weak and the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that would make it parallel all
How can we make this more parallel?
MR. WALLICH.

"And in view of the strength of the dollar."

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, "particularly if business news continues
weak and the dollar continues strong."
MR. PARTEE.

I think that's exactly what we ought to have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Continues weak" isn't exactly right in
terms of the latest figures, which aren't all that weak.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Change your mind--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Particularly with evidence of continued
sluggishness" or something like that.

-76-

12/17-18/84

MR. PARTEE.

That's okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Particularly should evidence continue of
sluggish economic growth and strength of the dollar in exchange
markets."
Now, that raises the Corrigan question.
In fact, I'd take the Corrigan
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
It seems to me the way it comes out now
position a notch farther.
that some people might read this as indicating that we actually would
tighten monetary policy if the dollar began to decline. And that is
not the message we're trying to get across.
MR. BOEHNE. Doesn't the next sentence take care of your
problem, Mr. Chairman?
MR. PARTEE. This suggests that the sentence relates to
I guess it
growth over the target numbers in the Ms, particularly M1.
is M1.
More growth is
MR. GRAMLEY. But Tony's point is right.
If the dollar starts to fall,
acceptable because the dollar is high.
then the implication might be-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, we've got to be very careful
about this now. There's a lot of attention being paid in the market
to what we might do.
I don't know
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree it sounds that way.
It sounds like precisely the opposite concern
whether that's so bad.
of Mr. Corrigan. You can't have it both ways; you can't object on
both grounds.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But the way it reads now,
People may read from that that we would
that's what it sounds like.
tighten.
MR. PARTEE. Down to 7 percent growth in M1--that's the
context in which we're discussing this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, that's right.

We had an overshoot in M1.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Are you going to have the next

sentence?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the question remains whether
we need either of the next sentences.
If
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I was going to say is this:
we are going to have a succeeding sentence of some kind, maybe we
ought to put in a more carefully worded [reference to] the foreign
exchange market consideration instead of trying to get the symmetry in
that one.
It's a risk.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I don't know how you put it in.

-77-

12/17-18/84

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Well, basically what we have always

said.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying this wording we have is
great, but I don't know why we need either of the next two sentences
when I look at them.
MR. CORRIGAN.

What does the "somewhat more rapid" sentence

say now?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd say "Somewhat more rapid growth of
M1"--or the monetary aggregates, which in this case doesn't change
anything else--"would be acceptable in light of the currently
estimated shortfall in growth for the fourth quarter relative to the
Committee's expectations at the beginning of the period, particularly
should evidence continue of sluggish economic growth and strength of
the dollar in exchange markets."
It isn't the most felicitous
wording, in terms of reading it.
MR. PARTEE.
I think it's the word "evidence" that louses it
up.
It doesn't carry through to the dollar.
I think if we didn't
have those qualifiers, which are only now a reference to acceptance of
a larger M1 growth, then there would be a basis for continuing the two
parallel sentences afterwards.
Maybe something could be done, then,
on the foreign exchange value of the dollar there. Otherwise, if we
have those qualifiers, it makes the next two sentences seem redundant,
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to get lesser restraint on
reserve positions. The second sentence, the "greater restraint"
sentence, doesn't bother me; it's the previous one that just seems a
little peculiar depending on how low we go [on borrowing].
We can't
do much less restraint.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I think we can do--and the Fed
watchers will spot the difference--is keep the succeeding sentence on
lesser restraint and move up international financial market conditions
to be the first [item in that list].
That gives some consideration to
it--"evaluated in relation to the strength of international financial
market conditions," etc.
That's
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you suggesting here?
correct. You haven't solved the next one. Mr. Axilrod has suggested
that we combine the first two sentences.
Go back to "In the
implementation of policy in the short run, the Committee seeks to
reduce pressures on reserve positions consistent with growth" etc.
That says, whatever figure we stick in there, we can go further if the
And we
We haven't got much further to go.
growth isn't up to it.
Well, we could leave
don't need either of the [next two sentences].
in the greater restraint sentence. We certainly don't need the
sentence on lesser restraint; we've already said that.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was going to suggest the
opposite:
Drop the dangling phrase beginning "particularly" and leave
in the sentence, which is more or less similar to what's in there now,
as a separate sentence; and move international financial market
conditions up to the head of that list.

-78-

12/17-18/84

I'd hate to put that ahead of the strength of
MR. PARTEE.
I think that
the business expansion and inflationary pressures, Tony.
really is still our first objective.
MR. MARTIN.

Our own economy.

I can give you simpler wording for this:
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Somewhat more rapid growth would be acceptable in the light of...,
provided economic growth remains sluggish and the dollar remains
strong in the exchange markets. We wouldn't tolerate the excessive
monetary expansion if the dollar were weak in the exchange markets.
MR. PARTEE.
I think "particularly" is better than
"provided."
Provided is absolute.
MR. MARTIN.
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.
"Particularly provided"!
Well, you can use "particularly" in the same

wording.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No you can't, I don't think.

"Particularly if the economy remains sluggish
MR. PARTEE.
and the dollar remains strong."
"Particularly if" or
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you?
"particularly in the context of continued sluggish growth in economic
I'm not
activity and strength of the dollar in exchange markets."
sure that this fourth-quarter preliminary flash on the GNP is going to
look all that sluggish. I don't know what you consider sluggish.
MR. MARTIN.

Less than 3 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. MARTIN.

Under 3.

Yes, under 3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, suppose we said "particularly in the
context of sluggish growth in economic activity and continued strength
of the dollar in exchange markets."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is "continued strength of the
What do you think it means to most people--the dollar
dollar"?
climbing further or maintaining present levels?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

dollar,"

Maintaining present levels or higher.

It could be interpreted, though--

MS. SEGER. When the popular magazines call it the "super
people are looking at it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But it would be 180 degrees opposite
of what the Committee wants if any significant number of people in
Europe or in the United States were to read from this wording that we
would resist, through monetary policy, declines in the dollar. That's

-79-

12/17-18/84

not what we're trying to say. That fact that there's nothing in the
dollar situation that would prevent us from easing is one thing.
Carrying an implication that we would tighten monetary policy if the
dollar began to come off is another.
MR. MARTIN. But, Tony, that would be such a departure from
Why would they draw that conclusion
the policy of the immediate past.
from that wording?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think they would draw that
conclusion in the sentence talking about more rapid growth of M1 than
what we've--.

MR. MARTIN.

The basic sentence.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's just a risk.
saying it's a strong probability.

I'm not

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do we leave out the next sentence?
What do we do with Mr. Axilrod's suggestion "seeks to reduce pressures
That would become more
on reserve positions consistent with..."
I
relevant maybe, depending upon the borrowing number we put in here.
must say, as I said before, my range of tolerance between $250 and
$300 million is immense.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's a historical and understandable bias
against answering this question, but within the context of either of
those levels of borrowing is it the general expectation of the
Committee that the steady state level of interest rates would fall out
That's in some way the thing that I'm stuck on.
at below 8 percent?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon what we do with the
discount rate.
But I think that is a dangerous thing to get hung up
This Committee has been hung up on that for three months and has
on.
not eased as fast as it should have in terms of reserve growth and Ml.
MR. MARTIN.
MR. BLACK.
MR. BALLES.

If that's a motion, I'll second it.
I'll third it.
Amen.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know who that reflects upon-this Committee or the Board of Governors for not having moved faster
on the discount rate cut.
MR. PARTEE.

Are you suggesting $300 million rather than $250

million?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm suggesting that I could go anyplace
between the two.
I thought we attracted a great consensus on some
number between those two, which would not bother me.
MR. PARTEE.

Like $275 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

$275 million wouldn't bother me.

How about the range of $250 to $300 million?

-80-

12/17-18/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's fine with me, too.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I still would prefer $300 million.

MESSRS. BOYKIN and GUFFEY.

I would too.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think any of the people who have
indicated that position here are going to be persuaded by your giving
a few paltry million on reserves.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
it's not important to you.
MR. RICE.

But it could make them feel better.

SPEAKER(?).
MR. RICE.

Make it $300 million.
Give it to them; make it $300 million.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MS. SEGER.

It's important to us, even if you say

For a Christmas present?

$300 million with a 7-1/2 percent discount rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this whole [paragraph] implies
that if things remain sluggish, we will go down below that; I don't
think there's anything that doesn't say that.
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

MR. MARTIN.

That's what it says.

MR. CORRIGAN.
circumstances.

That kind of thing is fine with me too in most

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think I'm indicating that we can
come within $50 million when we're aiming there anyway.
SPEAKER(?).

Look, I'm not really from a world--

MR. PARTEE.

That's going to be particularly hard if it's not

too--

MR. BLACK.

It seems to use the expression of Minneapolis or

New York.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we had in mind--on the order of a
suggestion--$300 million or lower to start with and we make the errors
on the lower side.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.
$300 million.

Whose errors are they?

Collective error.

[Unintelligible]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

asymmetrical range of $250 to

Is that satisfactory?

-81-

12/17-18/84

MESSRS. MARTIN and BOEHNE.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

To whom?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Me, sitting here trying to figure out what
to do.
We're going to take more chances that it will be below $300
million than above.
MR. PARTEE.
preference?
MS.

SEGER.

MR. PARTEE.

Why don't you take a show of hands for.

What is the question?
We haven't

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
striving for consensus.

done a show of hands for a long time.

It would be nice

to get a consensus;

I'm

That's why I think you might

MR. PARTEE.
I know you are.
need a show of hands as well.

I'm not sure.
We're combining the first
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
We have the second sentence:
two sentences.
Do you understand that?
"particularly in the context of sluggish growth in economic activity
And we
and continued strength of the dollar in exchange markets."
That
take out the next sentence; it's implied by the first sentence.
It
next sentence could be left in or taken out; it doesn't bother me.
says that if we really get a significant strengthening in economic
activity and inflationary pressures and if money growth is rapid, we'd
tighten up some.
That seems to me to be inoffensive, and I'd leave
that in.
Is that the consensus?
MR. MARTIN and MS.

SEGER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And we put

MR. MARTIN and MS.

SEGER.

in 6 to 10 percent.

Yes.

And the borrowing level,
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
interpret it, is up to $300 million.

as I now

What is the nuance between
Up to?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
$300 million and below and up to $300 million?
I tell you the only difference between
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
$250 and $300 million is a great big fat nuance to me.
I noticed.
If it's such a minor
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
nuance to you, why not try the $300 million?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
want $250 million.

Because a lot of people--the majority--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes.

Oh,

do they?

-82-

12/17-18/84

MS. HORN.

[Unintelligible]

the first two sentences, that

fits.

MS. SEGER.
$50 million.

Maybe in the spirit of Christmas we can give him

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

on.

And we have.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
What are we voting on?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I still don't know what we're voting

Up to $300 million.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Corrigan
Governor Gramley
President Horn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Let's vote.]

Yes
Up to $300?
Yes

No.

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Okay, I guess we're finished.

[Secretary's note:
At this point the group ate lunch in the
Board room. During lunch, the following exchange occurred:]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm afraid we left one thing open at the
Open Market Committee meeting. We'll have to regather. We talked
about the precise numbers to put in but didn't pin them down.
The
options were 7, 9, and 9 percent or 6-1/2, 8-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent.
I guess I was assuming 7, 9, and 9 percent when we were voting but if
other people were not assuming that, we ought to reconsider it.
MS. SEGER.

That's what I put down.

MR. WALLICH.
MS. HORN.

I voted for 7, 9, and 9.

I voted thinking 7, 9, and 9.

I could vote for either.

MR. CORRIGAN.

I assumed we were voting for 7, 9, and 9.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that was the general assumption,
we'll leave it at 7, 9, and 9.
MR. PARTEE.

That's what I assumed too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay.
END OF MEETING

