Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 2, 1984

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1984, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, R. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,
Siegman, and Stern, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

10/2/84

-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Griffith, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco
Messrs. T. Davis, Keran, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, and
Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Broaddus, Burger, Ms. Clarkin, and Mr. Fieleke,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
St. Louis, New York, and Boston, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 2, 1984
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the minutes.

We can start,

if somebody wants to move

MR. MARTIN.

I move the minutes, Mr. Chairman.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
currency operations.
MR. CROSS.

Without objection.

Let's turn to foreign

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps you could refresh my memory and
that of others as to the nature of this informal limit.
MR. CROSS.
We raised the total amount of this limit and the
DM amount. The total [informal limit] is now $5-1/2 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
informal limit?

What is the operative significance of this

MR. CROSS. Well, it is an informal limit. We have a formal
limit of $8 billion, which is recorded and registered as the decision
of the FOMC and I imagine made public.
This $5-1/2 billion is an
informal limit, which has been operative for a number of years, under
which we seek the FOMC's views about how much we would operate within
our total authorized $8 billion. We now have an informal maximum of
$5-1/2 billion for all currencies, with [limits of] $4 billion in
deutschemarks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in other
currencies.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we were not having a Committee
meeting and these limits were threatened to be exceeded?
MR. CROSS.

I believe you have the authority--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
a 3-person subcommittee.
MR. CROSS.

No, there is an Executive Committee--

The Foreign Currency Subcommittee could authorize

it.
MR. GRAMLEY.

What are your present holdings?

The present holding of DM is $3.9 billion
MR. CROSS.
Our limit is $4 billion equivalent and I am requesting-equivalent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
exceed the limit?

If the mark increased in value, we would

MR. CROSS. No. These are recorded on [the basis of]
historical acquisition costs. We could never operate in this day and
age if we were operating on the basis of market value.
MR. PARTEE.

We haven't done much with this for a long time,

10/2/84

I must say, and I am sure everybody's mind is very fuzzy on it--at
Why is it, Sam, that we take the interest in marks
least mine is.
rather than converting it to dollars?
MR. CROSS. Well, if we converted it into dollars, that would
be, in effect, an intervention operation.
MR. PARTEE. But it would be a very regularized small thing
that would permit us to get [the interest earnings] back into our own
currency.
MR. CROSS.
It is not as though we have such massive amounts
of these currencies that we need to worry about our balances being too
high, it seems to me.
As I say, the United States [holdings] as a
whole are way below what they were even a couple of years ago.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that is true. It's not even as much as
the Continental loan.
Nevertheless, a lot of people might consider $4
billion in marks to be quite a holding, particularly when you recall
that we got most of it at under 2.
MR. CROSS. Well, the total value of these at today's
exchange rate would be less than $3.9 billion. So, I think we are
talking about a very modest amount of currencies and it is in our
interest to have some of these currencies available.
I assume you are not interested in
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
driving the value of the dollar up any higher?

they
that
done
know

MR. PARTEE.
I don't know what the periodic receipts are, but
certainly can't exceed $100 million. I guess I would have argued
it would not have had any appreciable effect on the dollar had we
this periodically when we get them as a convention. And I don't
why it is-MR. CROSS.

We get about $200 million per year.

I think that's true if you believe
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
that there is a principle involved here, but I don't know what the
principle is.
You're assuming that all interest on foreign currencies
should as a matter of routine be converted to dollars?
Is that what
you're saying?
MR. PARTEE.
I don't know why it shouldn't be.
I consider
the home currency to be the dollar rather than the mark!
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That still is a form of intervention,
so I don't understand why you would want to do that unless you had an
intervention objective in mind.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, I don't remember the basis for doing it

this way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether or not it's intervention seems to
me semantic. The question is whether we feel comfortable or
I personally
uncomfortable with the amount of currencies we hold.
feel that we hold an uncomfortably small amount.

10/2/84

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, it seems conceivable that we may
need more than $500 million over the next year, so why not increase
the informal limit by $1 billion instead of $500 million?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.
MR. CROSS.

I'm perfectly happy to.

I certainly support that.
I would welcome an increase of $1 billion.

MR. MARTIN. Is there some significance that you didn't
articulate to the $500 million?
MR. CROSS. No.
It's just that the past couple of times when
we raised it, we increased it by $500 million and I did not want to
give the impression that there was anything very major involved. It
seems to me it would be quite appropriate--and in fact it would be
advisable--to increase it by $1 billion.
MR. MARTIN. The inevitability of gradualism! I'd go for a
billion dollars.
Operationally, I think it makes sense.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I really don't know why we have [an
informal limit].
I would move to do away with it altogether.
After
all, at the rate at which interest is accumulating we will double our
money every six or seven years anyhow.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Swiss francs.
MR. MARTIN.

Not at German interest rates or

[rates on]

Let's hope not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, do what you want to do, but it seems
to me that this informal limit may be useful within the overall limit
of $8 billion.
It confuses me a bit as to what it is, but at the
minimum it is some kind of Committee checkpoint.
It is $5.5 billion
presently. I don't think it does any harm and it forces the Committee
to review this, though not very frequently.
It hasn't been reviewed
for however long it has been, but it seems to me it has at least a
modest usefulness and I would think we probably would want to keep it.
I have no problem with [an increase of] $1 billion.
I think that's
more appropriate, but that's because my bias is that we don't hold
enough of these currencies anyway against the contingencies of an
unknown world.
MR. GRAMLEY. Then we'd want to raise the informal maximum
for all currencies to $6 billion from $5-1/2 billion too?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Well, it would be $6-1/2 billion.

$6-1/2 billion and raise the total for all of

them?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the yen is within $400 million
[of its limit].
It's not so far away but the amount is not very large
either--not that it is very difficult to change these.

10/2/84

Another possibility, Mr. Chairman, if you wanted
MR. CROSS.
to consider it, would be to keep the informal limit on the total but
to eliminate this difference between how much is in DM and how much is
That
in yen, and how much is in Swiss francs and other currencies.
would provide a little more flexibility.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, without taking that major step, I
And I take
take it this is an understanding and not a formal [vote].
it that what the understanding really means is that these are our
foreign currency [limits] but in an emergency I can breach them. But
the sense is that the Committee is thinking in terms of these [limits]
and if they were breached I would come back to the Committee at some
point and I would at least explain why they were breached. Limits of
$5 billion [on DM], $1 billion [on yen] and $.5 billion [on other
If there are
currencies] is the minimum change we're talking about.
no widespread objections to that, we will proceed.
We've had a very strange exchange market during this period,
as Mr. Cross has described, and he rationalized as best he could why
It's not so clear why it's so strong against
the dollar is so strong.
declining interest [rates], weaker economic activity, and several
developments indicating an easier Federal Reserve policy, all of which
in days of yore--like two months ago--would have sent the dollar down.
They don't seem to have any effect right now.
MR. CROSS.
I would certainly agree that there is no very
It is amazing how much the attitudes [have
clear-cut explanation.
changed]; everybody seems to talk about what a good thing the dollar
One can listen to how they talk now and
is to get into these days.
think back to how they talked in 1978 and 1979 when it was going the
other way and the United States was [viewed as] hopeless as far as the
It's hard to believe they are talking about the
future was concerned.
same country.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There was very widespread and deep concern
about this among European Finance Ministers and central bankers-really for the first time, so far as central bankers are concerned.
Certainly the intensity [was great] at the time of the IMF meeting,
which was right in the middle of this surge. Various proposals for
coordinated intervention were explored and there was very considerable
urging that we ease policy much more aggressively to deal with this
problem. The intervention that Mr. Cross referred to was coordinated
It was a general agreement among 4 or 5
in a rather loose way.
central banks, anyway, that upward movements in the dollar would be
resisted in our respective markets over the past week. The dollar did
stay in a lower range, as Mr. Cross indicated, but when it went up
decidedly we had really rather modest intervention. There weren't all
that many strong movements in the New York market but there was
[unintelligible] intervention on some scale abroad occasionally when
the dollar was strong, and that was all agreed to last week.
MR. PARTEE.

We intervened in a rising market?

Is that

right?
In a rising market.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Cross, were "a pronounced rising market."

The words you used,

10/2/84

MR. PARTEE.
We don't attempt to create disorderly conditions
the way the Germans did.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

They jumped on the declining dollar.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We deliberately didn't do that.
I think
it may have been helpful that they did it, but I don't particularly
want to be in the posture of doing it.
MR. PARTEE.
I wouldn't want to be a party to it.
I would
like to have the opportunity to register myself against such an
operation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't done it at this point and
I have no present intention to do it. We weren't very aggressive,
that's for sure. But we need to ratify the transactions if there are
no other questions.
MR. MARTIN.
[SPEAKER(?).

Move ratification.
Second.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Mr.

Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. BLACK.
Peter, do you think that it would work a little
better if we used only adjustment borrowing for our borrowing targets
and eliminated seasonal borrowing?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know that it would.
It could have
some different effects. Our experience is that seasonal borrowing
does seem to respond to interest rate pressures, and I think that's
the logic for coupling it with adjustment borrowing.
On the other
side, it doesn't have the same pressure to repay quickly that
adjustment borrowing has and that's the logic on the other side of it.
MR. BLACK.

You'd come out on balance for leaving it?

MR. STERNLIGHT.

I'd tend to leave it alone, I think.

MR. BLACK. In the recent period, adjustment borrowing would
have given you a better idea of what the federal funds rate was going
to do, wouldn't it?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if we had done that in the recent
period, I think it would have tended to push rates higher than they
went because we had the seasonal component building up.
MR. BLACK.
I was thinking you would have cut the adjustment
[borrowing assumption].
MR. STERNLIGHT. If we make the suitable adjustments in the
borrowing level, which work into the path, we could work with either
of those. However, the Committee may not want to do that [kind of]
short-run adjusting. I tend to think of the combined total as a
better number to work with, but I think it can be argued either way.

10/2/84

MR. PARTEE.

It is sensitive to interest rates?

Is that

right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. PARTEE.

Adjustment borrowing?

I mean the seasonal.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

The seasonal, yes.

MR. BLACK. I would have thought that it was so much less
sensitive that the other conceivably might work better.
If you think
the federal funds rate-MR. AXILROD. President Black, we have done some empirical
work, and it doesn't seem to show much difference between the two.
And I think as Peter mentioned, in the jargon it is essentially an
"intercept" problem. You would have a lower level of borrowing on
average for whatever funds rate you would be thinking of.
As far as
the volatility in the relationship, day-to-day, between borrowing and
the funds rate, I don't think it makes one iota of difference.
MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, do you think there still is a
precautionary premium affecting the federal funds rate right now?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm hard put to say what there is right now
because after that funds rate [unintelligible] did give some ground,
and one could say that there has been evidence just in the last few
days of some lessened reluctance to use the window. We've had several
sizable banks come in early in the reserve period. On the other hand,
the funds rate has been back toward the high side in this current
week.
It is averaging about 11.21 percent so far in this statement
period, which suggests that maybe this is just statement-date
pressure--that would be my guess as of the moment--and that there is
some return toward normalcy underlying this.
But I would have to see
another several days before I could conclude that with greater
conviction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is a very strange period.
Every
indicator ordinarily would be associated with lower interest rates:
The money supply was very sluggish; every bit of business news, I
think, came in on the lower side of market expectations; and there was
growing evidence of lower reserve pressures.
We were in the market
every day and the market just didn't react in any consistent way. And
now, after all this, the federal funds rate goes up where it was
before, with fewer reserve pressures.
MR. PARTEE. We could very well be having that statement-date
effect, couldn't we, Paul?
As I recall, looking back, we've had that
rather regularly now over the last couple of years.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
after the statement date.

It's a funny statement-date effect, coming

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We keep talking about the banks being
reluctant to borrow, and many of the banks talk about the Fed having
tightened its administration of the discount window. I've had that
said to me time and time again even though I know that our discount
officers deny that. But I don't know why there is such a strong

10/2/84

impression of that around--or there was during this period of time.
The fed funds rate was higher than what one would have expected.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was back during the summer when we
had all that other stuff. What I don't understand is this last month.
It's the same phenomenon in the exchange market.
The same thing is
keeping the exchange market higher.
It's a refusal to believe that
[the numbers are] right--that the economy is slowing and that the
money supply has weakened.
It has been [that way] in the last two
weeks.
MR. CORRIGAN.
It doesn't work for the exchange rate, but I
keep coming away with the feeling that the only plausible explanation
in terms of the domestic market is that perhaps way beneath the
surface this precautionary [motive] is still quite operative.
It's
the only thing I can figure out.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that doesn't explain why. You
are talking about caution [by banks] about borrowing because they
might get contaminated.
MR. CORRIGAN. No, not so much on borrowing but that there is
just a much more conservative attitude on the part of medium and large
size banks in terms on their whole approach to funding and money
management, with some implication, obviously, for their willingness to
borrow. But I don't know. It's the only thing that makes any sense
to me.
MR. MARTIN. To those bankers who are aware of the wildness
and the degeneration in the financial position of the thrift industry
in their state and their region and their market area, that surely is
a factor because it is degenerating rather rapidly.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if that's the explanation, then
we should be in the beginnings of a reversal of that because all the
anecdotal reports as well as the reduction in the spread between CDs
and Treasury bills show that there has been less anxiety in the
banking system and in the markets generally in the last few days.
In
that case, if we were to continue, let's say, $750 million borrowing,
we might end up with a much lower fed funds rate than one would expect
at the present time.
MR. PARTEE. I think there is less anxiety about the banking
I think what Pres was talking about is more anxiety by the
system.
bankers about their own situations.
MR. MARTIN. In fact, they are aware that dozens of the S&Ls
in their districts are going to fail and fail with a great public
splash. And they are aware, if they are operating nationally, that
hundreds of them are going to fail.
I can see that in the bankers'
psychology.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Except that we have gotten reports in
the last few days that show so much more relaxation on the part of
bank management, particularly now that they feel that interest rates
If that's the
All I'm saying is:
are not going to go up.
explanation, then there are [unintelligible] conditions that will
reverse that.

10/2/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There may be some developments in coming
days that will increase the anxiety.
MR. MARTIN.

Exactly.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
loss or something.
MR. MARTIN.
thrift institutions.

Another major bank has to show a big

I'm not talking about a bank.
I'm talking about
Some of them are in your backyard, good sir.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.

They will definitely increase their--

I'm talking about banks.

All right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just read the newspapers. A lot of this
may be the commentaries of all these people who make the newspaper
every day.
They are always predicting every day that interest rates
are going to go up. And I think that must be-MR. BOEHNE. Well, there still is burned very deeply in the
minds of people in the country--not just people who watch the
financial markets every minute and every hour--the very high interest
rates of several years ago when we had a 20 to 21 percent prime rate.
The burn scar from that is still very obvious. And the most frequent
question that I get when I'm out just talking to people who are
running small and middle sized businesses is:
We're not going to have
18 and 19 percent prime rates anymore are we?
MR. PARTEE.

What do you say?

MR. BOEHNE.
It depends on how [unintelligible] interest
rates. But the pain of that is still very close to the surface in a
lot of peoples' minds.
MR. ROBERTS.
I hear a lot of talk from the smaller and
medium size banks about how they are more carefully limiting their fed
funds sales.
Is there possibly a net shrinkage in the market here?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know whether statistically it
shows up as any net shrinkage, but I hear that too. They may put less
or are prepared to put less with individual institutions.
MR. ROBERTS.
They are certainly more selective.
distribute it out [more].
MR. RICE.

Maybe they

Shouldn't that show up in much higher excess

reserves?
MR. STERNLIGHT. The nationwide total for excess has not gone
up, unless it's changing this very reserve period we're in.
In the
full reserve periods that we have had, that had not shown any more-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Peter, you told me that there was a
tendency in the beginning of these periods for excess reserves to be
somewhat higher.

10/2/84

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, a tendency within the period for more
conservative management but nothing for the period as a whole.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we'll turn to the business
picture, which is crystal clear! We have to approve the operations.
MR. MARTIN.
[SPEAKER(?).

Move approval.
Second.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me raise a question about your initial
comment to the effect that no decline or stagnation is ahead.
MR. KICHLINE.
believes."

I think I said "appears" or "the staff

That's what I want to raise the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
question about. You said that things came in a little less strongly-or weaker or whatever adjective you used--than you had expected last
time. That was only about 6 weeks ago and you were assuming that GNP
was going to rise 5 percent in the third quarter. Now you're down to
2.7 percent. That's a heck of a big difference in six weeks, which
reflects the fact that all the news coming in has been very
appreciably lower than you were assuming.
I would say two things were going on,
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
though. One is that the information that we had at the time of the
August meeting generally is weaker today with data revisions. When we
had the August meeting, retail sales in July were reported to be down
0.9 percent. With the revised data, they are now reported to be down
So, it is true that new information available for August
2 percent.
has been weaker, but I'd say the past also looks weaker for
consumption, residential construction, business-fixed investment, as
It has been very broadly
well as for the merchandise trade area.
based. I think my briefing did not avoid the issue.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just raising a question. You are
amplifying what I am saying. The statistics are quite a lot weaker
than you anticipated six weeks ago. We started the summer on a high
GNP couldn't be much
note and we surely ended it on a low note.
It may be lower. I don't
higher in September than it was in June.
know. As we look ahead, it is very hard to see housing going
anyplace; and you say housing sales have leveled off. There was some
figure released this morning that I was told last night would show a
pretty sharp decline.
The house sales data were
I just received it.
MR. KICHLINE.
revised down for July, and August looks quite a bit weaker.
MR. PARTEE. I should remark that the revisions are an
If revisions are downward, that
insider's leading indicator.
indicates weakness.

10/2/84

-10-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had a lot of downward
I would
revisions.
It's very hard to see housing going anyplace.
think an optimistic projection in the near term is stability.
Plant
and equipment orders have been down quite sharply over the last few
months.
Backlogs are obviously up from where they were in the
recession, but expenditures are not that much lower than orders at
this point.
In fact, they are very close, and orders most recently
have been weak.
MR. MARTIN.

We had the McGraw-Hill survey, too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I didn't see that.

MR. KICHLINE. It's dated as of yesterday. They are
tabulating the October survey. The first reading for 1985 will be
available late in October. They have a little under half of the
respondents in and the total is running around an 8 percent increase
in nominal terms, which is substantially weaker than the staff
forecast. The survey is [still] fragmentary; we don't know how to
make a lot of sense out of it, but it is indeed a weak number.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all accompanied by a great surge
in imports, which certainly is eating into U.S. production.
The
however many percent increase in the exchange rate recently can't help
that situation in the future; there was an enormous surge in the
exchange rate.
I don't know what consumption is going to do but it
wasn't very good over the summer.
The auto sales look all right.
But
that's the only thing that looks pretty good. All of these other
things raise some question about the vulnerability of inventories in
the sense of continuing large accumulation, which is the only thing
going on now. So, why can't you make a pretty good case for no growth
in the fourth quarter?
MR. GRAMLEY. How many times in the past have we seen periods
of economic expansion interrupted by a quarter of pause and then it
goes on?
I would bet that over the postwar period you could find ten
of those.
MR. MORRIS.
I think the pauses typically come about two
years after the beginning of an expansion. We normally go into a
little slowing period.
MR. WALLICH. I find it hard to believe that with this budget
deficit--even though we have very large negative net exports--we could
have the economy sagging. There is just so much purchasing power put
in. There's also the stimulation of [business] investment, which
surely dominates housing. It's about 3 times as big as housing.
So,
as I look at the underlying factors, it seems to me it's a picture of
continued [unintelligible] pressure--not certainly strength.
MR. RICE. We're talking about the fourth quarter and this
would be a quarter of pause and it could be a big pause.
MR. WALLICH. Well, that I could see.
The things I'm talking
about don't point to any particular quarter, but I do try to look a
little further ahead and ask myself:
Where are we going?

-11-

10/2/84

MR. GRAMLEY.

Jim, have you looked at previous cycles to see

whether--

MR. KICHLINE. There are many. A classic case is 1976 where
we had a slowdown, particularly in consumer spending, and it looked at
the time as if the economy were perhaps falling apart.
But it was
really just one of these pauses that subsequently led to very sharp
growth. I have an answer to your question from the model. We have
all sorts of things in the model, and the probability of negative GNP
growth occurring in the fourth quarter of 1984 according to the
Board's econometric model is 25 percent.
MR. PARTEE.

It's what?

MR. KICHLINE.
It is 25 percent. That probability has been
rising because of the factors you've been citing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I wonder if we have an example here of central
bankers finding something going along about the way it ought to be
It seems to me
going along and finding a whole lot to worry about.
that several months ago we were concerned about the economy
overheating. We were going along well into a recovery and the concern
was that we were going to go off the ledge and that it wasn't
sustainable. We get some slowing over a period of several months and
now some concern about a recession. It seems to me that what is
happening is exactly what a majority of the Committee wanted to happen
just a few months ago--that we are seeing this adjustment to a slower
economy. My own region happens to be a region that's fairly sensitive
to what is going on in the [overall] economy and historically it has
tended to come down earlier than some other regions.
I must say as I
talk with people in various sectors that the evidence suggests some
slowing [in the expansion] but there's not very much that would
suggest that we're heading into a slide. There is less strength in
manufacturing but the retailers report that things are going along
really rather well. We've had some weakness in tourism largely
because of the dollar and the fact that Canadians are not coming into
the District. There is weakness in residential housing but commercial
construction is going along reasonably well. The bankers report some
slowing in C&I loans but not as a forerunner of a recession.
So, where I come out is that the economy is doing exactly
what we wanted it to do.
We wanted [the expansion] to slow down some
so that we could have a more sustainable growth. It seems to me that
we are not as recession prone as I would have thought at this point in
the recovery. I think inflation is under much better control and I
think monetary policy has been conducted on a better basis this time
around. We tightened earlier in a recovery than any time I recall
since being in this room and I think we have begun to ease earlier
than we normally have; so I think policy is considerably less procyclical than it has been historically. I would come out thinking
that what has been happening is pretty good for the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, the staff's revisions to the
forecast for 1985 seem to be more than usually sensitive to the dollar

10/2/84

exchange rate. We know what the various possibilities are there and
we also know the difficulty of assessing the probabilities associated
with forecasting the exchange rate.
But I don't think many people
would argue that the basic long-run strength in the economy is being
threatened.
I don't know of many people who have forecast a recession
in 1985.
I think the central question for us right now is:
What is
going to happen in the current quarter and possibly the next quarter?
The question is whether the economy is going to continue to decelerate
below the current level of activity estimated for the third quarter or
whether it's going to stabilize at levels around those of the third
quarter or whether it's going to rebound as projected by the staff.
I
think the scenario outlined by the staff for the fourth quarter is a
very plausible one and I certainly hope that it is realized. If it is
realized, we'll have pretty much what Ed Boehne was hoping for--that
is, we will have the kind of situation that we want.
However, I think we have to recognize and pay some attention
to the kinds of factors that the Chairman pointed to just a moment
ago:
that there is evidence of considerable weakness and that the
staff forecast is based on pretty wobbly foundations--primarily
consumer behavior and the expected rebound in consumer spending. Now,
at a time when investment spending is also decelerating somewhat, this
rebound in the current quarter seems to me crucially [dependent] on a
substantial rebound in consumer spending. And from past experience, I
think we have found that predicting consumer behavior in the short run
on a quarterly basis is a very hazardous business. In other words, it
seems to me highly possible that, in light of the very rapid
deceleration that we've seen in the last quarter, this could carry
forward to very low levels of expansion.
I would expect positive
rates of growth, but conceivably fairly low rates of growth-marginally positive rates of growth--and that, in my judgment, would
not be a desirable outcome. And I think we have an opportunity now to
forestall that without any risk of threatening a sustainable
expansion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN.
I appreciated Jim's comment on the 25 percent
probability from the model of zero growth in the fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Minus.

Zero or negative.

MR. MARTIN.
It seems to me that when we refer to the
slowdown in growth we're talking about a change from 10.1 percent real
GNP growth in the first quarter to 2.7 percent in the third quarter.
I suppose that's a slowdown rather than a jamming on the brakes, but
Henry's point is well placed with
it is reasonably significant.
regard to consumer behavior and the probability of the consumer coming
back, particularly in the durables area. The other side of that coin
is the consumer coming back to a saving rate that might reflect the
news that I expect to occur with regard to failing thrift institutions
[When] the November 14
and commercial banks as the year wears on.
report of Financial Corporation of America comes upon the media and
other institutions show difficulties, it could even be that the
I
consumer will feel that saving may be a little more desirable.
don't know what the probability of that is but there is some

-13-

10/2/84

probability. Of course, then the question is raised as to saving into
what. As to the notion of a return in the nondefense capital goods
area to a much stronger rate of spending, I think there is a great
deal of uncertainty there and that uncertainty stems from the very
point that the Chairman underlined previously, which is that interest
rates are still relatively high and profit margins, due to foreign
competition, are the narrowest in many, many industrial categories
And that certainly tends to
that they have been in several decades.
weigh a bit upon a board of directors realizing that because of the
financing gap they have to go outside. They can't do as they did in
the earlier stages of the expansion and finance from internal sources.
So, it seems to me, though I don't know what the probability
is, that there is a risk--not the risk that we will have such a bad
fourth quarter or first or second quarter going forward, but the risk
of an earlier end to this expansion than would be desirable
And
considering the need to face fiscal policy decisions in '85.
those are decisions that can best be made in [an environment] of a
trend rate of real growth or even a 3 to 4 percent rate of growth
rather than an expectation that the recession is around the corner
and, therefore, it's too late to do anything in the fiscal policy
area.
I reiterate my concern about financial institutions and their
lack of financial soundness and the vulnerability that the expansion
has to the fact that this will be developing later this year and into
So, it seems to me that the Chairman needs to have
next year.
flexibility and that we need to build into our thinking quite a bit of
flexibility so that we can move, particularly to offset downward
pressures, in the short- or intermediate-term future.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Miss Seger.

MS. SEGER. As someone who was pessimistic rather early on, I
guess I'm pleased to see the statistics finally supporting my woman's
intuition in that the statistics across the board are certainly
looking much weaker than they did back in July when I arrived here.
I'm also viewing this as a good sign, as are people in Philadelphia,
and not a bad sign. I think it's healthy that we are looking at some
downward revisions in our forecast for the rest of this year and for
1985 because it's important to keep inflation under control and having
So,
these signs takes some of the heat off here to jam on the brakes.
I'm pleased to see that this is happening. Also, I'm optimistic-maybe more optimistic than most people here--about some of the
I have mentioned these
fundamental changes going on in the economy.
before, particularly those things that are influencing productivity
favorably. There are other [developments] that influence the
management of companies and increase their commitment to doing things
efficiently, which of course is tied in to productivity. Their
stronger moves in labor negotiations, some innovations, and more
emphasis on R&D are the kinds of things that I think will pay big
I'm also concerned, though, about the problems
rewards longer term.
Maybe it's because I just gave a talk a week ago to
of the thrifts.
some treasurers of savings and loans and I'm carrying those cards, but
There are big problems there even if
there are big problems there.
interest rates don't rise, but the numbers I heard with even a modest
increase in interest rates in the future are terribly scary. I think
a very large group will be going down the chute rather than a somewhat
But, as I said, overall
smaller group. So, those are my concerns.
I'm rather pleased with what is going on.

-14-

10/2/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I too am rather pleased about
the ways things have gone.
I don't really see the risks being on the
down side either for the fourth quarter or for 1985.
I was a little
surprised at the 2.7 percent staff projection.
I would have thought
it would be a little higher.
I think the Commerce flash report of 3.6
percent is probably closer to the mark and, in fact, market watchers
are expecting that to be revised upward somewhat.
Also, the numbers
that I've seen for September, in my District at least, are indicating
some rebound in the economy from the slowing in the summer.
Speaking specifically about my District, we are seeing the
slowdown, but in all areas the strengths are still outweighing the
weaknesses in the economy.
So, I would think, Mr. Chairman, that the
risk is that we will have a rebound in the fourth quarter and that
that will carry over into 1985.
I say risk not because I think it's
going to be terribly significant but because the numbers will probably
be lower.
But I certainly don't see any negative growth or even zero
growth in 1985.
I think the institutional problems certainly will
have an effect on consumer attitudes and consumer expectations but, at
the moment at least, I sense a less nervous attitude on the part of
people with respect to the banking system. I don't think the thrift
problems have really surfaced very well in peoples' consciousness.
Now, if FCA or some other thrift were to go belly up, we might have a
different situation. But, for the moment at least, I think the market
nervousness and consumer nervousness about the banking system has
abated to some extent.
Basically, as I look at the situation, I think we are in a
pause.
I expect the fourth quarter to come in a little better than
the staff has projected and, as I said earlier, I think that will
carry over into 1985.
The wild card in all of this is the question of
the dollar.
And I would just like to raise at this point--if it's
appropriate, Mr. Chairman--the question of how significant in our
discussions today the question of the dollar should be.
Perhaps we
can talk about this later, but I wonder with respect to the dollar
what might happen if this significant decline in the dollar [were to
occur] whether this situation should be reflected in some way in the
directive.
I just throw that out as a point of discussion. What
happens to the dollar can obviously affect these projections very,
very significantly. If anything were to happen soon in terms of a
marked change in the dollar, it could affect what happens in the
fourth quarter or certainly in 1985.
But with the exception of the
dollar consideration, I would think the economy is on a pretty good
track and I would be more concerned about inflation in 1985 rather
than slow growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You refer to evidence of a rebound in your
District in September. What is that evidence?
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, retail sales have come back in early
September. Housing is back a bit more.
It is still down from earlier
levels, but better than the July numbers had suggested. Consumer
spending generally is a little better.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know.
I heard a lot of
stories about retail sales improving late in August and in early

10/2/84

-15-

September. More recently I hear stories that they disappeared again.
I don't know whether-MR. ROBERTS. That's what I am hearing also--that they have
become sluggish again after a little pickup in late August and early
September.
MR. MARTIN. They could come back, [given] the discounting
I've heard [that their approach
techniques to move the merchandise.
is]:
Never mind what the price is; [unintelligible]; let's do
something else here to move the merchandise.
MR. FORRESTAL. One of the interesting things that I find is
that the retail sales reflected in the statistics are not borne out by
the retailers that I talk to.
We see evidence in the numbers of
relatively weak retail sales, for example, yet when I talk to various
retailers they say they are doing great. There is some discrepancy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You must have been talking to different
ones than I was talking to or I wouldn't have [unintelligible].
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's one thing about retailers:
always find a retailer to support your position!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You can

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.
In the Eleventh District, Mr. Chairman, we are
seeing some slowdown. Primarily what we see is a climate of weakness
in the energy industry, particularly the processing portion. Refining
and [unintelligible] actually are showing absolute declines both in
employment and production. This summer drilling also declined on a
year-over-year basis, although very recently there has been a little
Housing is ebbing. Non-residential construction is
pickup there.
flattening out, and I really don't think that's too bad down our way.
On unemployment, of
We do have a number of areas of strengths.
course, we're below the national average, which really still suggests
to us a fairly tight labor market. This is borne out at our own Bank
where we continue to see our turnover rate increasing. It's always
fairly large, but it is picking up again. The excessive inventories
in oil field equipment are being worked off and production and
employment as a matter of fact are beginning to increase there.
In retail
Defense contracting is helpful as is electronic equipment.
sales, we continue to make gains but anecdotally some retailers we
told
talk to seem a bit pessimistic. The
me that they were getting increases of 17 and 18 percent and now it
looks like 7 or 8 percent and he's not too sure what will occur as we
On the agricultural side in our District, while
go through the year.
prices aren't that good, increased production has pretty well offset
At least for this year, we think the District agricultural
that.
situation is not going to be all that bad overall, although it's not
uniform. The drought areas, of course, are severely hurt. My bottom
line is that this seems to me more of a pause right now, and I agree
I
with those who think that maybe that's not too bad a development.
would anticipate that the fourth quarter might be a little better and
that 1985--barring all these really terrible things that have been
mentioned--shouldn't be all that bad.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

-16-

10/2/84

MR. KEEHN. Well, in the words of one of my associates:
"The
But as I hear
Middle West has dropped out of the economic expansion."
I
the comments, maybe we aren't the only ones to have dropped out.
think it's now clear that overall economic activity in the Middle West
has been at least leveling off since the early part of the summer.
Imports are taking a
Steel production is down and down significantly.
The heavy capital goods sector
very much larger part of that market.
continues to be relatively weak. One part of that sector, indeed, has
Orders for large trucks, which had been very strong,
turned around:
Residential
have now turned around and are on the way down.
Our gains in
construction is down, the result of high interest rates.
employment rates have slowed down. Our unemployment rate is down, but
it's probably more a factor of people just dropping out of the work
force and not the result of higher employment numbers. Retail sales
are uneven. There was a pickup during the back-to-school period.
Nonetheless, the September numbers, according to what we're hearing,
In the agricultural sector, the outlook
are again on the soft side.
continues to be relatively poor and the land values are continuing to
go down. The outlook for farm incomes is not positive and that is
backed up even more in the farm equipment sector where production is
Some major manufacturers are continuing to
being further curtailed.
I would not
lay off workers.
Broadly, the news is a bit more modest.
I
suggest by any of this that we are heading back into a recession.
But certainly, at
think it would be far too early to suggest that.
least in our area, the expansion has faded. And I think we are going
to have to watch the numbers pretty carefully in the upcoming period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. In general, Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of
sympathy for what Mr. Boehne said. At the same time, there is no
From my own
question that the tone of things has changed.
perspective, two months ago I would have put about a zero probability
on a fourth quarter of zero or something worse than that.
I'm not
sure where my own mental calculus would take me right now--maybe to
the 25 percent the model has, or maybe a little less than that.
But I
still think the best bet, by a comfortable margin, is that we will see
a pattern of economic growth emerge in the fourth quarter and in early
Having
1985 along the broad lines suggested in the staff forecast.
said that, there is no question that right now it's darn hard to read
Clearly, for example, the way that imports are
through the numbers.
working their way into the economy is just off the charts in terms of
our appreciation of what it means for domestic income, employment, and
On the other side, it's awfully hard to know what
all the rest of it.
We get reports through our
the underlying demand for automobiles is.
directors and otherwise suggesting that the supply constraints in the
automobile industry are very real and that the cars that people want
The inventory situation is a very, very
simply are not available.
tough call.
It could go either way. Again, the general attitude we
seem to run into everyplace among business people is that they are
being very aggressive and they are not terribly uncomfortable with
their inventory situations even right now. On the housing sector, I
think the general view that it's going to stand still is probably
I get the
right.
But there's one potential little problem there.
sense that these adjustable rate mortgages that were put out in such
enormous quantities earlier in the year and late last year could be a
potential problem in their own right that could possibly have some
unsettling influences on the mortgage market, leaving aside the

10/2/84

-17-

The inflation outlook, I think, is clearly a
problems of the thrifts.
plus, both in terms of attitudes and psychology as well as reality.
While we may be a little surprised by the business numbers, in some
way the biggest surprise is the continued very, very satisfactory
showing on the inflation side, which is reflected in recent [wage]
settlements as well.
The credit side
Just a word on the agricultural situation:
is no better than it was in May; it's probably worse notwithstanding
On
the fact that production yields are going to be pretty good.
But all in all,
balance, I think the credit side is probably worse.
as I said, I think the best bet by a comfortable margin is a rebound
The biggest wild card by far
along the lines of the staff forecast.
is the financial situation, despite the progress that was made with
I think the real wild
some of the LDC debt problems and so forth.
card is the possibility of some more uncertainties or unsettling
events in the financial situation quickly spilling over into a
It
question of confidence about dollar-denominated assets in general.
could have very adverse implications for the dollar. That would be
the worst of all worlds.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

In
MR. PARTEE.
I want to agree strongly with Ed Boehne.
fact, I would underline his comments by saying "Thank goodness we have
had a slowdown," because throughout 1983 the expansion was more rapid
than we expected. We certainly didn't have in mind anything like that
10 percent increase for the first quarter; that was several percentage
points above what we expected. The second quarter was also
considerably stronger than originally forecast and than what we
thought appropriate. Finally we have gotten a quarter on the low
It's the first quarter I can remember in the recovery that's on
side.
the low side of the projection and it's about time that we start to
see some balance.
Somebody earlier was talking about putting some
risks back into the situation. Well, I think that's necessary for the
business situation as well as the foreign exchange value of the dollar
--that there be a two-sided view as to what may be occurring. I'm
inclined to think that this is temporary. Despite Emmett's comments
that consumer spending is variable in the short run, I would say that
there tends to be an equating of spending with income streams, and
So, the chances are very, very strong
income streams are still good.
that there will be a recovery in consumer spending in the fourth
quarter. Whether it will be as strong as the staff has projected, I
don't know, but I would say the chances are good that there will be a
larger increase in GNP in the fourth quarter than in the third.
I noticed
I'm a little more concerned about 1985.
particularly the tremendous rate of increase in imports, and I think
that is beginning to sap the economy. If that continues in 1985-which, incidentally, the projection doesn't forecast--we could get a
considerably weaker year than has been forecast from the standpoint of
domestic activity. But that's some time in the future and a lot will
depend on the value of the dollar. And who knows what that may be?
Just to take a figure, it may be 40 percent lower by the first of the
I do think that our
year. Who can say where the dollar will be?
greatest threat, looking ahead over the next couple of years, is the
possibility that we may find ourselves in a position where interest
rates have to be substantially higher than they are now. And that's

-18-

10/2/84

because of the thrifts, Martha, and the farmers, Jerry, and the small
businessmen who have been referred to, and the LDCs, and the condition
of financial institutions generally. A repetition of the 18 percent
rate level that we saw before would be very, very destructive on the
economy. As I see it, that need may still develop in the course of
this cycle as we get farther out, and it's very important to try to
keep the pressure off so that won't occur. That's the big thing we
have to watch out for, and that's why I say "Thank goodness for the
slowdown!"
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I feel very much the same way.
Of course, I am
in some way impressed by the immediate events, but we can't influence
them very much. In other words, what we do now is not going to have
any immediate effect even on the fourth quarter except maybe for
housing. And looking at the longer run, it seems to me that inflation
continues to be the main problem. I know it's boring to talk about
inflation since it is finally doing so well. But really, that is to
be expected. Here we are well above the natural rate of unemployment
and inflation is going down, and that's what it's supposed to do.
What puzzles me is that so many people expect rising inflation at a
Maybe these
time when we have a very high level of unemployment.
expectations are [related to a view] that the dollar will go down or
But basically we seem to
maybe to the fear of financial calamities.
If it stays that way,
be taking 5 percent [inflation] for granted.
I think we're living on borrowed
then the problem is out of the way.
We don't know when it will come
time here with respect to the dollar.
down. It's very unlikely to me that it will always stay at these
levels.
We have had remarkable wage moderation; it's hard to explain.
Most expectations were for very high settlements, and surely that
I am
underlying feeling of "restore and more" must still be there.
If you look at our money
grateful to have had such good settlements.
supply target, we have pulled that down on average 1/4 or 1/2 point at
most for 1985.
Nominal GNP is likely to go from about 10 percent
So, if this change in the relationship
growth to about 7.5 percent.
of money to nominal GNP isn't going into output, maybe it will go into
slower velocity but maybe it will go into higher prices. At least the
makings of that are there. As I look at the outlook, I look more at
I
mid-1985 and later in 1985 than at the fourth quarter [of 1984].
think there's enough reason to believe that the fourth quarter isn't a
cause for immediate alarm and to allow one to take this longer-run
view. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I came into this meeting feeling
very optimistic because we've been able to move the economy to a
slower growth mode without pushing interest rates higher than we did.
I was afraid a few months ago; I didn't know what level of the funds
rate would be required to slow down the economy. I have no concern
about a prolonged period of stagnation, much less a recession, simply
because I think the fundamental underpinnings to the economy are
strong and I think the economy would be very responsive to even a
modest downward movement in interest rates, which any prolonged
stagnation would tend to generate. The main thing I've been concerned
about in the near term is the foreign exchange market because it seems
It's just
to me that there is a speculative bubble in that market.

-19-

10/2/84

like the tulip bulb mania. Whenever you see a market defying all the
fundamentals, which it is doing now, you have to think the time is
approaching when a correction has to be made. And, obviously, I'm
concerned about the interest rate effects of a decline in the dollar.
So, I think it is very fortunate that if the dollar should start
declining fairly soon, it will do so in an economy that is moving
ahead at a more reduced rate and the strains on the financial markets
I see that as our major
will not be as great as they otherwise would.
problem coming up--how we respond in policy to the financial strains
caused by a weaker dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what we all have been saying for a
Governor Gramley.
year or more.
MR. GRAMLEY. I'm very much in the Ed Boehne/Chuck Partee
camp.
I do think something rather fundamental has happened to the
I would
basic expansion and I think we should be thankful for that.
note again that we've been through a lot of periods of economic
expansion--Jim mentioned 1976, which was one, but there have been many
others--in which the growth of employment, industrial production, and
real GNP slowed for awhile and then picked up again. Jim was asked
what the probability of negative GNP in the fourth quarter was and he
A more meaningful question in my judgment would
gave the answer .25.
What is the probability of two successive quarters of negative
be:
And the answer the model cranks out on that is .05, which
GNP growth?
is negligible. And that agrees with my own perception.
MR. PARTEE.

At this time?

Did you have that run?

That's a regular output run of the model
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
and I get the model forecast.
MR. PARTEE.

One in 20?

If you look over the basic factors that
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
have been driving the economy, and many of them have been mentioned
here, they all seem to me to be conducive to continuation of economic
Budget policy is expansive. Monetary policy has not been
expansion.
unduly restrictive--we're looking at a growth of real money over the
first three quarters of around 2 percent, which is quite high by
Consumer confidence is high. Consumer balance
historical standards.
sheets are in quite good shape--income ratios have gone up but to
nowhere near where they once were. Net worth has improved recently
with the pickup in stock prices. As for incentives for business
investment, surely we can't expect to see 20 to 25 percent rates of
real business fixed investment taking place, but profits are high, the
As
tax incentives are still there, and capacity utilization is up.
for the inventory situation, one can see problems in some areas like
chemicals and fibers, textiles, and metals, but overall inventory
sales ratios are quite low. My perception is the one that Jerry
mentioned--that most businesses are quite comfortable with their
I
So, I think the staff has it about right.
inventory positions.
think we will see a pickup in the fourth quarter, and if not then, we
will see it in the first quarter. And then if we can see growth stay
in the range of 3 to 3-1/2 percent, it's certainly going to be quite
beneficial in terms of the impact on interest rates and aspects of
financial markets and the problems we have there.

-20-

10/2/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Focusing on our
regional economy, it's not unlike what has been described in some
other areas, particularly where there is a fairly dramatic division
between urban and rural areas.
In the urban areas, retail sales have
leveled off; the housing starts, not unlike what has already been
described, are falling off somewhat.
On the other hand, commercial
construction, particularly in Omaha, Kansas City, and Oklahoma City is
booming.
It started late and it will continue on for another couple
of years simply to complete the projects that are underway.
In the
energy area, as Bob Boykin has indicated, there's been an uptick in
rig count operations.
In Oklahoma, Colorado, and Wyoming, the numbers
are reasonably substantial as a matter of fact.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
depressed.

I thought he said the oil business was

MR. BOYKIN. I said during the summer there was an uptick in
Texas; the actual rig count was still down a little in New Mexico and
parts of the country he's talking about. There have been rather
substantial increases over the last month and we have begun to get a
little uptick even in Texas.
But comparing now to a year ago, it's
still down a little.
MR. GUFFEY. I think our numbers would reflect something
modestly different from that; the uptick compared to a year ago would
be somewhat greater than Bob has just described.
In auto production,
they are working very near capacity on the auto assembly lines.
Aircraft, on the other hand, is almost a dead industry at the moment.
They can't sell aircraft, particularly business aircraft. That is one
of the things that businesses apparently defer and there's an overhang
on the market of used aircraft. And that's rather an important part
of our industry in the Tenth District. The agricultural scene is not
unlike what already has been described.
It's bad now and the
prospects of it getting better any time in the near future are not
bright--non-existent as a matter of fact.
Russian grain sales are
taking place now, but they're taking place in [the context of] an
inventory overhang and as a result the prices do not reflect it nor
does it pass through to the producer. And that, of course, has a
continued impact on the financial side; the agricultural banks are
sort of hanging on.
The question is what they will do with collateral
that supports those loans when the loans cannot be serviced--interest
cannot be paid. As a result the best estimate is that if there is a
bottom to be reached, it won't be reached until perhaps the first
quarter of 1985.
The question of what will happen from now to then is
uncertain.
But I think it should be important to this Committee to
understand that unless we have a dramatic decrease in interest rates
there will not be any salvation for the agricultural sector. The
current rates, or modestly lower rates, will not be an answer to the
financial problems in the agricultural sector.
With respect to the staff forecast, I would agree with Ed
Boehne and others who have expressed the view that we ought to be
happy with the slowdown. As I look into the fourth quarter and
particularly into 1985, I have some question about the staff forecast
in that I think the economy will be somewhat weaker than they
In the numbers that they used, retail sales are very
forecast.

10/2/84

-21-

important; auto sales, for example, are extremely important in 1985.
The staff is looking at an 11 million unit rate for auto sales in
1985.
The fourth quarter of 1985, for example, is in the area of 11.2
million--greater than any time in 1983.
That suggests to me that if
there is any retrenchment because of problems in the financial sector
or otherwise, that forecast is more expansive than I would feel
comfortable with. With respect to the dollar's strength, it's
But as it relates to inflation it would seem to me
anybody's guess.
that so long as the dollar is strong imports are strong, and we could
look at lesser real growth and lesser inflation and, thus, the
forecast for nominal GNP in the period ending in the fourth quarter of
1985 would be somewhat less than the staff is projecting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS. Mr. Chairman, in the Eighth District, economic
activity is still strong--I think a little stronger than the national
average--but we are clearly seeing signs of a slowdown. Building
Builders are
activity is high but housing starts are declining.
comfortable with where they are but are worried about what will happen
in the fall and generally are anticipating that the high interest
rates will severely and adversely affect them. Consumer spending is
strong in our District; sales of consumer goods haven't really slowed
down. We have gotten a lot of information from national retailers
that sales, after flattening out in the summer, picked up in late
August or early September and, as I said, have become sluggish again.
Locally, there is less of that sluggishness. Except for in the
northern part of our District, the agricultural situation has
improved; there is some reduction in the financial pressures that the
farmers have been feeling for the last two years.
I made a comparison here of weak points and strong points and
what I ended up with is that the same industries and the same
activities are on both the weak and the strong side. For example, in
In
agriculture we have a very weak situation in northern Missouri.
the case of soybeans, it costs more to produce them than they can be
sold for at the moment even though we are getting a lot of production
--in the area of 50 bushels an acre.
The value of the dollar is an
adverse factor in exports, and cotton and rice are export crops in
On the other hand, they have the biggest
part of the District.
So, how that will come out
production in history--greater than 1982.
is a close call in terms of the effects on them. Construction is at a
high level but the outlook is for a weakening. In production,
Automobile sales are
generally we're at a very high level.
characterized by the major dealers as red hot. They can't handle the
So, that looks
demand, particularly for some of the larger cars.
good.
On the other hand, we've had some plant closings in the
International Harvester, a producer of farm implements,
District.
just closed a plant with 1500 workers; a small foundry closed; we saw
the first AT&T effect in telecommunications with a small plant
closing. In terms of the confidence factor, there is considerable
I had an interesting coincidence of three
concern about the thrifts.
visits in the last two weeks by bankers who are concerned about the
condition of thrifts.
Now, why they are [concerned] may be a product
of industry discussions, but they foresee major failures without
identifying them. As I talk to the thrift people, they are concerned
about the negative interest arbitrage but they haven't seen any
The
deterioration in quality, including in the variable rate loans.

-22-

10/2/84

consumer's confidence is reflected in our District in rising consumer
loans; the consumer is still borrowing. All in all, what I see is a
slowing at a high level--not a lot of imbalances around that we could
really do anything about.
Agriculture is an example. There is some
effect of the high dollar, but no big inventory problems that haven't
been resolved. Our expectations are that nationally we'll probably
see a continuation of about 3 percent growth next year but with
inflation rising, probably on the order of 5-1/2 or 6 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. As for business conditions in our District, the
anecdotes would support an economy that is levelling off but not
declining. And we would view that as basically a good development.
I
would like to comment on inflation. A couple of speakers have
commented on it and, in my opinion, it is an ongoing problem. There
is, of course, a good side of this.
We hear a number of anecdotes on
productivity as well in our District--that it may be increasing and
there may be some significant changes.
On the negative side, leaving
off fiscal policy from the discussion and turning to the exchange
rate, I think there is a genuine concern that if the exchange rate
were to be reduced significantly, that would show through to prices
very quickly.
In the Cleveland District we have a large number of the
types of firms that are finding themselves subject to import
substitution. And it's that pressure that has kept their margins in
an area where they are just completely uncomfortable with them. They
We hear
are just waiting for the moment to move [prices higher].
many, many stories of these types of firms being poised to move the
instant they can.
So, that adds to my concern about inflation as the
longer-term problem.

point?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else want to comment at this
Mr. Griffith, if you want to, we'll give you 30 seconds.

MR. GRIFFITH. Well, I can't add anything other than to say
that we support the Ed Boehne concept.
We think things are going
really well. There's nothing wrong with sitting here right on target.
Our staff forecast has, as does the Greenbook, fourth-quarter growth
more in the 4 percent range. And we're optimistic about 8 percent
nominal GNP growth next year.
I would only add to two things that
have been talked about earlier.
In our District we also have
agricultural problems, and I concur with Roger that these problems are
going to show up in the first quarter of '85 and later.
And, of
course, the thrift industry problems--and it seems we must have half
of them, all arising at one time--are, as I think Jerry pointed out,
in fact causing great concern in the financial community.
Bankers are
They have strange views about
huddling for strange reasons.
borrowing; they have strange views about a lot of things; and they're
very nervous about the thrift industry.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe you can give us a quick recital, Mr.
Axilrod, and we'll [have coffee.]
MR. AXILROD.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
[Coffee break]

-23-

10/2/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say that I don't have all these
figures precisely in mind, but the latest indications on the money
supply suggest that September is going to come in lower than was
assumed. And the quarterly figure for June to September will be in
the neighborhood of 2 percent or a little more, right?
MR. AXILROD. It will be below 2-1/2 percent and could be as
low as 2 percent. The numbers are variable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. October will start off appreciably below
It's rather a very sluggish ending. The other
the September average.
figures for the 3 months are without any clear change.
MR. PARTEE. That is, growth from June to September would be
2 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent?
September could be as much as 1-1/2 points
MR. AXILROD.
lower than we had, so that takes off 1/2 point for the quarter.
MR. PARTEE.

I see.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be worth pointing out that reserves
have done nothing over the summer. A question was asked about the
dollar earlier, and I'm not going to deal with all the questions of
what happens if the dollar declines because I don't know. I've been
Instead, it
worried about that for a year and it hasn't happened yet.
has been going up and going up very rapidly recently, as you know.
I suggest that something is
That is a factor in my thinking at least.
the matter here in terms of some notion of longer-term equilibrium and
is a factor in the business picture and, as I indicated earlier, a
I certainly put that in my thinking as a
source of some alarm abroad.
factor to supply more reserves rather than less during this period.
That factor alone is not the only factor, but I think at this stage it
is not an insignificant one. Well, with that much introduction, who
would like to say something?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that we ought to
I do think it's
maintain the present borrowing level of $750 million.
worth commenting here, though, that I've been surprised that you have
brought borrowings down from $1 billion to $750 million without any
consultation with the Committee. Even though I think that was the
correct thing to do and a certain amount of discretion is indicated in
the directive, it seems to me that at some point you would want to
check with the Committee to make sure that others share that view on
how to use that discretion. The question could arise again, possibly,
If we were to start with a borrowing level,
over the next few weeks:
let's say, of $750 million, at what point would you feel that you
should check with the Committee if both money and the real economy
turn out weaker and, therefore, you were reducing the borrowing level
or increasing the nonborrowed reserve path?
Turning to the decision for today, I'd start from the
assumption that even though there may be weakness in the fourth
quarter, that just does not mean an incipient recession. It seems to
me that we already have been perceived in the markets as being fairly
aggressive in easing and I think we ought to be somewhat cautious,
particularly between now and the election period. Unless there are
very clear economic reasons to do otherwise, we ought to continue to

-24-

10/2/84

be fairly cautious rather than move toward a pronounced easing. As
I would
far as the targets go, alternative B strikes me as fine.
There is one last point:
leave the funds rate range where it is.
It's not too likely, but if we were to get a restoration of confidence
in the banking system in a way whereby the management of these banks
began to follow a somewhat less cautious policy in reserve management,
then with a borrowing level of $750 million, we might find fed funds
And a question I think
dropping to as [low] as, say, 10-1/4 percent.
the Committee ought to consider is:
Do we want that much of a drop?
If this contingency were to arise--though I don't think it will--would
we want to see that much of a drop?
There could be an understanding
that the Chairman would be in touch with the rest of the Committee at
that point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would support alternative
B with the understanding, as during the last period, that the
borrowing limit could be lowered if the aggregates come in extremely
weak. But I think an 8 to 12 percent fed funds range is no longer
appropriate. When interest rates were moving up, the lower end of the
funds range didn't have much relevance. When they start moving down,
then it seems to me the lower limit becomes the more relevant one.
And to me an 8 percent lower limit is simply too low, certainly at
this juncture.
I would hate to see us make the sort of mistake we did
in 1981 of pursuing vigorously an M1 that was showing some weakness
and pushing rates down and getting an enormous surge of response from
It seems
the economy again. I think that would be very unfortunate.
to me that we need to probe down on interest rates and not let them
move down too sharply.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.

What are you referring to in 1981?

Well, in

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
funds rate in June.

'81-In '80 when we had an 18-1/2 percent

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was an entirely different situation.
A drop in the economy and the money supply decreased [unintelligible].
It was a mistake in retrospect, but I don't think we have anything
like that now.
The context is different. What I'm trying to
MR. MORRIS.
say is that I don't think in the present context we ought to
vigorously pursue a sluggish M1 if it means pushing interest rates
down very sharply. And, therefore, I think it would be a mistake to
have the directive give the Manager leeway to move interest rates down
that far.
I would suggest a 10 to 12 percent range on the funds rate
as being much more realistic, and that would require the Committee to
make another formal judgment before we went below ten percent.
MR. RICE. I would just like to point out that even
alternative A contemplates a funds rate no lower than 10-1/4 percent.
MR. PARTEE.
way.

Well, assuming that the aggregates come in that

10/2/84

-25-

MR. MORRIS. It just seems rather silly to me in this
situation to have a number as low as 8 percent when the lower limit is
the relevant one.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say 8 percent.
This is a piece of the
framework that I hadn't even considered--that the funds rate might be
down around 8 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or even 10 percent.
I would have
problems with 10 percent in the next few weeks.
I assume you would.
MR. MORRIS.
I'm not sure I would have a problem with 10
percent, but certainly anything below 10 percent I think would be a
little precipitous right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of what kind of signals we
want to give. After all, we're very close to the 12 percent and we're
nowhere near the 8 percent at this point.
Governor Martin.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I think that the growth in M1 and
the growth in M2 over the last 4 months or so deserve some underlining
here. The lack of growth in the monetary aggregates and the flat
configuration of the curve of reserve growth argue, as one of our
colleagues here indicated, for probing in the direction of restoring
M1 and M2 to a somewhat higher configuration over the next weeks.
It
also seems to me that the slowing of the economy's rate of growth and
the uncertainty with regard to nondefense capital spending suggest a
probing in that direction. I would join Governor Gramley in his
assertion that a 25 percent annual rate of growth of capital spending
is not appropriate at this stage of the cycle, but I would also point
out that we've had some minus figures in the nondefense capital area
for two months and that the purchasing agents indicate strongly that
this continued for a third month in September. I'm not sanguine that
the consumers are going to come back that quickly. On top of the
rationale stemming from the aggregates and from the reserve growth
pattern you add the high uncertainties with regard to a possible
growth recession--whatever that is--in the fourth quarter or the first
quarter or both. We can certainly have two quarters of very, very low
growth with the implication that says to the Congress when they come
back--after all, we're talking about policies that will have some
impact four or six or eight months from now just at the time when the
Congress is back--and the question of taking some responsibility for
fiscal policy is in the offing.
If we have 1 or 2 percent real growth
at that time, what prospect is there for some degree of responsibility
for fiscal policy?
And finally, it seems to me that the behavior pattern that
Steve described with regard to borrowing, with regard to fed funds
provision, and with regard to excess reserve positions on the part of
the banking community will probably be reinforced. This aberrant
behavior, if you will, that has kept the fed funds rate where it is
despite almost daily intervention by us, despite the reserve position,
and the borrowing position of the banking community, is going to be
reinforced by the bad news that's going to come out of commercial
banks and thrift institutions instance after instance.
And we know
this bad news is coming and that it is certainly not going to build
confidence.
It seems to me we should probe from the current level of
$750 million of borrowing, from the current 11 to 11-1/2 percent level

-26-

10/2/84

of fed funds, and from the current level of excess reserves carefully
down toward the levels specified in "A."
In other words, I recommend
we start at the current levels and move very carefully toward "A,"
consulting as you will with this Committee, Mr. Chairman. But,
certainly, a $600 million level of borrowing is not out of the
question; and if it takes a $500 million level of borrowing to get to
that 10 to 10-1/2 percent range for fed funds, then so be it.
A third
reason for probing and moving in that direction is, of course, the
dollar situation, which has been thoroughly discussed here and which
is giving our central banker colleagues in Europe and Japan
difficulties.
To me, the aggregates, the economy, and the dollar
argue for a careful probing movement in the direction of whatever it
takes to bring the rate down in the direction of the level specified
in "A."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
numbers specified?
MR. MARTIN.

But not necessarily the money supply

But not necessarily the money supply.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tony Solomon has
stated a position that I would like to join, with just a modest change
Rather than adopting "B" as proposed in
for maybe different reasons.
the Bluebook at a 6 percent M1 level--and I'm not talking about either
M2 or M3 or the federal funds range--I would prefer that the Committee
adopt a shading toward "C," to the 5-1/2 percent level, the same level
we adopted for the third quarter.
In other words, as the record is
published it would reflect that there has been no change in the
objective of the Committee with respect to money growth. The
difference, obviously, is that we did not achieve 5-1/2 percent growth
in the third quarter, but only 2 percent on a quarterly basis.
It
My concern is, much as what
would give us the latitude to move down.
has already been expressed, that the fed funds rate range have some
flexibility in it but that within the next six weeks there not be any
major move to a lower level.
I think the chance of moving to lower
interest rate levels is quite likely consistent with the comments that
I made earlier in that I don't believe that the economy is going to be
quite as strong as the staff is forecasting for the fourth quarter.
I
think we'll see some easing. But for the record I would like to see
us re-adopt the same money targets that we had in the third quarter
and try to achieve that 5-1/2 percent growth for M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

I
I like the specifications of alternative B.
MR. PARTEE.
would neither want to raise the M1 number above 6 percent, which I
think is a good center number to have in mind, nor to reduce it,
especially following on the shortfalls that we already have had, which
I like the
I think would signal a more restrictive stance.
specifications and I would leave the funds rate at 8 to 12 percent.
It comes as somewhat of a shock to me that anybody would consider the
I see the point about not going to 8
8 percent a relevant number.
percent in the short run, but I think the public relations effect of
raising it from 8 percent to 10 percent would be too difficult for us
to deal with, so I wouldn't do that. Now, I must say that I don't
think there has been anything very aggressive about monetary policy in

10/2/84

the last 6 weeks when you remember that we are significantly-significantly by several points--short of the targets we set just 6
weeks ago for the third quarter.
We are three points short in the
case of M1, 2-1/2 points or more short in the case of M2, and 2 points
short in the case of M3.
I'm surprised that policy didn't flex more
toward an easier money market stance than it did over this period.
So, far from wondering why there wasn't a conference call to see
whether we should go that far, I'm wondering why there wasn't a
conference call to see if we should have gone further in this period
than we did.
As I said, there's nothing wrong with these targets, but
the trouble is that our most recent record is that we don't meet the
It may be that we will meet them readily or it may be that
targets.
we won't meet them readily in the quarter to come, since we have just
received this news about M1 perhaps falling even further short.
MR. AXILROD.
on Wednesday--

Please remember this is Tuesday and borrowing

MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. That's why you're proposing
Wednesday meetings, which is a very good reason for Wednesday
meetings. But I am remembering that it looks as if we are going to
have a shortfall [in M1] and it might carry through into M2 also; I
don't know. I've been a little unhappy about an initial borrowing
level as high as $750 million and it strengthens my view that we ought
to cut it to $650 million to start with.
I see nothing wrong with a
10 percent funds rate, although I guess I would have to agree that if
it goes significantly below 10 percent for a period of time, that
signals something new and I would want to talk about it before it got
below 10 percent.
But if reducing the initial borrowing number to
$650 million happened to give us [a funds rate] moving down toward 10
percent, I wouldn't be at all concerned about it.
Maybe that's the
problem we're going to have, Mr. Chairman:
that we all will choose
alternative B but we all will have different ideas as to where [that
may lead].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Looking at the GNP
I'm a bit more optimistic than some of the comments that I have heard.
I think the third quarter may very well wind up stronger than the 2.7
percent that the staff has projected and that the fourth quarter, and
indeed most of 1985, will be a little stronger as well. Also, I think
the money supply is about where we want it, notwithstanding some of
the recent weakness. There, too, I think we will have a bit of a
So, the policy consideration
rebound, as suggested by the Bluebook.
that flows from those hypotheses would indicate to me that a status
quo policy is appropriate, and for that reason I would opt for
alternative B with a borrowing level at $750 million. I think it
would be appropriate for consultation to occur if the fed funds rate
were to drop below 10 percent.
I have some sympathy with the remarks
that were made earlier about the range of the fed funds rate.
I
really don't know what 8 percent means except for public relations
purposes, but it doesn't seem to me to be very relevant in this
environment.
If the dollar were to surge again, I would assume that
that would cause a different policy direction, and again perhaps a
consultation would be appropriate.

-28-

10/2/84

Mr. Chairman, the question that I raised earlier about the
dollar in terms of any significant deviation upward or downward really
I have a concern
went beyond consideration of policy at this meeting.
that we're all expecting at some point some decline in the dollar--and
hopefully it would not be a precipitous decline--but nobody really
knows and nobody knows when it's going to come down. I suppose we
could say we'll have a winner one day--that it probably is going to
Is anyone looking at what our
come down. The question in my mind is:
response should be if there is a precipitous decline or do we deal
Maybe some planning is going on that
with this on an ad hoc basis?
I'm unaware of, but I raise the question of whether there is a
contingency plan and, if not, should we be looking at some kind of
contingency plan.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you specify the conditions that
you are imagining, I will develop a contingency plan.
MR. FORRESTAL.

I don't know what the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORRESTAL.
SPEAKER(?).

Neither do I.

That's the problem.

[Unintelligible.]

The Secretary of the Treasury takes care of it.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, two things occur to me:
intervention and one is a change in policy.

One is

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the conditions would be.
I don't know whether it will be
I suspect it will go down some day.
I suspect when it comes down it will come
in 1984, 1985, or 1986.
down precipitously. You tell me whether the economy is vigorously
expanding at that point or whether it's weak and what the inflation
rate is then and what the budgetary situation is and I would be glad
to develop a contingency plan. But I named three variables, none of
which I know about at this point, and all of which would affect my
contingency plan.
MR. FORRESTAL.
out various scenarios.

Well, I guess if I were doing it,

I would lay

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I invite anybody who wants to engage
Mr. Black.
in that exercise to engage in it.
MR. BLACK. Being more confused than usual about the economic
outlook, which is a state I imagine most people around this table find
[themselves in], it's hard to contemplate but I didn't say very much
[Unintelligible] Boehne,
during the first part of the meeting.
Partee, and Gramley axis, for lack of a better term. But I think a
point that Henry made does deserve stressing and that is that if we
are fortunate enough to get the 4-3/4 percent inflation rate that the
staff is projecting for next year, that would look good only in
relation to the late 1970s and early 1980s; in any other time that
would have been considered a major economic problem. So, in
formulating our short-term objectives, I think we need to keep that
longer-term objective in mind and try to hit our targets for what
If we could
would be the 18th month in a row right on the button.
come out near the midpoint of the target, I think we would do

10/2/84

-29-

something that would be very beneficial from the standpoint of the
whole economy.
Like Chuck, I would go with all
To get to the bottom line:
Unlike Chuck, though, with
the provisions and specifications of "B."
M1 growth picking up in September albeit not as much as I thought,
given [the report] this morning that it's apparently somewhat more
elastic with respect to interest rates than we thought earlier, I
think it's unlikely that we've seen the full response to this decline
in the fed funds rate that we had earlier.
So, I would be inclined to
let it sit there for a while or maybe move it down a tad at most and
then wait and see what happens.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

$750 million on
MR. GRAMLEY. I would buy the specs of "B":
borrowing, 6 percent for M1, and leave the fed funds rate range where
I would agree
it is.
Basically, I want to try to stay where we are.
with Chuck that what we have done couldn't be considered aggressive
easing, but I think we have eased significantly. The principal
concern on my mind is that if I'm right and the staff is right on the
outlook, the greatest danger at this point is that we might
inadvertently ease too much, which would then give rise to the need
for higher interest rates later. In this connection, it seems to me
that none of us knows for sure whether or not this pause, if it is a
pause, is going to continue through October or through the first part
of November or exactly how long. That may mean that we're going to be
looking at some rather weak money numbers for a while and I don't
think we ought to panic. We ought to move gingerly toward a lower
level of adjustment borrowing, if that's necessary.
I would be quite
reluctant, for example, to see us move down to $500 million, given
that we've moved to $750 million within the past few weeks.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree pretty much with what
Pres Martin said.
It seems to me that all of the recent developments
point to a need to ease monetary conditions somewhat--the behavior of
the aggregates, the level of the exchange rate, the level of the
dollar, and the outlook for inflation. Hardly anyone expects an
inflation rate next year above 5 percent.
The consensus outlook among
We ourselves
economists, as I read it, is between 4 and 5 percent.
So, from almost everybody's
revised our inflation forecast down.
point of view, the outlook for inflation is improving and is much
better than it was just a month or so ago.
If you add to that the
condition of the thrifts, I think this is a time when we could
reasonably hope for a somewhat lower level of interest rates.
I think
the case is as strong as it has been in recent years for some easing.
Call it a probing easing if you like, but I think we ought to try to
ease some.
Now, the good thing about the present combination of
circumstances is--at least it seems so to me--that we can do it with
very little risk. If the economy surges in the fourth quarter or
early next year--we expect it will not, but if it does--we are in a
very good position to reverse without any damage to the economy to
So, it seems to me that we can at this time think very much
speak of.
I would go for a
in terms of reducing the reserve pressures somewhat.
position somewhere between alternatives A and B, although Governor
Partee's specifications for alternative B are very close to what I

10/2/84

-30-

would be willing to go along with. We could call it "B" with Governor
Partee's specifications. But I would like to see a level of borrowing
around $600 million and I'd leave the funds rate range pretty much
where it is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in my view, it's a little
premature to try to do any further easing right now. The status quo
has a lot of appeal to me. Therefore, alternative B as specified in
the Bluebook, with a $750 million dollar borrowing assumption, would
be very acceptable to me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I would go along with the specifications of
alternative B, including an initial borrowing level of $750 million.
However, it seems to me what is really crucial in this decision is how
we--how you, Mr. Chairman--respond to incoming information over the
next several weeks.
I would respond more quickly to a continuation of
weak aggregates and a weaker economy than I would the other way
So, if we got surprised with stronger aggregate growth or a
around.
stronger economy, it would take more evidence to respond than it would
if they continue to be on the weak side, just simply because of the
accumulation of information that has come in on the weak side. With
this kind of approach, we are more likely to end up a month from now
with lower rates than we have now, but I think it would depend on
incoming information as we proceed through the period, much as has
occurred during the last 6 or 7 weeks.
MR. PARTEE. Would you change "would" to "might" to have an
asymmetrical directive?
MR. BOEHNE.
Well, I suppose that is more literally what I'm
I could live with a symmetrical directive as long as we had a
saying.
slightly asymmetrical interpretation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I would take the specifications of "B" as is,
That view is partly conditioned on my
with borrowing at $750 million.
view of the economy and partly conditioned on my thought that the
trajectory we are facing going into 1985 with money growth is
important.
It's also based on a belief that if incoming developments
did warrant some further easing, we could get a pretty quick response
in the real economy. On that I happen to agree with Frank Morris.
But it's also based on not very scientific observations that suggest
that the law of averages with regard to the money supply is now
We have gotten surprised on the down side for
working against us.
several months running and I have this fear that one of these months,
for no necessarily obvious reason, we could have a big surprise on the
And, in that kind of circumstance, I think there is a very
up side.
great risk of interest rates moving down much too fast--the risk of
I'd hate like the devil to find ourselves in a
the whipsaw effect.
position later this year or early next year, for whatever reasons--the
economy, money supply, the exchange rate--where we had to reverse
quickly.
Indeed, I would argue that that might be more damaging to
the thrifts than staying where we are in the intervening weeks and

-31-

10/2/84

months.
So, I do see a real risk of a whipsaw effect that could be
very damaging if we get too far out in front of this thing.
I'd like to think that there was something that could be done
with open market operations to facilitate a soft landing of the
dollar, but I guess I don't.
I do have an open mind as to what kind
of contingent language, symmetrical or otherwise, might be in the
directive that would permit some further reduction in the borrowing
level if the economy and so forth warranted it.
But I would be very
much on the side of a gingerly response rather than any very
aggressive probing. I would draw that distinction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I would go with Alternative B. I'm
puzzled by the behavior of the aggregates.
There has been more than
the usual variation in very short-run velocity. I know that short-run
velocity doesn't mean anything, but it is puzzling to observe the ups
So, the specifications seem all right
and downs over the first half.
On the
to me and borrowing of $750 million seems all right to me.
I recognize that
funds rate, I would like to put a lower limit on it.
For
doing this in the public record might have adverse repercussions.
instance, it might affect interest rate expectations adversely.
So,
perhaps we could have an understanding that we would have a telephone
As for symmetry, I would prefer to stay symmetrical.
conference.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Miss Seger.

I'm leaning toward the A alternative, with my
MS. SEGER.
first reason being the performance of the monetary aggregates in the
third quarter. When I look at what the various alternatives are
expected to produce in the way of monetary growth in the fourth
quarter and for the 12 months in 1984, it looks as if even with
alternative A the results would be within the longer-run targets with
the exception of M3, which would be just outside by a very small
amount. Also, as I mentioned earlier, the economy is definitely
I don't believe we are heading straight for a recession but
slowing.
I think there has been a significant slowing. I happen to agree that
it's going to continue to be on the moderate side of the spectrum and
that would suggest that some easing, as in alternative A, is
appropriate. To repeat what a number of people have mentioned, the
strong dollar is a consideration here and I hope that we can do
something to maybe at least stop its strong advance.
Finally, I repeat my continuing concern about the thrifts and
the health of the financial system in general. When I look at where
the fed funds rate would likely go based on alternative A, as I read
the statement here, it looks as if it would go somewhere between
10-1/4 and 10-1/2 percent; and I don't see that as a precipitous drop
in interest rates.
Maybe it's my bias, having seen a lot of
volatility in interest rates, but from where the fed funds rate is now
I would say that's on the modest side.
Also, I am thinking of the
signals that we sent to money market participants this summer when
many of them assumed that the Fed had in fact tightened. I don't
[That was] the
remember sitting here and voting for tightening.
conclusion that many of them drew from asymmetrical language.
Consequently, I think we got an upward movement in the fed funds rate
that in fact exceeded what we were talking about here at the time--at

-32-

10/2/84

Having said all that, I
least what I thought we were hoping for.
would prefer to go with some easing and in general what is shown here
in alternative A.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS.
I would prefer that we use alternative B but
make certain that we do everything possible to accomplish the M1
growth projected for the fourth quarter.
I think the recent
experience has demonstrated that when we have too many targets we can
get inconsistencies in borrowing and interest rates and money and it
probably is too big a pot.
I would concentrate on money and if that
caused us to lower the borrowing level or lower interest rates in
order to accomplish that, I would be in favor of that.
It seems to me
that we have a broadly based economic expansion that has reached a
high level and is turning a little sluggish but still doing all right.
Interest rates have come down
Price [increases] have slowed down.
significantly.
And we're dealing here with lags. What we have at the
moment reflects the past monetary growth and what we do now will
And contrary to what Emmett mentioned, my
affect the future.
observation is that people at the Conference Board, Chase, DRI,
Morgan, and Citicorp, all are looking for 4-1/2 to 6 percent inflation
next year in the projections that I see. And that's the range that I
see also.
We're right in the middle of the ranges on the money supply
and I think we ought to try to stay right there.
MR. RICE. The Association of Business Economists, an
organization of 200 people, is looking for an inflation rate somewhere
between 4 and 5 percent.
I also noticed yesterday that our shadows
expect an inflation rate between 3 and 4 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little dangerous that they said
they were content with policy!
MR. GRAMLEY. They also said that underlying policy is
consistent with 6 to 7 percent inflation and that unless we bring
money down, we might get worse results.
MR. PARTEE.
And they were talking about 10 percent
funds rate] by the end of this year, weren't they?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
we have done this year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[on the

I also heard that they approved what

That's what it said in the paper.

Mr.

Griffith.
MR. GRIFFITH. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District supports
the specifications of "B" and very much what Ted just said and what
Bob Boykin said. We think it's premature to make any change right
And the point
now. We don't [know] exactly where the stop point is.
that if
that Jerry Corrigan made our staff thinks is very important:
[rates] were to go down too much too quickly, we could find ourselves
starting off 1985 with the whipsaw effect. And for that reason we
feel very strongly about the specifications of "B" as written.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

10/2/84

-33-

MR. KEEHN. For reasons that have been well stated, I think
alternative B would be the most desirable alternative at this point.
Clearly, there has been a moderation in the rate of economic growth.
I think there is a disagreement around the table as to whether or not
we are headed toward a more negative environment or indeed just down
to a more sustainable rate of growth. But it does seem to me that
from a monetary policy point of view, things are lined up awfully well
at this point and the fundamentals are really right and that it would
be premature to be making any kind of significant change. We are in a
period where we would want to watch it pretty carefully but,
fortunately, we have another meeting coming up in a fairly brief
period of time.
As a consequence, at this meeting alternative B seems
to me to be the most appropriate alternative with borrowing of, say,
$750 million, but I'd have a high element of flexibility on that
borrowing. And I would attempt very hard to achieve a growth rate of
M1 in the 6 percent area.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I support alternative B and I share very strongly
the concerns that Jerry expressed and that were expressed by some
other people around the table. Maybe I will just state it in a
I would not like to give the market the wrong
slightly different way.
Now, if I only knew
signal through borrowing and the fed funds rate.
what the wrong signal was--.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Exactly.

We could all share that.

MS. HORN. But, since I don't, moving slowly seems to me the
best approach. And I would support "B."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you have identified the
right question. There is clearly a strong consensus for "B" with a
That is not surprising when we are talking
couple of exceptions.
about numbers for the money supply, which look nice. Most people have
That sounds right
suggested not changing the fed funds rate [range].
to me too; I don't see how we can raise the lower limit without
getting peculiar interpretations. I thought we had a very full
discussion at the last meeting of what to do in terms of contingencies
and I must say I don't ever remember being in a position [during an
intermeeting period] when every indicator that I looked at appeared to
be in the same direction and neatly fit the directive for moving down.
Whether I looked at M1, M2, M3, reserves, the exchange rate, the
economy--what else have I left out here?
MR. PARTEE.

Prices.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Prices--except for that last consumer
price index number. That was the only fly in the ointment. But the
producer price index and everything else seemed to fit exactly in a
contingency that we considered and discussed at some length at the
meeting as to how we would react under those circumstances. The one
thing that was really surprising and added a little edge to the way we
operated was the exchange rate. One could have argued that we should
have been a little more aggressive in our monetary policy [response].
At least that's my thinking. In any event, that's behind us.

-34-

10/2/84

We seem to have votes for "B," which I interpret as including
both the funds rate range and the aggregates. There are some
differences of opinion on how that is to be dealt with.
I would
remind you of what Si Keehn just said.
We meet again in 5 weeks; it's
I didn't hear anybody talking
a relatively short period of time.
Some people were talking about a
about a higher borrowings number.
lower one and a number of people were talking explicitly or implicitly
about not being too slow to move lower, if the evidence suggests that.
Someplace in this area we ought to be able to reach some kind of
I don't like the directive as Mr. Sternlight
consensus operationally.
It starts out by saying policy
and Mr. Axilrod wrote it, I must say.
I'll be more correct in my words; it says the
is unchanged.
"implementation of policy has been unchanged" when it obviously was
changed in the last month.
If we were to read all of our directives
in succession, they would never say anything was changed, although in
fact they were changed.
MR. PARTEE.

That's traditional.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I recall we had an argument about
But it seems to me that the first sentence ought to
this once before.
acknowledge that we have somewhat less pressure on reserves than we
did at the time of the last meeting [when we adopted a directive] that
said no change unless something happens.
Well, something happened.
That's a more or less technical point.
The real question is what we
do thereafter.
I certainly share the view that some have expressed
that if things continue coming in on the low side and/or the exchange
rate continues very strong, we shouldn't be very reluctant to ease
further in the kind of range that has been discussed here.
I, myself,
I
am somewhat indifferent as to whether or not we do that right now.
don't think it is necessary [to take action now].
We have a very
peculiar technical situation now where the funds rate is very high-and borrowings have been very high just in the last few days--relative
The
to what one would think it would be with this borrowing level.
actual borrowing level we're going to publish is going to be way above
our target.
It's going to confuse people. And we are looking toward
a great excess of reserves later in the week that may or may not be
reflected very promptly in the funds rate. How we will handle that I
don't know, but we are well above any borrowing number--about twice-that anybody has been talking about for the first week of this twoweek period. And getting it down to any of these borrowing numbers in
the course of this week is inconceivable.
It would have to go to zero
right away. So, during this period, we're going to have a much higher
level of borrowing than any of these numbers we are talking about.
Whether there was anything that could have been done about that, I
don't know, but it's too late now. We are going to start off the
first week of this five-week period with a very high level of
borrowing relative to what we're presumably aiming at, which may mean
that the funds rate temporarily will go quite low later in the week.
In that case we obviously will be selling--not necessarily this week,
but later in the two-week averaging period.
MR. PARTEE.

Is this the first week of a two-week period?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, this is the first week of the twoweek period.
Just as a guess, the funds rate isn't going to decline
all that precipitously later in this calendar week but the banks may
have such an accumulation of excess reserves by the early part of next

-35-

10/2/84

week that it may plunge. And they will be even further confused by
I have my doubts about these two-week
what we're trying to do.
averaging periods the more experience we have with that; the banks
don't seem to have a very good idea of where the funds rate should be
and it moves all over the lot.
MR. GRAMLEY.
accounting.

Maybe we should go back to lagged reserve

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how much that affects it.
It
may be that the contemporaneous reserve accounting makes them so much
more uncertain about their reserve positions that it contributes to
It may be a combination of the two.
it.
MR. PARTEE.

[Unintelligible]

uncertainty.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, in substance I will attempt
to interpret what people are saying or some mean of what people are
saying. We start where we are, or close to where we are, and are
pretty prompt to move lower if the money supply weakness is further
confirmed, if the dollar is strong, and if economic weakness is
relatively further confirmed. All these signals would have to be
pretty strong to carry us to borrowing as low as $500 million, I
think, but not so strong to carry us down to $650 million or $600
million. The signals would have to be clear, but not extreme.
Before
I talk about language, how does that sound?
MR. GRAMLEY. I for one would repeat my own concern about
moving too far too fast because I don't think we know when the economy
is going to start picking up again.
I thought I heard a fair number
There were a number of
of people share that concern; maybe not.
people who were worried, as I am, about the possibility that if
interest rates come down too much and if the economy then recovers
rates would go bouncing back up again. And that's not a desirable
development, in my judgment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we want to examine is how much
I would remind you, we now have a borrowing
is too much too fast.
level that is down by $250 million, presumably, in terms of the
previous target, with the fed funds rate as of the last few days down
practically not at all.
A lot of other things are going on.
I don't
know what you're thinking of.
Putting it in terms of interest rates
is easier to describe.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
rate at this point.
MR. PARTEE.

I don't have in my mind a 10 percent funds

I don't think we are talking about very much,

Lyle.
MR. GRAMLEY. If the funds rate were to get down into the
10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent range, I wouldn't be acutely uncomfortable.
If it gets down to 10 percent, having been up to 11-1/2 percent only a
few weeks ago, that just seems to me to be too big a move.

-36-

10/2/84

MR. PARTEE.
considerable degree.

But the 11-1/2 percent was an aberration to a

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, yes, except it stayed up in that 11-1/4
to 11-1/2 percent range for quite some time.
To go down more than a
full percentage point in a matter of 6 to 8 weeks--.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, nobody knows.
And we get daily
fluctuations in the numbers; we already have. But to give you the
state of my mind:
I'm not thinking of a 10 percent funds rate at this
point as a likely outcome without a good deal more weakness than what
we've already seen.
MR. CORRIGAN. There is one thing I'm very uncomfortable
about. As you stated, when you start out at $750 million, you're
willing to go to $650 million and if the funds rate comes down a
little more in the circumstance that you described, I think that's
probably all right. My hunch is that, absent this precautionary
premium or whatever we want to call it, the funds rate probably would
move down by itself in the fourth quarter in the context in which we
had money growth around 6 percent and borrowings around $750 million.
But my real concern is the other contingency:
that events could very
well precipitate an increase in that precautionary premium. Then, we
would end up with a situation in which at any borrowing level, the
federal funds rate would tend to be higher. And then we would be left
with a Catch-22 situation where money growth, wherever it may be,
could be in some structural sense out of line with what is observed in
the federal funds market and what is observed with the level of
borrowing.
And I just don't know what to do about that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what contingency you're
talking about. There could be a million of them. Are you saying the
implication, if the money supply should be high, is that-MR. CORRIGAN. Now, that would be the worst.
I'm saying that
the contingency I'm concerned about would be if this precautionary
atmosphere that we see in the way banks are managing their money is
intensified.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that, but if that gives a
tight [funds] market and money supply growth is relatively low,
presumably we would ease the pressures on reserve positions.
That's
fairly easy.
MR. CORRIGAN.
Yes, but my concern is that we might get that
in a context in which money growth is strong.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
situation.
MR. CORRIGAN.

Well, then you've got a different

Then we have a real problem.

MR. PARTEE. But we have these guides in the directive for
the money supply growth, if it is strong.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but he's saying he doesn't like that,
presumably, when something looks contrary or peculiar.
If we had
rising interest rates and high money supply growth, then I think we

-37-

10/2/84

would have to rethink it.
directive.

I don't know how you write that in the

You can't cover every eventuality.

MR. MARTIN.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have to rethink it.
MR. CORRIGAN.
confronted with that.

I think that is clearly one where we'd

I think there's a good chance we may be

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
do about it.

Well, we may;

I don't know what we would

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to be careful not to go back
and overemphasize the importance of short-run money supply numbers.
They may not be telling us anything.
MR. PARTEE.

Or they might be telling us something.

MR. MARTIN.

When we've had them for four months!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, normally, we look at longer
periods, and in longer periods we seem to be all right. I understand
that a lot of the recent economic indicators are somewhat weaker, but
as long as we're doing so well in the long run [with respect to] the
annual money targets why should we be that concerned about correcting
the short run?
MR. MARTIN.

[Is]

the short run 3 to 4 months?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I don't know what that lag is.

MR. PARTEE. I agree with you, Tony, but I do think that as
We had the
the evidence accumulates we have to begin to recognize it.
weak July and then the staff said that August would snap back. Then
August was low and they said that September would be good. Now
September seems to be revising down, and in this case they don't seem
to have much hope that October is going to be strong. Maybe, to
complete the whole circle, October will be very strong. Right now it
So, we're starting to develop [a pattern of]
doesn't seem to look it.
some months.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If October is going to be strong, it's
going to have to show up, I suspect, in the figure for October 8th,
which we won't have for a while. And, if it doesn't show up then,
we'll be in trouble in October because we'll have a couple of weeks in
October below the September average.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, the $8 billion increase that's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, they usually come in the first or
If it doesn't come
second week in the month; that's why I say that.
by October 8th, I think we're unlikely to get an increase like that.
MR. PARTEE. So that becomes four months of low growth. Four
months is not as long as a year, but it's approaching six months and

-38-

10/2/84

one starts to take it into account a little.
I look at it.

At least that's the way

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As in September, if we had a great big
increase that first full week in October, it wouldn't mean much; it
might be necessary to put October at 6 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Which would be all right.

Which is what happened in September.

Coming back to the question that you
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
posed, I would agree with the basic strategy as you formulated it in
terms of continuing where we are on the borrowing level, the
alternative B numbers, and using your discretion that if everything
comes in weak to go down to $600 or $650 million [on borrowing].
But
it seems to me that a large number of us are concerned too about the
perception as well as the substance of a large drop in interest rates
engineered by the Fed in the next critical 5 to 6 weeks.
And it seems
to me that, under those circumstances, there would have to be a strong
enough case for you to call a Committee consultation if you want to go
below $600 million. If it's something in that area, that seems to me
an appropriate way of touching different bases.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any great problem with that,
but my only connection with all the various political or semipolitical sensitivities that have been mentioned is that, just
speaking personally, I'm not very impressed with any of them I must
say.
I don't necessarily agree with the Vice Chairman's fiscal policy
strategy.
I'm not sure we'd know how to play that one.
I'd just play
it straight.
And, in connection with the next few weeks, I'd play it
straight too.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Yes, if there's an overwhelming case

for-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, you say overwhelming--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Or clear case.

A reasonably clear case.

That's all I'm

saying.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets don't have as pessimistic
a view as I think you and Pres Martin and maybe Emmett have been
reflecting today.
MR. RICE.

I don't have a pessimistic view.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I misunderstood you.
I think the
market view is quite clearly one that this is a temporary weakness-this 3-1/2 percent that we see on the third-quarter flash [GNP report]
--and that the fourth quarter will continue with moderate strength.
And I think it's important that we have a clear case before we're
perceived as doing some very substantial easing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a matter of degree. But I
think it can be overemphasized.
The market may be wrong and then

-39-

10/2/84

The market
we're going to look like damn fools, and pretty quickly.
But I think it's
couldn't understand that we were easing earlier.
fully accepted and it's very hard to [find] fault with it, I think, in
their view.
I don't get any sense of complaint about it or wondering
about it at this stage, although they didn't quite anticipate it.
There was a kind of disbelief for some weeks.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I think you did the right thing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is how the economy and the
And none of us knows that.
dollar and all the rest will behave.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think you did the right thing, but
For a man who's as skeptical as you are
I guess I'm surprised also.
and most of us are about what the economic indicators are telling us
about the real economy, don't you think it is dangerous to try to
After all, we only
fine-tune an interest rate response so quickly?
began to see these weaker economic indicators that I'm talking about
in the last few weeks.
I think your judgment has been vindicated, but
we only began to see a few weeks ago these indicators showing more
weakness.
And they could possibly have been wrong.
It wasn't just the numbers on the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think they began showing up immediately after the last meeting. We
had an extreme movement in the dollar and continued weakness in the
monetary aggregates.
MR. PARTEE.

There were shortfalls in all of them.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but since we ignored the
strength of the dollar previously in domestic monetary policy, I guess
I don't quite understand why this last speculative bubble had that
much more impact on this situation. Although I agree with the
direction of it, the-In terms of my
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was pretty extreme.
foreign colleagues, outrage is a little strong, but [their reaction
verged] on outrage that we didn't pay more attention to it.
I know. But then I heard very
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
critical comments from the key actors on the European side--central
bankers I'm talking about--that our intervention was so feeble that it
didn't really mean anything.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with that, but there was
very little support for intervention without monetary policy action on
the part of the United States.
Well, I think we are in an asymmetrical position; that's
[The issue is] whether or not we put it
where my gut tells me we are.
If the economy suddenly rebounded
I would.
down in the directive.
and the money supply began running significantly higher than
alternative B, I would question what we do, particularly in the
I can imagine
context of the dollar not strengthening further.
circumstances in which one might want to tighten, but I'd be pretty
hard pressed to imagine what those circumstances would be in the next
It does not strain my credulity at all to think that we
five weeks.
might want to go at least modestly in the other direction in the next

-40-

10/2/84

five weeks.
And I would think that the directive ought to reflect
that.
But just how it reflects that is-MR. PARTEE.
"might" and "would."

Well, as I suggested, we could just change the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.
the sentence.

Yes, I know.

We could do that.

Or we could change the order of the two parts of

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That, I think, is the minimum that one
ought to do.
Mr. Axilrod could distribute this [draft] that really is
asymmetrical, if you're interested in looking at it.
It would start
out by saying "In the implementation of policy in the short run the
Committee seeks to maintain the lesser degree of restraint on reserve
positions sought in recent weeks."
That's more or less technical; it
acknowledges that we did something.
Then, we'd put in the sentence
with basically the alternative B [specifications].
It would go on to
say that a somewhat or slightly further lessening of restraint on
reserve positions would be acceptable in the light of significantly
slower growth in the monetary aggregates, particularly in the context
of continued moderation in economic activity and inflationary
pressures. Then we'd go on with the standard language.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought it would be "only" in the
context.
That implies that even without any weakening in the real
economy there would be even less restraint just because of weakness in
the monetary aggregates--that that alone would trigger it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It says "particularly in the context of."

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Whereas the one we had before that

said-MR. PARTEE.

It said "only."

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

--"only in."

MR. MARTIN.
Continued moderation in economic activity and
inflationary pressures.
MR. GRAMLEY. You're dropping out the tightening
[alternative] altogether.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In this version. We can put it back in,
but I'd put it in another sentence--unless you want to use something
like "particularly."
Otherwise, we could just drop the next sentence.
MR. PARTEE.
last phrase.

Yes, or leave the next sentence and drop the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The one thing that bothers me about this
is that there is then no mention, except in another paragraph, of
credit market conditions and the exchange rate. That is obscurely in
That could be worked in
there now with financial market conditions.
somehow, I suppose.
Let's put a comma, and then "taking account of
financial market conditions and the rate of credit growth."

10/2/84

-41-

MR. GUFFEY. Doesn't that appear in the sentence immediately
above the start of the operating paragraph?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does, but it doesn't get much attention
there.
It's not in the operative part of the directive.
I don't have
it in front of me, but you are right that there is a-MR. PARTEE. My point, Paul, was that we could drop that
whole phrase starting with "particularly" and instead make it a phrase
such as "evaluated in relation not only to indicators of the strength
of..." and just continue right on. Now, that makes it a one-sided
directive, but I think it would solve Tony's problem that we would
only look at easing in the context of weak money numbers and the
confirming business and inflationary and credit situations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's a mistake not to have
something on both sides. We can achieve the purpose you want by
simply revising the existing sentence and putting the easier restraint
first and then leaving the rest of the directive exactly as it is.
So, it would read:
"Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the context of significantly slower growth of the
aggregates or somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable in the
It
event of more substantial growth. In either case..." and so on.
just seems to me that, with a couple of months of weakness in economic
activity, to send a signal out that we have completely ruled out of
our thinking any possibility that we would react to events on the
other side is wrong. It's not the way to do things.
MR. BOEHNE.
I'd like to piggyback on that.
I think an
asymmetrical directive, or at least a tilt in that direction, makes
sense. But I think the image that this directive will create, in
contrast to the last directive, is a stronger change than I would
think the Committee would want to convey. After all, the last
directive, which was symmetrical, enabled a rather significant drop in
the borrowings, which I happen to think was a wise thing to do. But I
just wonder if one has to move that far in this directive.
Some tilt
or some small signal, yes; but this just seems to me to highlight it
and it's awfully strong for my taste.
MR. WALLICH. I think it would indicate a real policy shift
if we dropped the up side of the symmetry.
MR. GUFFEY.

I would agree.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

And I would agree, obviously.

MR. CORRIGAN. In the context of what I thought you were
saying before, Mr. Chairman, in terms of borrowings that could get
down to, say, $600 to $650 million and a federal funds rate that could
get down to 10 percent or 10-1/2 percent or something like that, I
think that contingency could be covered easily in a directive that
Again, I must say that the danger that
tilts rather than falls.
If we
really bothers me is this whipsaw phenomenon I spoke of before.
went through a period where we had, say, a 150 basis points swing up
and down in short-term interest rates in a period of three months or
so, I think that would be very, very damaging to the real economy and
for the thrifts, for the banks, and for everybody else.

10/2/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't see why, but that's--

MR. CORRIGAN. I would say the reason why is that if we start
to move in that direction in a context in which it's perceived that
there is a potential for a rather large move, the markets will respond
very aggressively. We'll get another surge of all this crazy activity
in the mortgage markets and then it will just get stopped dead in its
tracks if interest rates have to turn around.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree with Jerry completely.
The
more they see us responding quickly to short-run changes in the
monetary aggregates, the more people in the market are going to say
"Are we going to go back to the extreme swings that we had where rates
were running between 8 and 20 percent?".
I think we have to be
careful of that; we ought to be moving very gradually.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think you are assuming much more
controllability of the market than in fact we have.
MR. CORRIGAN.

I don't have any problem--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This great 1-1/2 percentage point
reduction in long-term rates took place without any change in our
borrowing assumption at all.
We reduced the borrowing by $250
million--this massive move that you talk about--and long-term rates
are practically where they were before we started moving borrowing
down. And how far down the federal funds rate is, I don't even know.
It depends upon whether you look at it on Friday or Monday or
Wednesday.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's because of special
factors that you talked about earlier.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it depends upon so many other factors
that thinking we can predict this with any assurance is a bit beyond
our capacity.
MR. CORRIGAN.
I don't have any trouble with the substance of
what I think you're saying.
I don't even have any trouble with the
suggestion that it would take some considerable set of circumstances
to envision a tightening move in the next five weeks.
But what I do
have trouble with is creating a perception that what we have in mind
is more than what I think you're saying.
Most people are saying-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're assuming conditions
that I'm not assuming on this.
MR. CORRIGAN.

I may be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this easing that you're talking about
takes place in the context of continuing quite sluggish business
numbers, a strong dollar, and low money growth.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, in those circumstances, if the borrowing
level goes down in this five-week period, or even early in the fiveweek period, to this $650 or $600 million--

10/2/84

-43-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Earlier you said you had no objection
to making it double-barrelled as long as it's only tilted, but I
assume that you don't object to putting back in some contingency
language on the other side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's too formalistic, I think we're
just doing a very formalistic thing and not being very enlightening.
But I don't have any objection to dealing with that.
MR. BOEHNE. May I suggest that you keep the sentence that
you have there beginning with "A somewhat further lessening of
restraint" and drop that last sentence?
But in its place, we could
have a sentence that would go something like this:
"Some increase in
reserve restraint might possibly be appropriate in the context of
substantially greater growth in the monetary aggregates."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I have no objection to something like

that.
MR. WALLICH.

Other than "possibly."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
word "possibly" in there.
MR. GRAMLEY.
reverse the order?

Yes, I don't know whether you want the

Why not just take the existing sentence and

MR. GUFFEY.

Indeed.

That's a good suggestion.

MR. BOYKIN.

Yes, that's what I think.

MR. PARTEE. Well, if we want to tilt it, we could say "well
above" instead of "high growth."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a very minor thing, but I would
not just take this existing sentence and reverse the order because it
sounds so formalistic.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have changed nothing and people
are supposed to read great meaning into the changing of the order of a
sentence without one iota of change in the substance.
That sounds a
little too much. But if you put in an adjective or two, I don't mind
that if you prefer it.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

A moderate adjective?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This time I'm partly objecting because it
rather sounds to me like we're playing games instead of reflecting
anything substantive.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think perhaps you have a stronger
view from the down side of the economy than most of us have.
MR. PARTEE.
If you really want to change the structure, I
would go back to my proposal that we use your first sentence and then
say "evaluated in relation not only" and so forth. Then we could have

-44-

10/2/84

another sentence that says "Conversely, if the monetary aggregates are
strong and there is associated strength showing in the economy"-MR. CORRIGAN.
MR. WALLICH.
right direction.

I could easily support that.
"Conversely" strikes me as balancing it in the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It sounds a little less formalistic to me
than just reversing [the order].
MR. PARTEE.
Well, it is.
I think, but not a great deal.

It really does change it somewhat,

MR. GRAMLEY. But wouldn't you want to put that sentence
before the "in any event" sentence?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, he's combining those two sentences.

No, I'm combining them and dropping that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way he would have it read is "A
somewhat further lessening of restraint on reserve positions would be
acceptable in the event of significantly slower growth in the monetary
aggregates evaluated in relation not only to the indicated strength of
the business expansion and inflationary pressures, but also to
financial market conditions and the rate of credit growth."
That's a
rather cumbersome sentence, but it's all right.
"Conversely, greater
restraint might" or "would be acceptable."
MR. PARTEE.

"Might,"

I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Is "acceptable" the word? We'd say
"acceptable in the event of"--well, "significantly" is the obvious
word to put in here but we used "significantly" up above.
MR. PARTEE.
"Monetary growth well above the numbers
expected."
Is that what we call it?

growth."

MR. GRAMLEY.

"Well above these expectations."

MR. AXILROD.

"Growth substantially more rapid."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Is that-MR. PARTEE.

"Substantially more rapid monetary

That would be all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"And indications of"--we can't exactly say
a rebound.
"Indications of stronger"?
MR. PARTEE.

"New strength" or something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Economic growth and credit expansion."
[Unintelligible] Jack Kemp's concerns.
MR. PARTEE.
"Indications of stronger expansion in economic
and financial developments."

-45-

10/2/84

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Sounds great.

Real prose--poetry, in

fact.
MR. PARTEE.

Or

"stronger economic and credit market"--

I wrote
MR. AXILROD. Add "inflationary pressures."
"indications of significant strengthening in economic activity and
inflationary pressures."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think it's good to get the
[reference to] inflationary pressures in there--"of economic activity
and inflationary pressures."
MR. PARTEE.
this in five weeks.

It's hard to imagine we'll have evidence of all

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.

I think that's right.

More than fragmentary indications.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the rest of it?

Well, I know what I have now, and what's

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

The usual boiler.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The usual last two sentences, or just the
It goes directly to the last sentence.
last sentence.
MR. GRAMLEY. Sometime we ought to put out a directive which
says "Complete with the usual boiler plate"!
"In the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just read it:
implementation of policy in the short run, the Committee seeks to
maintain the lesser degree of restraint on reserve positions sought in
recent weeks. This action is expected to be consistent with growth in
M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of 6, 7-1/2, and 9 percent,
respectively, during the period from September to December. A
somewhat further lessening of restraint on reserve positions would be
acceptable in the event of significantly slower growth in the monetary
Why don't we take out this "not
aggregates, evaluated in relation--."
only" bit to simplify the sentence?
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

--"evaluated in relation to the strength
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of business expansion and inflationary pressures and financial market
Am I right?
conditions and the rate of credit growth."
MR. AXILROD.
market conditions"?

Did you want to put "financial and exchange

Put in
"Domestic and international."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"...domestic and international
everything but the kitchen sink!
financial market conditions, and the rate of credit growth.
Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable in the event of
substantially more rapid monetary growth and indications of
significant strengthening of economic activity and inflationary

10/2/84

-46-

pressures.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation" etc.
And we leave in 8 to 12 percent [for the funds rate range].
SPEAKER(?).

Sounds right.

MR. MARTIN.

Then we want 8.

MR. GRAMLEY. Would you read that significant strengthening
in economic activity [part]?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"...strengthening of economic

activity and

inflationary pressures."

percent.

MR. PARTEE.
That's right.
The current range is up to 12
That's just as well, isn't it, Steve?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If that is satisfactory, we will vote.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Corrigan
Governor Gramley
President Horn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes

Okay, I guess we are finished.
END OF MEETING

