Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 7, 1984

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, November 7, 1984, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Balles,1/ Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roberts, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Burns, J. Davis, Kohn, Lang, Lindsey,
Siegman, and Stern, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Left meeting before action to adopt domestic policy directive.

11/7/84

size of their reserves and figuring 10 percent on that and the troop
payments, they should be selling much more. That's really what their
principle is.
MR. CROSS. Well, they don't sell only on those celebrated
occasions when they have come in and hit the market, of course. They
do put some of this in over time.
For a long period of time they had
followed, in varying degrees, the practice of putting these amounts in
during periods when it seemed sensible to them or when they wanted to
do it.
They don't follow and have not followed, as far as I know, the
practice of consistently putting these amounts in the market on a
regular basis.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
If I remember correctly--Ted Truman
might know--when I was at the Treasury the amount of the two items
that Henry mentioned was $1 to $2 billion a year.
And we did not urge
them to follow a policy, Henry, of immediately selling it out as they
got it in, but they did try to follow an overall, longer-term policy
of averaging out that way.
MR. CROSS.
They've been doing this for many years and have
always done it in this way. The amounts I think are larger than-MR. TRUMAN.
It sticks in my mind that troop payments were
somewhat less than $100 million a month. That would be somewhat more
than $1 billion just on that score alone in a calendar year and then
they would have a couple of hundred million in income.
MR. CROSS. Troop costs certainly used to be at least that
much; that may have declined.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion?
Well, I take it
that there is a willingness to renegotiate all the swaps or to renew
them for another year. There is not much renegotiation involved.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do we need a formal vote?

I guess we don't, do we?

MR. CROSS.
I will assume the Committee agrees and will
proceed accordingly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll approve them when they are done.
have to ratify the transactions.
MR. MARTIN.

We

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Without objection.

Mr. Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Questions?

MR. WALLICH. On this foreign issue:
If the spread first
went down and then went back up to where it was at the time of the
issue, is there any justification for any bank to say that they would
have lost money had they gone in on that and that they were smart not
to go in on it?

11/7/84

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think some who went in on it felt
that it was worth something, just for the prestige or the advertising
One had that sense on the bids that came in, and I think that
factor.
some modest losses probably were taken in the course of doing that.
Certainly, one hears that the next time around the spread is not
likely to be as large as that 32 basis points--that maybe half that
would be justifiable. That was the feeling I was getting.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Japanese felt an obligation to
I think that was a significant factor that wouldn't
cooperate.
necessarily be there in the future to such a degree.
MR. GUFFEY.
I would like to inquire, Peter:
When did we
I must tell you
drop the borrowing level from $750 to $700 million?
as a preface that I was surprised. The first time I realized it was
from the Bluebook, which I thought was a mistake; I went back to the
daily wires and there was no indication that I could find that the
borrowing level had been dropped.
I am confident
MR. STERNLIGHT. Just a week ago, I believe.
I
it was mentioned. Well, I can't say I read the wire of the call.
know that it certainly was reviewed at the conference call.
If it wasn't in the wire, it should have been.
MR. AXILROD.
It must have been an oversight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. GUFFEY.

Last Thursday or Friday.

I think I went back over

[the wires of]

the last

week.
It was right after
MR. AXILROD.
week period. We ended up at $700 million
the average borrowing level and it seemed
It
million, given all that had happened.
If it wasn't, it
memorandum of the call.
MR. GUFFEY.

that first week of the tworight about that time for
sensible to make it $700
should have been in the
was certainly an oversight.

Well, I could be mistaken, but I don't think so.

I
It has been an interesting market.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
think that the range of short-term interest rates is predicated more
on a market anticipation of a fed funds rate closer to 9-1/2 percent
So,
than the 10 or 9-7/8 percent that it has been averaging lately.
there is a question--not that we're getting into that now--but
assuming there's some further easing, the question is whether markets
will assume that's the last; I doubt that they will. They'll probably
assume there will be a discount rate cut later on and the markets will
then take it even further and we may continue to get some lower rates
than the projections.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
transactions.
MR. MARTIN.

We have to ratify the

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Any other comments?

Without objection.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

11/7/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say the economy was expanding more
This is what the employment figures
rapidly in September and October.
That does not seem to be matched
for October show as I understand it.
by industrial production or by consumption necessarily.
MR. KICHLINE.
September.

We said more rapidly in October than in

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In employment.

MR. KICHLINE. That's true. The gains in employment in
October were rather spectacular; it's the highest increase in over a
It looks a little odd.
year. I think that's unsustainable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand the number.
interpret the unemployment claims figure?

How do you

MR. KICHLINE. To start out I mentioned conflicting signs,
Initial claims for unemployment
and that indeed is one of them.
insurance have been edging higher, including those for the week after
the labor market reports were taken. We are estimating, as I noted,
that industrial production was up about a quarter of a percent in
October and that's better than a 0.6 percent decline. But the October
level of production is still below what we saw in the summer. There
are many what I would view as conflicting indicators of what is
happening.
MR. PARTEE. Well, a lot of that increase in employment in
October was in nonmanufacturing.
MR. KICHLINE. The bulk of it.
I think industrial production
is related [more] to the manufacturing employment. But for some
reason, people are going out and hiring lots of new employees in
services and trades.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

To unload the imports and sell them!

To get them off the docks?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, that could be.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
I met yesterday with the chairman of the
I asked him about the October retail sales. He said
that their sales were lower than they expected and as a consequence
that their inventories are up about 5 percent from where they thought
He attributes it largely to the fact that October
they would be.
weather was unusually warm and that people just don't buy winter
He is expecting a very strong
clothing until the weather turns cold.
Christmas selling season. That, for whatever it's worth, is the
view.
MR. PARTEE.

He does recognize that he had a very soft

October?

factor.

MR. MORRIS.
Yes. But he thinks he knows why--the weather
It wasn't something that alarms him.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

11/7/84

I just want to underline some of the mixed
MR. MARTIN.
signals, Jim.
I note that the Michigan consumer confidence measure
was off a little in October. I don't put a big weight on that.
The
hours worked quantum always puzzles me a bit, but I notice the hours
The
worked were down in October according to the Labor Department.
Chairman has mentioned that initial claims for unemployment were up.
The purchasing agents survey is not a good quantitative measure--it
was revised three times ex post out of the [unintelligible] data--but
for whatever it's worth it shows reductions in new orders, delivery
speed, inventories, and payrolls, and less price increases.
I think
perhaps more important were the preliminary indications that the
third-quarter real GNP may be revised downward due to the merchandise
If that is 1.7, not 2.7 percent, it may require
trade deficit number.
a rethinking of some of the inventory changes.
It already has been
I don't know what a soft landing
revised down once from 3.6 percent.
is, but an 80 percent decline from the first half, when we had GNP
The
growth of 8.4 percent--I don't know how soft that landing is.
undercarriage of the vehicle may be slightly bent in that kind of
[scenario].
MR. PARTEE.

Well, it's still above the runway.

MR. MARTIN. It's above the runway but perhaps without any
wheels! At any rate, your comment with regard to oil prices, food
prices, and other indications of inflation out there in the future is
Imports are still soaring--I'm tying onto the Chairman's
reassuring.
comments as usual here--but those imports are having employment and
income effects in U.S. firms.
We know that.
It seems to me that
there is a risk of a growth recession in the first and second quarters
of next year.
I too have talked to retailers who feel they will get
through the holiday selling season well and then have very quiet first
and second quarters. And I see the risk of a growth recession, with
rising unemployment and very low real growth taking off from that 1.7
I saw one model's output that had 1.2 percent for the
or 1.5 percent.
third quarter, which I don't believe, but it begins to get your
attention, I think. The consumer comes into the first and second
quarters with all those new cars bought on credit and all those other
consumer durables and is paying the kinds of real interest rates one
pays today, and I don't know whether that adds up to a snapback or
I think that the risk is so high that we
not.
It doesn't to me.
If we get your [projected] 3.5
should be very concerned about it.
percent real [GNP] for the fourth quarter and run along at about 3 or
3-1/2 percent for 1985--given the margin of error, no disrespect
intended--it seems to me that again gets to be a precarious position
If we get one or two
to be in with a substantial downside risk.
exogenous factors in there when the economy is hovering around a 3
percent level, unemployment can get started up again. The foreign
So, I think
competitor is still cutting into those employment rolls.
the margin of error is substantial. I would hate to see the Congress
come back into this town, this font of all the wisdom in the universe,
We
facing a 1 percent real growth figure and rising unemployment.
would just get some dandy decisions in the fiscal area in that
circumstance. I think we are facing an increasing downside risk.
MR. PARTEE. Jim, the last time you talked some about the
probabilities. May I ask whether you have anything new to say about
That is, have you increased the probability of something around
that?
zero compared with six weeks ago or whenever we met last?

11/7/84

MR. KICHLINE. There is a probability of negative growth in
the fourth quarter of 19 percent.
MR. BLACK.

Are you rounding, or is that--?

MR. MARTIN.
and second quarters?

Jim, what about the probabilities in the first

MR. KICHLINE. This comes out of the econometric model
exercises we performed. The model said 19 percent for the fourth
quarter and 15 percent for the first quarter; then it drifts in the
range of 25 or 30 percent, let's say, in the latter part of 1985.
MR. BALLES.
MR. KICHLINE.

Have you checked it with

[Jimmy]

the Greek?

No.

MR. GRAMLEY. What is the probability of two consecutive
quarters of negative growth?
MR. KICHLINE.

Two consecutive quarters is very low--1 to 2

percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, Governor Martin said a good part of
what I had in mind except that I don't expect a growth recession in
I don't have any major argument with the
the first half of next year.
staff forecast. But I am more comfortable with the longer-term part
of the forecast than I am with the forecast for the current quarter.
As was pointed out in the briefing, the performance of the current
quarter is very sensitive to the increase in consumer expenditures; we
have to get a substantial increase--on the order of 5 percent plus in
this quarter--in order to get the projected growth for this quarter.
In addition, even if we get this substantial increase in consumption
expenditures, the stimulus to GNP depends on the distribution of these
consumer expenditures between imports and the rundown of inventory.
So, the net stimulus to real GNP may not be as strong as projected.
On the other hand, it may well work out that output does increase in
the range of 3-1/2 percent. My only point is that for this quarter we
should be prepared to see an increase in real GNP of significantly
less than 3-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

Perhaps in line with previous comments, I'm
MR. KEEHN.
beginning to sense what I think is quite a different tone in our area
I have suggested in the
than what I reported at the previous meeting.
past that the Middle West has not participated very fully in the
recovery and expansion, and that continues to be the case. But some
things may be developing that signal broader problems. The bad
The backlogs of orders are running
business has continued to be bad.
down. But those businesses that have done better than others are
One CEO that I talked with who works
beginning to feel the slowdown.
with what he calls pressure curves, which are some kind of regression
analysis on the rate of incoming orders, says those are beginning to
Specifically:
indicate to him that we are heading into a downturn.
The appliance business is noticeably weaker; heavy trucks, which were

11/7/84

very strong early in the year, are now turning down; and the truck
trailer business market was up because of a legislative change but is
clearly turning around and slowing down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KEEHN.
MR. PARTEE.

What business?

Truck trailer.
That means double trailers.

MR. KEEHN. There was a legislative change that provided for
double bottoms and that really ballooned the market.
That is coming
down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interrupt for a second.
I had
the impression that heavy trucks were doing well--that they had gone
down and then gone up.
MR. KEEHN. Orders booked for very heavy trucks, Class 8
trucks, are down substantially and their production is down. A large
retailer--which is frankly a euphemism for
MR. MARTIN.

Let's see if they told you the same thing they

told me!
MR. KEEHN. We had a meeting of [local] economists a week or
so ago and their representative, who had been quite optimistic about
the Christmas outlook, is now a lot less optimistic.
MR. MARTIN.

They did.

MR. KEEHN. They are expressing some doubts about the outlook
This suggests that while we thought the soft
for retail sales.
landing--or the reduction from the very high first and second
quarters--was a welcome thing, it may be something a bit more
I don't disagree
I'm beginning to wonder about that.
fundamental.
with the staff forecast, but it tends to be a little on the high side,
to me at least. The GNP numbers look high both for this quarter and
So,
for next year.
Housing starts and auto sales look a little high.
consistent with [the views of] Governor Rice and Governor Martin, I
think there is an increasing risk of low or perhaps even negative
growth rates.
I just can't let the moment go by without commenting that
conditions in the agricultural sector are continuing to deteriorate.
What has been a very difficult situation has only gotten worse with
The rains are now complicating the harvest
the passage of time.
season; commodity prices are down; meat prices are down; and land
[The latter] is particularly true
values are continuing to decline.
in Iowa where admittedly they have come down from pretty high levels,
but they are in a decline that's very significant. This is beginning
to back up even more with regard to nonperforming loans in the
agricultural banks. The banks keep saying that their problems are
manageable; nonetheless, these are the kinds of things that can turn
around pretty rapidly. Based on the calendar we are at a time of the
year when for the next few months things [should] only get better.
They ought to be better now than they are. And the fact that they are
bad would indicate that in the next few months things are going to get

11/7/84

worse. Agricultural equipment manufacturers are continuing to go
through just a very dismal period. The outlook is poor and they are
pulling down their production schedules very significantly. There is
plenty of tractor and combine equipment at the retail level, so
Our agricultural
production is going to be very weak well into 1985.
economist, who is a pretty conservative guy not given to extremes,
said that in his view we are facing the worst set of circumstances in
this area that he has known in his whole experience at the Bank. I
don't think that we are at a turning point here, but I would certainly
think that the odds have changed significantly and that the
probability of going into a period of lower rates of growth than we
thought in the past is increasing.
It is certainly higher than it was
at the past meeting or two.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
In my District if you talk to people who are
running companies, they still have fairly good expectations for 1985
Some doubts are beginning to creep in and I think
but are less sure.
we're in a period where expectations could change. The current
results are quite mixed. Manufacturing tends to be flatter.
In
retailing, I find that we talk to one retailer and things look good in
October and we talk to another retailer and things were pretty flat.
I do think, however,
So, the current indicators are rather mixed.
that if we continue to get these mixed current indicators, the longerIf you start out with really
term expectations are going to shift.
good feelings about 1985, I think uncertainty tends to undermine them.
So I think, as has been said around the table starting with Governor
Martin, that there has been a change.
I don't think it is a definite
turning point but it's a period of increasing doubts.
And if we don't
begin to see some pickup very soon, attitudes about 1985 will shift
significantly.
If you felt strongly a month ago that we were having a
If last
snapback, you have to be a lot less sure about that now.
month you were leaning toward [an expectation of] a growth recession,
you have to be leaning more in that direction. My own view is that
I'm fairly uncertain.
There is a high degree of uncertainly about
where things are going, but I think the risks have shifted toward a
slower economy than I, at least, would have thought a month ago.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I approach this with a
little different view from the other speakers this morning. That's
primarily, I suppose, because of where I live and work. To be sure,
economic activity in the Atlanta District did go through a period of
Generally
moderation in the summer but we have seen some pickup.
speaking, I think that economic activity is fairly healthy. Most of
the indicators show strength, although there are some weak areas. We
have heavy defense spending, particularly in the electronic and
aerospace industries; oil and gas [activity] is even picking up in the
Louisiana area; and the carpet industry, construction, and housing are
picking up.
In fact, housing surged by about 52 percent in the
Southeast in the month of September. Tourism continues to be good.
The weak spots are forest products and textiles and other exportrelated areas. Now, retail sales have been off even in our area; they
picked up in September and fell off again a little in October. All of
the retailers I speak to are experiencing downturns from their
projections; their sales are not up to plan. They attribute this, as

11/7/84

others have said, to the unusually warm weather in October. They are
a bit cautious about Christmas, although I think most of them are
fairly confident that they are going to have a good Christmas season.
Agriculture is a mixed bag because of a number of factors, including
drought followed by very heavy rain in early November.
Looking beyond the Southeast, which is perhaps not typical
[of the nation], I tend to agree with the staff forecast of renewed
growth in the fourth quarter and in 1985, particularly because I think
that we have not yet seen the effects working through the economy of
the lower interest rates that we've recently experienced. On the
inflation side, I am a little less confident about the staff's
projection. I still think that is a problem that we really have to
keep our eye on.
I think the dollar is going to come off although,
like everybody else, I won't be very quick to say when that will
happen. But I think we are going to see the dollar coming off, with
its implications for inflation. Also, the numbers that I have seen
suggest that wage settlements in the service sector have not been
nearly as low as they have been in manufacturing. And, of course, we
have the fiscal stimulus, which I don't see being removed very quickly
when Congress comes back. So, on balance, Mr. Chairman, I think we
can expect reasonably good growth in 1985.
I view the risk not as one
of negative growth but rather of renewed inflation. Even if we didn't
get 3-1/2 percent real GNP in 1985, I think that even 2-1/2 to 3
percent growth would still be fairly decent and not anything to be
terribly worried about.
At this point, I am not concerned about
recession or any kind of negative growth in 1985.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Well, the staff's projection for the fourth
quarter is about in line with what most private forecasters have been
saying; it's certainly plausible and maybe even the most likely
forecast. But I have to agree with Preston Martin and Emmett Rice and
Ed Boehne and Si Keehn:
I believe the risk has shifted to the low
side since we last met.
As Jim Kichline pointed out, there are
certainly some statistics that suggest that growth picked up in
September--the employment figures and the figures on retail sales.
But I think we have to bear in mind that given the export/import
picture, even if final demand strengthens, that doesn't necessarily
mean that we are going to have equivalent strength in domestic
employment and demand.
People may, as you said, Mr. Chairman, be
lining up to unload those imports. Moreover, the lack of growth in M1
since midyear certainly makes it less likely that there will be any
In short, I see some
sustained resumption in growth any time soon.
serious risks in the near-term economic future and I think we ought to
keep those in mind as we address policy today.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I am agnostic on the outlook.
I think it
has deteriorated somewhat. I made a list for myself of strong and
weak factors and I stopped when I reached 12 on each side and had a
number more. But I think the nature of the choices that we have is a
little different. Expansions don't go on forever; at some point there
will be a pause--a growth recession, hopefully not a real recession.
If we had the choice of a growth recession in the near future or a
real recession a year later, for instance--

-10-

11/7/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What's a growth recession?

MR. WALLICH. When unemployment rises but GNP still rises--in
If we had that and it were
other words, growth below potential.
reversed subsequently, that to me would be a less ominous thing than a
new real recession. And that might well be a choice because the
things one would have to do in order to make sure that there is no
growth recession may very well generate imbalances or maladjustments
and set in motion [forces] that a year or two later might produce a
real recession. They might also, of course, get us back into
inflation.
Starting from 5 percent inflation, it seems to me one
It's not
ought to use special caution in dealing with that prospect.
as though we were starting from close to zero.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's not exactly at 5 percent either.

MR. WALLICH. I think the underlying inflation rate is of
If we look
that order if one removes all the temporary [influences].
at the probabilities of what is going to happen, they may be evenly
balanced between a resumption of the expansion or a growth recession.
I doubt that it would be a real recession.
If we look at the risks
that lie beyond that, action to keep [the economy] growing at all
costs might produce a much worse situation later and might conceivably
I think those possible costs are much
relaunch us into inflation.
higher than if the economy wants to take a short pause and then resume
[growth] again.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. As I look at the numbers coming in, I am
inclined to agree with the staff that they do suggest there is some
improvement in activity going on. When I think of how the numbers
were coming in a month or two ago, the recent figures look to me a lot
more optimistic.
The last figure on new orders for nondefense capital
Shipments were up
goods was up after a couple of months of decline.
quite strongly. The last figure we had for retail sales was up; we
I read the Beigebook and I
don't know what October will bring.
thought it was saying that the gains we had in September seemed to be
sustained in October even though that doesn't seem to be confirmed by
department store sales.
MR. PARTEE.

Nor by the comments around here.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we haven't heard from everybody yet.
But
certainly, the comments in the Beigebook did not reflect what we're
hearing today.
MR. PARTEE.

I think somebody else wrote the Beigebook!

MR. GRAMLEY. We're now looking at a period of rising auto
production--increasing availability of models instead of the reverse
that was going on in the summer. The last figures on housing starts
The
and new home sales were up in contrast to earlier weakness.
October employment data were considerably stronger than the data
coming in during the summer; indeed, we had a turnaround in
manufacturing employment from a rather sizable decline in September to
In a period like this there is bound to be
an increase in October.
uncertainty. As Henry mentioned, you can list a dozen factors on the

11/7/84

-11-

positive side and a dozen on the negative side, and there is room for
doubt among reasonable people as to where things are going. We've
been through this sort of pause many, many times in periods of
economic expansion.
If you asked what basic factors were driving the
economy during the first six quarters of recovery--strong fiscal
stimulus, a lot of consumer confidence, low inflation, the technology
driving business fixed investment--I think those factors are still
there. And I'm about 75 percent certain, personally, that the
incoming figures a month and two months from now will show a more
positive trend. I do not worry about the possibility that thirdquarter GNP growth will be revised downward.
I don't doubt that at
all.
That is what happened in the past.
Indeed, if it turns out that
the downward revision reflects a lower rate of inventory investment,
that would be on balance a plus and not a minus.
I agree with the
staff forecast.
I think we will see some strengthening in activity.
I don't know whether it is going to be in the fourth quarter and I
don't really care.
It's a question of whether or not it comes along
soon enough, as I think it will, to generate the kind of growth that
the staff is forecasting for 1985. And I think they are about right
on the button.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
In the Twelfth District, the pace of economic
expansion really has slowed dramatically. We just haven't seen the
bounceback in sales that is reported in some Districts. One thing
that is going quite strongly in our District is nonresidential
construction; in some of our leading cities it's almost of boom
proportions. But it's certainly clear that the reduction we've seen
so far in mortgage rates has been insufficient to prevent both the
construction and the sale of new homes from falling further.
That's a
weak area.
And as I've been reporting for a long time now, the strong
dollar and the situation with foreign imports are hurting a good part
of Western industries such as forest products and primary metals, and
that is reducing the overall growth of manufacturing employment to a
crawl. The agricultural situation is pretty grim in a good many of
our states.
In sum, I think the balance has changed toward the engine
stalling here.
If the plane is still in the air, it's about to make
something worse than a soft landing.
I agree with much of what was
said by Governors Martin and Rice and Presidents Keehn, Boehne, and
others. Monetary policy is supposed to be flexible and I think the
time has come to err a bit on the side of ease unless the situation
clarifies.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. My own view is that the staff forecast is
probably about on the mark. In fact, I still very much lean to the
view that in the next two or three quarters as a whole, there is a
good chance that the economy will be stronger than the staff forecast
rather than weaker.
I may be a little less certain about that now
than I was six weeks ago, as are other people; nevertheless, that's
still where I'd put the probabilities.
The uncertainty factor clearly
does reflect the very, very near-term outlook. What is this mishmash
of statistics and anecdotes really telling us?
On the retail sales
side, we had meetings last week with the CEOs of all the big companies
in Minneapolis--and there are two very sizable retailers headquartered
there--and they,

11/7/84

-12-

remain extremely bullish about the outlook for retail
sales in the near term notwithstanding this pronounced slowing in the
last two weeks of October.
On the other side of the picture, a couple of the companies
in the Twin Cities that are major manufacturers and suppliers of
electronic gear and happen to be thought of as computer companies--in
fact, they make lots of components that go into both commercial and
residential construction--reported a surge in industrial bookings in
Insofar as the equipment
October.
That was the word that they used.
that they manufacture and sell is associated with housing, they don't
know whether it's related to new housing or renovation, of course.
But in October, or I should say the 30 days ending last Thursday, they
had an all-time record 30-day pace of activity for bookings and
shipments of electronic components that go into residential units.
Maybe that's consistent with the view that the decline in interest
rates that we've seen is beginning to take hold a little. While the
housing sales figures in the last set of numbers were somewhat mixed
geographically, there was some spark at least for one month evident in
those statistics as well. When I put it together, again, I would
agree with many of the comments that the immediate situation is harder
than usual to read.
I personally do not see a recession in sight or
anything that would remotely qualify as a recession.
I have two quick comments on imports and agriculture.
This
import phenomenon, as I think I said once before, is really off the
chart.
There is no doubt that that makes it extremely difficult to
figure out where the driving forces are, but I will just try to put
that in perspective with a couple of concrete examples.
For example,
one of these companies told me that just in the past six or seven
months they have started buying disk drives for floppy disks for
smaller computers from a Taiwanese supplier. They are delivered in
Minneapolis for $60 a unit whereas the cheapest they can make them
with no markup--the cheapest they can-manufacture them themselves
anyplace in the United States--is $140 a unit. Another very large
high-tech company reported to me that within the time frame of this
year they started buying transformers for their medium size main frame
Again, the price delivered to
computers from Far Eastern sources.
them in the United States is one-third of the cheapest price they can
Indeed, one of these companies
manufacture that type of component.
reported to me that the situation has reached a point where, no matter
what one assumes about exchange rates or anything else, from the point
of view of their corporate long-term strategic planning they have now
found themselves forced for the first time to consider seriously going
into off-shore supply in a major way through their own facilities.
They find that very distasteful but the economics of it are such that
they find themselves compelled to think in those terms.
On the agricultural situation, I would just echo what Si
It is not pretty. And I think it is now starting to
Keehn has said.
back up in a way that you can see the implications of it on the small
banks--all these darn small one-bank holding companies that are
It could be very
sitting out there and are leveraged to the hilt.
troubling.

11/7/84

-13-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. The situation from the vantage point of the
Cleveland District isn't much different from what has been expressed
by a number of people around the table.
The Fourth District's
difficulties are probably due to a [concurrence] of circumstances.
First, there are the ongoing structural problems and the intense
import competition, which we feel so strongly, together with the pause
in economic activity. Most of our capital goods industries, excluding
machine tools, have noted a flattening in orders and shipments.
In
steel we've had a few more furnace shutdowns.
Housing in the District
has been flat at best for several months and our bankers continue to
comment on the difficult income situation that farmers find themselves
in and the problems they will have servicing their debts.
The result,
as has been pointed out, is increased uncertainty about the outlook
for next year.
In our District we still have the basic view that the
consumer will lift the economy into growth next year; around the
District a strong Christmas is widely expected. Expectations are also
for a continued thrust from business investment, although presumably
at a slower pace. We have a basically positive outlook but a lot of
concern is expressed; I think the concerns of many people arise in
part because of how discouraged they are with the very strong import
competition. Others focus on the long-term problems of the economy:
the need for fiscal policy changes, the inflation problems, and so
forth. Also, expectations are generally damped by the pause that we
see.
Although expectations are for growth next year, they are very
shaky, and sometimes I wonder if they are held with enough confidence
to get us over a few disappointments that we might see in the coming
months.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I think it is fair to characterize
the situation in the Eleventh District as one where we are continuing
to see some improvement. Employment is increasing, industrial
production is still moving up, and retail sales look fairly good.
I
will say that we have had slowdowns from earlier in the year.
Weakness, of course, continues in the energy industry, and that might
be getting a little worse. We also have had a downturn in
construction but, as I indicated last time, I really don't think
that's all that bad.
I would pretty well agree with the Board staff's
forecast. I would expect the fourth quarter obviously to look a
little better than the third quarter.
At least from the people I've
talked to down our way, I have not picked up any real concern about a
recession on the horizon as we go into 1985.
The confidence factor,
at least my own confidence factor, is not quite as strong as it was
earlier. So, I'm not really complacent.
On the other hand, my degree
of discomfort, if you will, is probably not as great as that expressed
by a number of people here.
It seems to me that we're just coming
into a period when there is uncertainty and when decisions become very
difficult.
I think there is an awfully great risk of overreacting to
what might or might not happen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms. Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I have been somewhat concerned about slowing
business conditions for several months and I still am.
I won't repeat
I will just
all the signs; I heard them earlier and you have also.

11/7/84

-14-

One is that in
add two things that I haven't heard mentioned so far.
talking with a number of business economist friends who are neither
kooks nor politicians I sense a big change in their attitudes in the
In general their confidence in their forecasts
last six weeks or so.
Frankly, if I had to point my
for next year seems to have diminished.
finger at one factor that is responsible for this, it would be the
signals that we have been sending from this building. They are
looking at the slower monetary growth in the last four months and as a
group are not interpreting that as poor marksmanship or the inability
They are interpreting these numbers as an actual
to hit our targets.
tightening, particularly when they saw the fed funds rate shoot back
up in August.
So, I think that has led to some of the changes in
Secondly, I was talking to a top economist for one of the
attitude.
Big Three auto companies who said that when they were doing their
modeling and trying to forecast auto sales for next year they looked
at the usual relationships among employment, income growth, credit
availability and all the things that they know influence auto sales.
They came up with a particular forecast, yet because of their lack of
faith in that number, they peeled off about 300 to 400 thousand units
from that because in the pit of their stomachs they didn't think they
I am mentioning
could hit the number that came out of their model.
this to suggest that if there is a risk, I think it is that these
numbers [forecast] for the fourth quarter and for 1985 will be too
I am not saying that there is a recession
high rather than too low.
around the corner; I am not that good a forecaster. But I think there
is the risk.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE.
One thing that worries a person who looks at the
business statistics all the time is a situation that can't very well
be explained on the basis of past experience. And I can't very well
explain why business is as weak as it has been in the last few months.
I
That makes for considerable discomfort in a professional economist.
I felt confident that there
am very nervous at the present time.
would be a resurgence in the economy this fall because, like Lyle, I
thought that we had just a temporary spell of reduced consumption.
I
thought the economy would come along in the fall because incomes and
expectations and confidence and the real financial value of assets
were all there to support strong consumer spending. I guess I still
than I am to
I am closer in view to the guy from
feel that.
in thinking that we're going to have a good
the guy from
Christmas. Nevertheless, there is no real indication of such a
resurgence in attitudes of manufacturers and business people
generally. The one thing that I have never dealt with is the problem
of a steadily rising proportion of total markets being taken up with
Because we haven't had that in the 35 years that I have been
imports.
an economist, it does occur to me that it's possible that retail sales
can look good and strong and that plant and equipment spending can
look good and strong and it won't do anything for the domestic economy
if an important increment of that demand is going into imported goods.
Therefore, it is quite possible that we could have strength in the
indicators of the kind that Bob Forrestal talked about--retail sales
and so forth--but weakness in the underlying performance of the
economy. I think that's a big change from the past, and it seems to
be a trend that is still persisting.

11/7/84

-15-

The other thing that may have occurred--and it's very, very
hard to know--is that, in fact, inflation expectations may have
subsided over the last six months. We are getting some indications of
that from these horseback surveys that people do on inflation. But I
don't think they are much good; they really just reflect what has
happened most recently. But it may be that we've had a period of low
increases in wages and low increases in profit margins for a long
enough time that people are now beginning to believe that by golly
inflation isn't going to go back to 7 or 8 or 9 percent!
You may
remember in the spring that it wasn't hard to find outliers like
Milton Friedman who thought that inflation would be at double digits
by the end of this year. That has disappeared entirely. That also is
something that could affect attitudes and the speed with which plans
are put in place in order to beat price increases, because now people
don't expect the price to increase whereas before they did.
I would point out that the staff forecast is nothing to write
home about in terms of great strength. The forecast is for a little
over 3 percent real growth over the next five quarters.
That's not a
high number.
I would also point out to you that there is an important
presumption in that forecast and that is that real imports go no
higher than they are now--that the whole import thrust is behind us.
In the Greenbook, if you look at constant dollar net imports on a GNP
basis, there has been a deterioration of $35 billion over the past
four quarters.
Over the next four quarters there will be none
whatsoever, if that forecast is accurate. And that goes into the GNP
forecast.
If you don't believe that the import surge has ended, then
you can't really believe a forecast as strong as the one the staff has
shown.
I don't know what you think, but I think that imports are
still rising pretty darn rapidly and that the growth in imports will
not be over until we can change the terms of trade in which the United
States deals.
So, the forecast of a little over 3 percent assumes
that net imports stopped growing as of the third quarter, which is
already behind us.
That's not such a very strong forecast.
Henry speaks about inflation. He says a base rate of 5
percent; I would say 4 percent. It is [not] zero.
But unemployment
isn't zero either. As a matter of fact, we have 7-1/2 percent
unemployment; it has been hanging at that number, Henry, and I would
argue that a 7-1/2 percent unemployment rate gives us room for further
growth in the economy in the sense of looking at the performance
compared with some kind of norm--what we would like to see ideally.
The unemployment rate is about as distressingly above where it ought
to be as the inflation rate is above what it ought to be.
As I see
it, it's a situation in which one can say inflation has done better
than one would expect based on recent track performance. Unemployment
is worse than it ought to be at this stage of a cyclical recovery.
Therefore, although I'm not sure what is going to happen in the
immediate future, I think that the economy is not going to go into a
great resurgence in terms of output and employment and I think there
is room for some more growth than seems in prospect in the numbers
that we have.
MR. TRUMAN. May I just correct one comment on the forecast?
I don't want to dispute the basic thrust of your argument, but on the
import side we have identified a couple of areas--textiles and steel-where it is pretty clear that there was a buildup in imports in
anticipation of trade policy actions that did occur and are going to,

-16-

11/7/84

at a minimum, put us back toward the trend of where those imports were
relative to GNP.
It is partly because we have taken out that small
piece--$2-1/2 billion in 1972 dollars--which is not trivial in terms
of the numbers we are looking at.
It's 2 or 2-1/2 percent,
We have taken that piece out and
essentially, in current dollars.
allowed some payback of it so that we get the absolutely flat picture
So we do have a continued rise in
that you so accurately described.
imports at least to the middle of next year absent that factor, which
tells us the dollar's depreciation, putative depreciation, takes
effect. But the reason you get the picture in the Greenbook is
largely because we have that offsetting payback in the short run on
imports.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, am I looking at this table correctly?

MR. TRUMAN.

No, that's right.

MR. PARTEE. A year ago you had a plus $12 billion; in the
third quarter of this year it's a minus $22.6 billion. That's a
change of $34-35 billion.
MR. TRUMAN.

No, no--

MR. PARTEE. And now, with this little $2 billion difference,
you have essentially stability from now on out?
MR. GRAMLEY.

Is this imports of goods or goods and services?

MR. PARTEE. The only one they have in constant dollars is
I am looking at page 1-21.
goods and services.
MR. GRAMLEY. But I think the staff's forecast is for some
increase in the constant dollar value of goods counterbalanced by a
decline in the services component, which largely reflects reduced
investment income.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, but the basic story is correct. Thirdquarter [imports] of goods were something around $100 billion 1972
dollars, which is close to $20 billion higher than it was a year ago.
[Unintelligible] another $3 or $4 billion in goods because you have
So, imports of services
oil in there over the forecast period.
decline somewhat and that gives you the flat number on a GNP basis.
MR. PARTEE.

And that is in the GNP forecast.

Am I right,

Jim?
MR. KICHLINE.

Correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS.
I am seeing in my District some of the change
I had a meeting
in attitude that has been commented on by others.
with about a dozen chief executive officers of large companies last
week and their consensus was that business had turned toward the soft
They were generally concerned about inventory levels; it was
side.
not that inventories had gotten out of control, but the focus of these
The retailers spoke of
CEOs had moved to the control of inventories.
a good Christmas instead of their previous very optimistic

11/7/84

-17-

expectations about the Christmas season. They are reassessing their
prospects in the retail area, and this group included four national
retailers who had a pretty good feel of conditions nationally.
They
were focusing particularly on [sales in] recent weeks.
In the
manufacturing sector, one thing that struck me was that without
exception, none of them sees any inflation anywhere either in what
they buy or in their ability to change prices of what they sell.
They
relate this principally to the import competition, which seems to be
pervasive. All of them one way or another seem to be experiencing
that across the board.
The other thing that impressed me was that
they all felt that wages were under complete control--that settlements
that had occurred were very modest indeed, and their expectations
about wage settlements were of the same variety.
The housing area has been fairly stable; we have had some
softness in single-family starts offset by multifamily starts.
In the
appliance manufacturing area, we have seen specific reductions.
For
example, the GE manufacturing facility in Louisville has just
announced another 1400 layoffs, including about 300 white collar
workers.
In the textile area, where import competition has a big
effect, four plants in Arkansas have just been closed involving about
22,000 workers.
The shoe industry in Missouri is in extremis, as they
say, in terms of import competition. Agriculture in particular is
hurting now because of rains that are delaying harvesting and causing
some problems. We are getting reports that harvesting of animals is
including breeding stock and that is an indication of problems there.
So, when I put the whole thing together, I see a change of attitude
and conditions from a slowing in the economy to an economy that has
flattened out.
My judgment is that the staff forecast is probably
optimistic for the fourth quarter and for next year as well. My best
guess is that, absent a significant change of policy soon, the next
move in the economy will be down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. ROBERTS.

Mr. Guffey.

On the other side of Missouri-It's a very thin edge.

In the Tenth
MR. GUFFEY. But an important thin edge.
District there has been no improvement in those areas that I have
expressed concern about before--principally agriculture, energy, and
the aircraft manufacturing industry. There are a couple of factors,
however, that may influence the future. One, in the agricultural
sector, is the Administration's program that was announced a month or
so ago for delaying or setting aside some of the debt of the
producers. That is now being put into place and they hope to have it
operational by January 1. For your information, it involves among
other things setting aside 25 percent of a producer's total debt up to
$200,000 and delaying that for a period of 5 years with no interest
and no payback. It is a guarantee program also with respect to the
commercial banks that are financing agriculture, if that comes about.
It's a pilot program in five states--Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska,
Minnesota, and Iowa. There is some mixed reaction from the
agricultural sector, but it is something positive and they are trying
After it is in place in these five
to assess what the impact will be.
states, they expect to expand it nationwide.

11/7/84

With respect to the energy area, OPEC and the lowering of
crude prices have damped the enthusiasm, which was not very great, in
energy discovery. Another factor that has come to pass most recently
was the announcement by Canada that they were going to reduce the
price of natural gas imported into the United States by 25 percent. A
lot of the Tenth District is very heavily engaged in natural gas
production, so that could further depress any interest in discovery or
There is a fairly large segment of the
exploration in that area.
District involved in high-tech business, particularly on the eastern
slope of the Rockies. Most recently there have been rather
substantial layoffs--about 2,000 people--in that area who were engaged
I'm told that the demand for
in the production of semi-conductors.
semi-conductors worldwide has diminished but it has impacted this
On
particular area more dramatically than I think any of us realizes.
the positive side, auto assembly [activity], in which we have a very
Everybody is back and
large number employed, is going full out.
employed. Nonresidential construction is experiencing boom conditions
in several areas in our District. Recreational activity is very high,
with tourism and the ski industry looking forward to a very good year.
I'd just note that in New Mexico, which is a very small part [of our
District] population-wise but very important in the defense industry,
is experiencing a boom particularly in the Albuquerque area simply
because they are deeply involved in the production of defense
equipment.
With respect to the outlook, I would agree with those who
think the Greenbook is about right or maybe not optimistic enough.
I
don't see the dangers that everybody expressed around the table that
we are going to drop into a growth recession, if you will, in the
fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1985--or even if we did, that
In other words, I don't see the potential of
that would be all bad.
On
recession as a very high probability or any probability at all.
the national level, I would accept the staff forecast as being about
right. And if we get it, I would be delighted.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to associate myself
I think it's
with the Lyle Gramley school of predicting where we are.
very typical toward the second year of an expansion to run into a
slower rate of growth in the economy as the economy shifts to a lower
rate of inventory accumulation. And I think that is exactly what is
I would assess the risks of a recession as close
going on right now.
to zero.
I think the underpinnings of the economy are very strong.
The most surprising statistic of the last month was the 440,000
increase in employment. That--particularly the 55,000 increase in
durable goods manufacturing employment--was much bigger than I had
expected. These are not the kinds of numbers that one sees associated
Furthermore, we have
with an early stage of going into a recession.
I think this economy is going to
had a big decline in interest rates.
be very responsive to that. We haven't had enough time yet to assess
the impact the interest rate decline that has already taken place will
have. We see one sign in the increase in new home sales and another
sign in the strength of the stock market. Another sign is
[unintelligible].
But I think we haven't yet seen the full effect on
the real economic activity of the rate declines that have already
taken place.
So, I find the pessimism that I have heard around the
table from many sources hard to understand. And I don't think this

11/7/84

-19-

comes from the fact that I am living in a state that has an
unemployment rate of 3.7 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am living in a state which has
double that rate of unemployment and yet I share your view, Frank. I
don't quite understand the level of concern that I hear other than
that it is the inherent nature of central bankers always to look at
the gloomy side.
And I think the sense of balance would be not a
major shift of policy as Ted Roberts is saying, but some modest though
limited easing. I won't repeat the reasons why I think the staff
forecast for next year is on balance probably as reasonable as one can
expect. In our view it might be somewhat weaker in the fourth quarter
because of inventory adjustment. But the general feeling in my
District--what I hear from business leaders and from members of our
board--is that there will be good Christmas retail sales and that
manufacturing is not showing the earlier growth but is not showing any
significant softening either.
I also share Henry Wallich's view--I
don't always agree with Henry, but I must say I do this time--that the
business cycle is still with us and we should not be excessively
alarmed about some tapering off and moderation. And even though 3
percent isn't high, Chuck, it seems to me that that is a very
appropriate level--if that is what we actually get next year.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, we could easily afford more.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I tend to assume that the
dollar is going to come off more and I assume there will be
inflationary pressures that will result from that--although they won't
show up too immediately, I suppose. And I would be concerned about
much more than a 3 percent growth rate.
I think our capacity is
growing around 3 percent and it may very well be that the structure of
the economy and our comparative advantage has changed in the world and
that we cannot expect to go back to a level of unemployment as low as
we had in previous recoveries.
Also, in those previous recoveries we
got to double-digit inflation so we then tended to overreact the other
way.
It seems to me that a steadier, more prudent, balanced, calmer
policy would be in the direction of easing which does not reflect as
much concern about the economy as I heard around the table.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Well, why don't we hear from Mr. Axilrod.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
questions or comments?

Are there any more or less technical

MR. BOEHNE.
I have a technical question. As you try to sort
out what is behind the weakness in M1 and whether it's from the demand
side or from the supply side, if you look at reserves over the last
couple of months--which is on the supply side and can be viewed in
some rough way as a [base] for creating money--reserve growth, as you
pointed out, has been quite weak. I wonder, as we go into November
and December and try to guard against the continuation of this
weakness, if there's any value in looking through the nonborrowed
target more to reserve growth to try to reduce the odds of continued
slow growth. Now, that presumes that part of the problem comes from

11/7/84

-20-

I just wondered technically if you have any
the supply side.
reactions to that.
MR. AXILROD. Well, President Boehne, say the Committee
wanted to achieve something like the alternative B path or, say, 7
[While] it's
percent growth in total reserves in November.
technically not impossible to conduct operations in an effort to
achieve that if the Committee wanted it, it is impossible to tell you
with any certainty, other than the way we do it in the Bluebook, what
is likely to happen to the level of member bank borrowing. If the
demand for those reserves doesn't happen to be there, we would have to
keep throwing nonborrowed reserves out there until we force the demand
on them--force the banks to create the required reserves. And that
could take a very substantial drop in interest rates if the demand
doesn't happen to be there. Our best guess, as is in the Bluebook
implicitly, is that it would not take a substantial drop in interest
rates, though I would [modulate] that a bit if the latest money supply
figures I have seen hold up after a day or so.
I guess I am just getting at this supply/demand
MR. BOEHNE.
division that you mentioned. Does that give you any reading as to
whether more of the problem lies with the supply side or the demand
side?
No, I think you have to look at the
MR. AXILROD.
relationship between interest rates and velocity. Obviously, there
would be more money out there, if we put in more reserves and there
would be less money, vice versa. The way I would look at it would be
to try to explain velocity.
That is what I was trying to do.
Does
the fourth-quarter rise in velocity indicate that people didn't really
want the money and that they are quite happy?
Or does it indicate
that people simply didn't get the money they really wanted and we had
a temporary --in effect, arithmetic--rise in velocity and we're going
to see that reflected later in income as they have to adjust to the
I don't think
fact that they don't have as much money as they want?
just looking at the reserve-to-money relationship can tell you much
about that.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, you commented on the possible impact of
I
the MMDA alternative to less interest [on] transaction balances.
take it you were referring to the surprise in October?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

MR. MARTIN. But why wouldn't that kind of impact occur when
the rates first dropped?
MR. AXILROD.
MMDAs were rising in the first four months of
the year at a slightly faster rate than they were rising in October.
And then they stopped rising as market rates went up and banks didn't
follow them all the way up.
Then, with this recent very sharp drop in
short rates, banks have lagged in the extent to which their MMDA rates
have dropped. And, according to the figures we have for MMDAs, after
declining for several months they started rising. At the same time we
are observing in the figures--although we have problems with seasonal
adjustments because we don't have them seasonally adjusted--a drop in
NOW accounts and in the very recent figures also a drop in Super NOW
accounts.

11/7/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How big are Super NOW accounts?

MR. AXILROD. The level?
billion approximately.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The level of NOW accounts is $140

Super NOWs are what level?

MR. ROBERTS.

$43 billion.

MR. AXILROD.

I think I have that number.

They're about $45

billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Is that included in that $140 billion?

That's included;

so there is $100 and some odd

billion--

MR. ROBERTS.
Steve, are you saying that as the differential
between NOW accounts and MMDAs declines, there's a percentage that
shifts [to MMDAs] instead of the contrary?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, [we were] reaching for hypotheses to
explain this back in the second half of 1982 when interest rates
dropped sharply and there was a sharp rise in NOW accounts. At that
time there were no MMDAs. MMDAs have a lower reserve requirement than
NOW accounts by a lot.
MR. ROBERTS.
But that's an interesting thesis:
that someone
who accepts a lower-than-market rate gets more interested in changing
to the market rate as the spread declines instead of as it widens.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was thinking of these as monies that
are in the market now that shift back into bank deposits as rates go
down. And what bank deposits do they shift back into?
MR. ROBERTS.

Not from NOWs to MMDAs but from the market to

MMDAs.
MR. AXILROD.
experienced in 1982--

And instead of going back into NOWs, as we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Why would that make NOW accounts go down?

MR. AXILROD. Well, there are other things going on at the
same time, obviously. But I was thinking mainly of shifts from the
market and not using NOW accounts.
MR. PARTEE.

It keeps them from going up.

I see the point.

MR. MARTIN.
But my question is:
Why wouldn't that have
occurred earlier than October?
I am trying to figure out October and
I can't.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that I really can't give an answer to.
The banks' MMDA figures were running negative between 5 and 6 percent
and then minus 1 percent in September. Then they rose to an 8.8
percent rate of growth in October.

-22-

11/7/84

MR. ROBERTS. For a while the money market funds were more
attractive than the bank funds and that spread has declined more
recently.
But why banks have chosen to lag their rates at
MR. AXILROD.
this point is hard to answer.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey, did you have a question?

With respect to the October number--and I
MR. GUFFEY. Yes.
know this won't make a great difference--do I remember correctly that
last year when we did the seasonal adjustment those figures for the
fourth quarter, including October, were revised up substantially?
Would you not expect a similar event this year?
MR. AXILROD. What I have readily in mind is that for the
second half of last year the rate of growth of M1 was raised 1-3/4
percentage points at an annual rate, of which 1 percentage point was
This year, we've run through
seasonal and .7 was benchmark figures.
it assuming that money grew 7 percent in November and December and
that changes the configuration somewhat in that the slowdown occurs
But you still would get,
more gradually over the course of the year.
of course, a much slower growth in the latter months of the year than
But it will raise July,
in the first several months of the year.
August, and September and make October less negative, say, by 4
There's no doubt
percentage points depending on November-December.
about that; it goes in that direction.
MR. GUFFEY.

That's making a substantial--

MR. PARTEE. What if November-December were less than 7
If, say, November and December were at 4 percent rather than
percent?
7 percent, would that have changed the seasonal distribution and in
which direction?
I assume a lower growth
MR. AXILROD. I assume it would.
rate would tilt a little more of the growth into the second half. But
I didn't run it for that.
MR. GRAMLEY.
I have a question about the contention that the
increase in velocity in the fourth quarter might be explained by a
supply side phenomenon rather than a demand side phenomenon. I know
there are differences in speeds of adjustments, depending on the
models, but if you had a stable money demand function and a
restriction of supply and the short-run elasticities of demand with
respect to interest rates were a lot less, what you would have is a
phenomenon in which interest rates rose much more than they would have
to to equate money demand to money supply. Well, that's not the
Interest rates are going down, not up.
problem we are looking at now.
It seems to me you have to argue that if we have not had a downward
shift in money demand either we don't really understand the factors
affecting money demand, which is possible, or that our estimated
nominal GNP figure for the fourth quarter is way too high.
MR. AXILROD. The only thing I would add to that, Governor
Gramley, is that apart from the fact that the model [unintelligible]
relationships, one could also argue that interest rates are higher

11/7/84

-23-

than they otherwise would have been, obviously, if you had really
forced in the money now. That's pretty much what I had in mind.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Sternlight?

Do you have something to say, Mr.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I was going to add a comment on the question
Steve was raising earlier about why the banks have lagged in bringing
down their rates on MMDA accounts.
I think one reason might be that
they see that as a rather easy way to get in some more retail money
and lessen their dependence on day-to-day liability managed funds.
I
think some of them are conscious of the problems the big banks have
had and wanted to strengthen their deposit base that way. That could
have been a factor.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
I'd just like to ask Steve a question about the
use of his phrase "searching for hypotheses" here in view of the
unexpected and unwelcomed decline in M1 in October, which seems to be
getting worse.
If there had not been a downward shift in money
demand, are there alternative plausible explanations such as that we
didn't provide enough reserves?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, that's what I was trying to deal with.
Reserves did drop somewhere around 15 to 18 percent.
MR. WALLICH.

Then interest rates would have had to rise.

MR. AXILROD.

Or drop a lot more to get the money in.

MR. WALLICH.
demand was constant.

I mean if you didn't supply enough money and

MR. AXILROD. The other hypothesis that I tried to [test] was
that if the demand was weakening in any event and if you supplied more
money, interest rates would go down even more.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
and drink some coffee.

We've had enough hypotheses.

We will go

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me express a few thoughts after
listening to this conversation this morning, which I thought had quite
a different tone than a month ago. The big surge theory seems to have
disappeared or has strongly dissipated at least.
Similarly, the
economy has not been expanding very rapidly in recent months. We had
that very large--and confusing to me--figure on employment in October.
I would emphasize one point that a lot of people have emphasized
already:
The impact of imports on the manufacturing sector of the
economy is pervasive.
I won't go on at great lengths because it was
explored earlier. But there are signs that what was happening earlier
was that the expansion in demand was so great you could knock off 2
percent of it for imports and nobody felt the difference. Now, when
domestic demand goes down, it makes a big difference. And I guess the
imports actually have surged.
You do get a sense of spreading layoffs
among some pretty big areas in manufacturing industries right in the

24-

11/7/84

middle of this expansion. You mentioned textiles, shoes, lumber, and
some others. And I think that affects the manufacturers' moods
anyway--not just in terms of the current competition but I think they
are looking at some of their investment plans.
Some shoe businesses
are going out of business, for instance.
MR. PARTEE.

Textiles too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it is leading to some moderation
there. But enough was said about that. As I look at the business
picture, I think we have a rapid rate of inventory accumulation. That
didn't look so bad when the economy was rising rapidly, but as soon as
the economy stops rising so rapidly that rate of inventory
accumulation has to come down. One senses that that's what
businessmen feel. And I think the short-run question we have is:
How
will that happen?
If retail sales are strong in the next few months,
we can get a declining rate of inventory accumulation in a very smooth
way and have a good setting for business next year.
If retail sales
don't pick up in the next few months, I think we have a quite
different kind of problem.
The GNP figure for the fourth quarter may
not be a bit different in total but it's going to include more
inventories and less sales, and that has quite different implications
for next year.
And I don't think we know. Everybody reports on
talking to retailers who seem to change their minds every two weeks
about their feelings about sales--for good reason, I suspect, because
there is some instability in them.
I surely don't know, but if I had
to guess I'd say the retail sales figure in October is probably going
to be weak because autos presumably were down. The explanation that
there are not enough cars [in dealer inventories] is beginning to wear
a little thin on me.
Maybe it's all true; there is something curious
in that industry. I don't think the industry wants to produce many
more cars.
I am beginning to think they get a nice profit margin
where they are. The dealers like it, manufacturers like it, and so
long as they have the Japanese shut off why take on another worker
with all the pension obligations and everything else?
Although we'll
get some expansion in production there, I guess it will not be very
much. We are in a period of great uncertainty, particularly about
what retail sales are going to do.
I think plant and equipment
[spending] is holding up fairly well.
I feel more comfortable about
housing than I did a while ago simply because interest rates are going
down.
I would comment that I don't have any particular quarrel with
the forecast, but I think we ought to put a good deal of uncertainty
around any forecast.
I would point out that the forecast level has
been successively lowered in recent meetings at the same time that
interest rates have been declining fairly precipitously. We have a
lower forecast now for economic activity for the next year than we had
in August or in previous meetings, with interest rates 2 percentage
points lower.
MR. GRAMLEY. Is that right?
I thought the level of real GNP
at the end of 1985 was almost exactly what it was in the previous
forecast.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

No.

I don't know what the previous--

It was, but the near term--

11/7/84

-25-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But two forecasts ago we had a 5 percent
increase in the third-quarter GNP and we're now going to have 1-1/2 to
2 percent. That's a difference of almost 1 percent [in level terms]
in the estimate of one quarter's change.
I think it was still higher
in an earlier estimate.
MR. PARTEE.

Then it has been coming down?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It has been coming down by whatever the
right amount is.
In a perverse kind of way, maybe compared to the
comments that I heard from a lot of people earlier, I feel more
comfortable about the forecast this month than I did last month,
partly because interest rates are down and I think the housing
forecast is better based. We have the exchange rate at least moving
in the other direction; we are not under the same pressure. We have
had some--it is so brief it is hard to tell--firming of commodity
prices in recent weeks which is quite in contrast to the trend we had
for several months prior to that. And we do have that surprisingly
good employment figure in services and retail trade in October, which
I don't understand.
Last month I saw no danger, frankly, that we could overease
within the practical scope of whatever we were going to do.
This time
I am not so sure.
Beginning at the level of interest rates that we
have and given the feeling I have about the economy, I could conceive
that we would get overly enthusiastic in terms of easing, whereas I
didn't think that was possible last month. In terms of generally
posturing ourselves, I think we are in a far better position for a
variety of reasons, given all the risks that exist, to not be too far
behind the curve in easing if that is the way things develop. That's
partly because we have the risks of the dollar; I would hate to have
to do a lot of aggressive easing in a situation where the dollar is
already declining more than one would like to see.
I would rather be
in a position where, if anything, we have the easing done and are in a
position to tighten up a little if the dollar does get in real trouble
at some point. But in terms of our general posture, it's partly--and
the point has been made--that there is room, obviously, for the
economy to grow more than 3 percent next year.
I am talking about the
probabilities.
The inflation picture looks under enough control so that I
don't think we have to worry about an explosion on that side apart
from anything that would develop on the exchange rate end itself.
It
is not a current concern but could be a concern almost at any time
looking to the future depending upon how things develop. And given
the experience we have had, I don't feel any great sense of inability
to prevent the economy from bursting out on the up side in the
foreseeable future. If we had to tighten some down the road, so be
it.
I don't have the feeling that it would be an impossible job to
keep the economy from an unfortunate and overextended surge of
activity if we faced that possibility rather than the opposite one of
cumulating excessive weakness in the economy, given all the risks and
uncertainties that I see.
And one factor I might mention in that
connection is that in the rest of the world I still do not see many
signs of ebullient economic activity, to say the least. The European
economy still seems to me to be in a very sluggish phase.
I guess the
latest information from Japan is not so bad, but it's on the slower
side rather than on the stronger side.
And that has been the one

-26-

11/7/84

economy that has been showing a pretty good rate of advance.
problems in the developing world are obvious enough.

The

Where that all leaves us, I don't quite know. But I think we
may have room for a little more formal easing here if that's what you
But I don't know that we want to go overboard about it.
want to do.
I might say that in view of the monetary developments, I think the
only question in the past few weeks was whether we should have been
The
easier and put in more reserves and reduced the borrowing level.
reason that was not done was simply because I judged that the tone of
the discussion and the instructions last time clearly reflected some
concern if interest rates--and the federal funds rate in particular-were to go down around the 10 percent level or below and other rates
There wasn't much eagerness for being very
were declining rapidly.
aggressive, so we weren't very aggressive.
In fact, interest rates
obviously did get to those levels and in those conditions it didn't
But I don't know that I personally had the
seem all that urgent.
feeling that the interest rate developments were disastrously rapid in
And I am not sure I
terms of lower rates, given all the conditions.
would want to conduct a policy that I thought would actively back them
up again as a deliberate matter of policy. But with that much
discussion, let us proceed.
I would like to propose that we move
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
to an area between alternatives A and B.
I think we get halfway there
if we only bring the borrowing level down to $600 million. If the fed
funds rate is running now at, say, 9-7/8 percent on average and we
reduce the borrowing level by $100 million, the rate is likely to come
down to 9-1/2 percent or a shade above. I think the markets then will
expect a discount rate cut at some point following that; and if that
were a 1/2 point reduction, that would bring [the funds rate] down to
9 percent.
It seems to me that to go all the way to alternative B
Therefore, borrowing somewhere in the area
would be a great mistake.
We probably ought to adjust the
of $600 million makes the most sense.
Maybe we
fed funds range.
I forget what it is now--8 to 12 percent?
For the monetary target figures I
ought to make that 7 to 11 percent.
would probably take numbers halfway between the [A and B
I don't have a clear view on M1; it seems to me less
alternatives].
But the target figure is there.
reliable than it has at other times.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
By going halfway in between you are making
a final judgment of 1/2 percentage point on a figure that we may come
within 5 percentage points of if we are lucky.
MR. PARTEE.

We did this past time;

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. MARTIN.

it was within 5.

Okay.

Within 10!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I am pretty limited by 10.

I understand.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

That's all I have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned something about reducing the
discount rate; I have a comment on that. That may be a market

11/7/84

-27-

expectation, but I don't think there is anything technical that would
raise the question of a decline in the discount rate if the funds rate
were 9-1/4 or 9-3/4 percent or so.
We can do it if we want to, but I
don't see any dynamic in the situation that forces that decision.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
But if the Board were to take the
move and cut it by 1/2 point--I'm not saying that it would--the fed
funds rate would go down by 1/2 point with that.
Somebody tells me that
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might mention:
Citibank reduced the prime rate by 1/4 point--a small move on the down
side, considering.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
deliberations here!
MR. CORRIGAN.

They'll

They're trying to influence these

[unintelligible]

one way or the other

here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to put too much
emphasis in our discussion on M1 in a single month, despite the
magnitude of that surprise decline of 7 or 7-1/2 percent--I think
If it carries over into
that's what I heard Steve say--in October.
this month, though, I think it deserves some weight given that there
are so many uncertainties from the real economy that we've all been
It's so difficult to forecast not only
sharing with one another here.
the fourth quarter but the first and second quarters of next year when
Yes, even
I think there is a high probability of some difficulties.
the third quarter is still [uncertain].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word about that M1
number.
If I understand it, given the fragmentary information we now
have for the beginning of the month, we would have to get a big
increase in the second week of the month-MR. MARTIN.

I realize that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make an empirical comment that big
increases don't ordinarily come in the second week of a month.
MR. AXILROD. Even before these figures, we had been
forecasting a fairly big increase in the second week of the month.
But that is an unusual time for that to occur.
MR. PARTEE.

figures.

You have a 7 percent projection for November?

MR. AXILROD. That's what we had before the very latest
I feel confident it will be lower now.

A figure that pulls down growth for
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
the month of October at the end of the month by 1 percentage point
means that November is starting appreciably lower than what they were
assuming.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, the level is roughly $3-1/2
lower than we were assuming.

[billion]

-28-

11/7/84

MR. MARTIN.

So the 7 percent for November in alternative A--

MR. PARTEE.

It's not going to happen.

MR. MARTIN.
Of course, it is now way out on the curve
I take it so is the 7 percent in alternative B.
somewhere.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is harder to get those figures in
Of course,
I don't think there is any question about it.
November.
if we get some momentum, it's not hard to get a big one-month figure.
December could be anything. But it's going to be hard to get a big
figure in November.
MR. MARTIN. If it were a perfect world--which it isn't, of
course--the ideal targeting would be something around the midpoint for
M1 and M2.
We're getting somewhat different information from M2.
Maybe it is a relief in that we are not getting quite the same message
But [the midpoint] obviously is not a potential in either
as from M1.
of the alternatives as regards what could be done the rest of the year
and beginning in the first quarter in terms of getting levels up to a
point that would be consonant with a reasonable rate of real growth in
the economy. There is no point in belaboring the lessons from the
real side of the economy. And you are tired of hearing me talk about
risks in the financial system--in thrift institutions, agricultural
I won't make my usual [comments] and take up
banks, and all the rest.
But
your time--all this overhead sitting around the room--with that.
still, it seems to me that we can pay some more attention valuably to
I am not clear with
the aggregates, particularly M1 and M2, now.
The risk of a growth recession is greatly enhanced if
regard to M3.
M1 is allowed to decelerate sharply for the whole fourth quarter. And
even if we were to set an operating procedure and some short-term
targets in which we overshot the midpoint, I don't see under these
circumstances--with inflation being under control, the low M1 figure
we have had, and the uncertainties in the economy--that that's a
substantial risk.
So, I come down for alternative A.
Given what Steve and the
Chairman have just discussed with regard to the growth of M1 and M2
for the fourth quarter, those are not modest figures but they're a
long way from getting us to the midpoint [of our long-run targets].
As I understand it, very temporarily--hopefully very temporarily--the
M1 figure is almost at the bottom of the range; it is within $400 to
$600 million of the bottom. So, it seems to me that alternative A
doesn't produce any kind of configuration vis-a-vis the midpoint of
either of those two ranges to have any implication of overstimulation
or the revival of inflation. Given what Steve and his colleagues have
laid out here in terms of borrowing getting down considerably below
Tony's number, it seems to me it would be well to go for the $400 to
If that results in a fed funds rate rate below 9
$500 million level.
percent or in the 9 to 9-1/2 percent range, that doesn't seem to me a
problem. It was well said that we don't know what the implications
I
are of the decline in interest rates that has already occurred.
agree with that. We also don't know the implications of 4 or maybe 5
months of decline in the growth of M1 particularly and to a lesser
degree of M2.
We don't know what the aggregates track will turn out
to be going into the first quarter, so it seems to me that we are in a
position of being able to change our targeting in an accommodative
direction without any substantial risk of reigniting inflationary

-29-

11/7/84

factors.
I say again, at the risk of turning you all off, that if a
fiscal policy question is going to confront the nation early next
year, I would hate to see that confrontation with 1 percent real
growth and unemployment heading for 8 percent or something of that
I vote for "A," Mr. Chairman.
sort.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roberts.

MR. ROBERTS.
I would like to reinforce what Governor Martin
said.
I think we are testing our luck by having had no growth in M1
for five months. And based on our inability to meet our past targets
for M1 growth, I have no confidence that the projected November and
December increases will occur unless we refocus our policy on reserve
growth instead of interest rates, which is what I think we should have
done.
I think the reason M1 has not expanded is that we have been
willing through our policy of targeting borrowing to resist the
natural market declines in interest rates that otherwise would have
occurred.
I noticed that the growth in total reserves and M1 from the
fourth quarter [of 1983] to October are essentially the same, for
example.
But in recent times we have had this precipitous drop in
reserves.
So my view would be that this is a time to effect a
significant easing and to accomplish a growth in reserves that will
result in a growth in money--without concern about the level of market
rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment on
our operating procedure.
It seems to me that the events of this
summer uncovered a significant defect in our current operating
procedure in that, as a consequence of the Continental situation, the
banks' borrowing behavior was very much different than we had assumed
at the time of our meeting. They had a propensity to bid up the
federal funds rate rather than come into the discount window and as a
consequence we had a higher level of interest rates, which also fed
into long-term bond yields, than the Committee had expected at the
time of the meeting.
If we have an excessively-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What meeting are you talking about?

MR. MORRIS.
Well, it was the July meeting [or perhaps] two
meetings ago.
You recall we were not contemplating a federal funds
rate that would go up to the 11-1/2 to 11-3/4 percent area.
I don't
think anyone around the table was talking about that high a level.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My memory is that that happened before
that meeting or very close to it.
MR. MORRIS.
I would have to look back and find out which
But I think it is clear that there was a meeting in
meeting it was.
which as a consequence of this change in behavior we got a tighter
federal funds market than any member of the Committee had talked
about. And it seems to me that if we have a slower economy than we
want now, perhaps part of it at least could have been produced by that
higher level of interest rates than we contemplated. It seems to me
that is the fact, and there may be a recurrence of this kind of
situation in times to come.
I just wonder whether we shouldn't take
that into account in how we structure the directive.
Since the

11/7/84

-30-

borrowing [level] is not a key factor in the implementation of
monetary policy, if that borrowing [level] produces unexpected results
in interest rates, it seems to me that perhaps we ought to have the
Committee take a look at the situation by conference call rather than
just staying with it and accepting whatever rate comes out of it.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Frank, one of the problems was that
nobody could be sure how long that unpredictable behavior was going to
continue. We didn't know how long that reluctance to borrow would
continue and we certainly didn't want to take care of it in the
directive because then we would have ended up [targeting] the fed
funds rate more narrowly than I think-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
was almost tempted to raise
to target the federal funds
want to do last meeting. I

After hearing the discussion last month, I
the question on the agenda:
Do you want
rate? That is what most people seemed to
wouldn't recommend it, but that's--

MR. MORRIS.
I recognize that there are a lot of hazards in
I think the question is whether we
targeting the federal funds rate.
ought to have a procedure under which, if the borrowing level is
producing a significantly different level of rates than the Committee
expected, the Committee should at least take a look at it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think you're misreading this history a
bit, if I may say so.
There is no doubt that the funds rate got
higher than was anticipated, given any particular level of borrowings.
But this happened over a period of 4 or 5 months; we had several
meetings when the interest rate was higher than we expected it to be
and there was a deliberate decision not to do anything about it.
When
it first happened, the money supply was rising very rapidly in May and
June and the economy was going along very rapidly and we had quite
ebullient forecasts that people weren't objecting to as to the rate of
economic growth. So, under those conditions people sat there and
said, rightly or wrongly:
"The interest rate is higher than we
expected it to be but it looks all right."
MR. MORRIS.
Sure.
That's
coming from a strong economy and is
it's coming from a deviant behavior
another thing. It seems to me that
differentiate these.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.

precisely the point.
If it's
expected, that's one thing.
If
on the part of the banks, that's
our procedures ought to be able to

If we can distinguish.
Well, the economy was visibly strong.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know whether you have a particular

proposal.
MR. MORRIS.
I have a proposal that we ask the staff to take
a look at this problem--if you agree that it is one--and to design a
proposal for dealing with it in the future.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.

This is not operative for today's meeting?

No, I'm not talking about today's meeting.

-31-

11/7/84

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, perhaps we can return to that point.

MR. MORRIS. Beyond that, in line with my previous comments,
I would prefer to stand back at the moment with alternative B until we
get further information. I would be perfectly willing to support a
move to a still further lowering of interest rates if the incoming
evidence suggests continued weakening in the economy. But it seems to
me that we ought to stop and take a reading with respect to what
impact the rate declines we have already seen will have on the economy
before we go further.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How long a time period are you talking

about?
MR. MORRIS.

A few weeks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What information are we going to get in
the next few weeks?
We know roughly what industrial production is
going to be.
The big information we're going to get is retail sales
figures; there's nothing else of any significance.
MR. KICHLINE.

Next Wednesday we will get the retail sales.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there anything else? When are durable
goods orders?
Is there anything else big coming out?
MR. KICHLINE. No.
We have personal income on November 19th;
housing starts on the 20th; revised GNP figures on the 20th; and
durable goods orders on the 21st, which will be the following week.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
orders two weeks from now.

So we get retail sales and durable goods

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are pretty sure that retail sales
will be somewhat on the weak side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the retail sales figure is
going to tell us much unless it is quite strong.
If it is, I would
think it significant. Myself, I think it is likely to be weak.
MR. PARTEE. And the GNP revision is likely to be downward.
So the first possible good-size plus number we could get would be on
durable goods. That's hanging an awful lot on durable goods orders.
MR. MARTIN. And if the purchasing agents are right, we're
not going to get a plus number.
MR. MORRIS.

[Unintelligible]

initial claims, basic commodity

prices-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get commodity prices and initial
claims, yes. Are you finished?
MR. MORRIS.

Yes sir.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

11/7/84

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it is important that we try
to get M1 back on a moderate growth path as quickly as we can.
Unless
someone is prepared to make pretty heroic assumptions [about] shifts
in demands for money, then it strikes me that a zero rate of growth
over a four-month period is just about the maximum that we ought to
tolerate.
But I think we have to be very careful here and in
particular take account of these lagged relationships that
traditionally have existed between short-term rates and M1.
We have
pushed short-term rates down some 200 basis points, and in the past
such a move usually has led to a very sharp spurt in money growth.
It
could be that this lagged response to the rate reductions we have
already had will produce a fairly good pickup in M1 in November and
December.
I think it would be very desirable if we could finish with
M1 close to the 6 percent midpoint at the end of the year.
But at the
same time, we have to keep in mind that the actions we take now affect
reserve pressures over the next few weeks and are going to affect M1
in the early part of next year.
I can see a danger that an overly
determined effort to try to get near that midpoint could start us off
in 1985 with an unacceptably rapid rate of money growth. But if you
look at the quarterly rates of growth in M1 or the other aggregates
for 1984 and see how much M1 in particular has decelerated, a fairly
rapid growth in the first quarter of next year would not look all that
bad to me.
The bottom line is that I think our reactions should be
rather cautious and measured.
I prefer the aggregate outcomes anticipated by "A," but at
the same time I am not at all sure that it's necessary to push the
borrowing target immediately down to $400 million with whatever
reduction in the federal funds rate that might imply. I would feel
more comfortable if we moved somewhat more slowly with a higher
borrowing target initially for the next couple of weeks or so; if it
becomes clear at that point that M1 is still below path, then I would
be prepared to reduce the borrowing target accordingly.
I would favor
[the language in the Bluebook under] alternative Roman numeral II with
certain changes in the second sentence for the wording of that and I
strongly endorse Frank Morris' suggestion that it really is time for
us to look at our procedures.
I think everybody wants to get the
money supply growing again, but we have no earthly idea how much we
will have to reduce the borrowing target or how much the federal funds
rate will have to come down to accomplish that. And I think that
means that our procedures are pretty faulty.
I doubt that I would end
up with the same recommendation as Frank but I certainly do endorse
his idea. In view of all these unexpected things that have happened
this year, our control mechanism leaves a lot to be desired and I
think we can improve it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. From my perspective what we have seen here
over the past several weeks, and indeed months, has been something
that I would consider an orderly adjustment in policy and interest
rates and so on.
There was at least a fleeting moment when I thought
it might become a little messy but that did not materialize.
In the
broad context of the situation that we are looking at, I would not be
troubled if interest rates went down a bit more in a context not
unlike what Tony spoke about earlier.
But let me turn to that in a
minute.
My view of the economy is a little different from many
others.
That is a factor in my thinking. But I would also caution

11/7/84

-33-

against too much of a reaction to M1.
We have been through M1
problems and we are going to go through them again.
It seems to me
that all of these fine arguments that Mr. Axilrod and others make
about M1 really come down to the question of how many angels can dance
on the head of a pin.
I don't know how many. I do know that seasonal
adjustment factors alone can make a big difference. We have looked at
these data using a seasonal adjustment technique that's very
respectable--I don't think it's any better than any others but it's
very respectable--and it produces almost a $7 billion increase in the
money supply from the first week of June to the second week of October
rather than a decline.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Better use that seasonal, Mr. Axilrod!

MR. PARTEE. We need to have several seasonals and we can use
the one that fits best!
MR. AXILROD.

50 seasonals!

MR. CORRIGAN. The point isn't that any one is better than
any other. The point is that this series is notoriously noisy and we
don't really understand it in the short run, and I think to pretend
that we do is a mistake. The only thing we can be sure about in terms
of M1 is that if it's surprising us on the down side right now, it's
going to be surprising us on the up side at some point in the not too
distant future. So, while I recognize the very special psychological
if not political significance of M1, I must say I would be very
cautious about going too far too fast in response to it even in the
context of everything else that is going on.
My thoughts on specifics
would be somewhere between "A" and "B."
I have no great concern about
the money specifications themselves.
Borrowing of $550 to $600
million wouldn't bother me.
I would prefer, at least for now, to
leave the federal funds range at 8 to 12 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, no one can take first place away from me
in recognizing the volatility of the M1 numbers.
And I agree, Jerry,
that the best thing to expect when we get a decline is a rise in the
next month. But we have been sitting here looking at surprisingly
weak numbers for quite a while and I think there is a cumulative
effect that most people do feel has a significance.
I think enough of
M1 as an indicator that I am inclined to be considerably impressed by
that or I presume that I am going to be impressed by it unless someone
gives me very good evidence as to why I shouldn't be.
As I review it,
M1 has been surprisingly weak over a period of time and probably
erratically weak in October.
I just don't see how we could have such
an economy that would produce a 7-1/2 percent decline in money as an
indication of the future.
But when you put it all together, it does
amount to quite a bit.
Because of that and the great damage that
that's going to do us, as well as what I said earlier about the
economy falling short and having room for further growth, I would not
be opposed to alternative A as the way to go.
I think it's time for a
fairly pronounced further adjustment. And it won't hurt us; I agree
with Paul that if it turns out to be wrong, we can tighten up a little
later on.

-34-

11/7/84

But right now it seems to me that the risks are such that we
ought to be guided to a degree by this weakness in the M1 numbers.
One advantage of a Wednesday meeting--maybe it isn't an advantage--is
that at least we get the most recent figures that way.
And I would
point out that Steve has indicated that with these most recent figures
it seems very improbable that we could get the M1 specs of alternative
A.
So, we ought to use something like the specs of alternative B
since we already have fallen well short of what was put in the
Bluebook for us last Friday. I also think that means we have to go to
a different kind of description of our policy than just a repetition
of the past one--focusing on what we would hope to see and would be
prepared to tolerate in November-December following the surprising
I guess the Roman numeral II [draft] directive is a
October weakness.
reasonable thing to be talking about.
I would reduce the federal
funds rate range from 8 to 12 percent to 7 to 11 percent, as Tony
suggested; and I would regard the midpoint of that range, 9 percent,
as entirely acceptable for the funds rate.
[On borrowing], $400
million seems a rather marked change in operational targeting. I
would put it at $500 million but I would not be prepared to accept a
figure as high as $600 million, as I think Tony suggested.
It is time
One final point:
for a little "oomph" to get into monetary policy.
If in fact it is true that it is becoming the very general view out
there that the inflation rate is going to be much calmer than was
previously expected, that, of course means that nominal rates have to
drop at least as much as the expected inflation rate--maybe a little
more--in order to offset the deflating effect of that change in
So, I don't know that we have gone too far at all in
expectations.
terms of the indicative real rates that would be associated with the
declines we have had in nominal rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.
Well, Mr. Chairman, given what I said earlier
this morning, it's probably not difficult to predict where I come out.
Of course, this behavior of M1 throws up some red flags and does
suggest a cautionary attitude. But there are a couple of mitigating
factors that I would like to put on the table.
One, the debt number
is still relatively high and that ameliorates my concern about the M1
decline a bit.
Secondly, I really don't think that M1 is yet showing
the influence of the lower rates that we've had in the past several
weeks.
Indeed, M1 might still be reacting to the higher rates that we
had during the summer.
So, given those lags and my view of the
economy--which is that it's basically coming down to a sustainable
level and we're going to get some pickup in the fourth quarter and
into 1985 as suggested by the staff--I think we just ought to pause,
rest on our oars, and let the easing that has occurred filter through
to the economy and the money supply. M2 and M3 are behaving quite
respectably and I am not at all uncomfortable with adopting a policy
that would allow M1 to be in the lower end of the range for the
I would be very cautious about continuing to ease
balance of 1984.
too much or pushing too hard in the direction of ease at this point.
With respect to the directive, I would prefer alternative B,
which as I interpret it is a status quo, wait-and-see alternative; and
I would keep borrowing at $700 million with the funds range where it
is.
As for the directive [language] I would prefer the second
alternative in the Bluebook, although in the second sentence of that
alternative there is reference to M1 being in the lower end of the

-35-

11/7/84

range and I'm not sure that it's necessary to flag that for the public
The bottom line for me, Mr. Chairman, is that I think we
generally.
have time and I would stay where we are.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Bob has given my speech; I am with him.
I would like to suggest that there is a case that we could look at,
Chuck, where the money numbers were giving us the same kind of
misinformation they are now and that was in the late spring and early
summer of 1980.
Now, the situation was quite different. But we were
looking at very, very large declines in real GNP and so we were
experiencing weak growth of money because we were moving down the
money demand function. And at the same time the money demand function
was dropping a ton. Signs that the economy was going to come out of
recession were beginning to emerge but that was very uncertain. So
what we did--and I have to say that I participated in this--is that we
kept pushing the interest rates down far enough so that finally we got
the money growth that we had been contemplating; but when we got it we
found that the economy was roaring upward.
So money growth began to
take place at horrendous rates and we pushed interest rates way, way
up again and got involved in a situation of volatility of money growth
and of interest rates which I think was neither necessary nor
desirable. Now, this is a totally different situation than that.
MR. PARTEE.
about that.

You can get whipsawed.

There's no question

I am optimistic that
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, and that's my point.
the economy is going to turn around; the signs of emerging strength
are there.
I am not certain, but I am reasonably confident that
that's going to take place.
I would not, therefore, want to see
interest rates drop much further from where they are now. In this
connection I would note that the staff forecast implies a federal
funds rate for the end of 1985 in the 10-1/4 percent plus range and if
we let the rate drop too much further, we are going to be looking at
the need for a significant increase in interest rates to keep both the
One point I want
economy and money growth under reasonable control.
to make is a more or less technical one:
The staff has been telling
us that seasonal borrowing is a very, very large part of the total
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. I think the number for the
seasonal component is $300 to $350 million.
If we adopted a borrowing
target of $400 million, we are talking about $50 to $100 million of
pure adjustment borrowing.
I don't know where the federal funds rate
is going to go but it could go down a lot further than to the 9
percent number that the staff is talking about.
MR. PARTEE.
I would assume that we are dealing with a time
when seasonal borrowing would drop.
MR. AXILROD.
Well, my thought would be that some of it would
drop.
Seasonal borrowing is running well ahead of where it runs with
even much more total borrowing. We don't know for sure how much of it
is going to stay because it is seasonal or distress borrowing and how
I think it will end
much really represents the response to the rate.
up a little higher than one would normally think in any event.

-36-

11/7/84

A good part of the seasonal is arbitraging the
MR. ROBERTS.
People just
discount rate. That was certainly true in my District.
took advantage of the opportunity and they will stop doing it.
MR. AXILROD.

That

[borrowing] will drop.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The conduct of monetary policy would
be better, I think, with a mix of a partial movement in the fed funds
rate and a cut in the discount rate in order not to get the borrowing
If the borrowing level gets too low, I think there
levels too low.
are complications.
MR. PARTEE.
I interrupted Lyle. I really was just thinking
that we are at the time of the year when we ought to get a drop in the
seasonal.
That is all.
I think the problems
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that could happen.
with the agricultural banks make it less clear that most of them have
been playing the rate spread and that what we're likely to see is the
normal seasonal decline. In any event, I would stick with alternative
B.
If we wanted to shave the borrowing level down to $650 million or
I would want the federal funds rate to stick
so, that would be fine.
in the range of 9-1/2 percent plus or minus a little and wait and see
what happens.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. As has been pointed out several times here, we've
seen a good deal of easing since the last meeting. As a matter of
fact, the easing is just about the amount that I had hoped for at the
last meeting, so what has been taking place in the easing of policy is
I think it is important not
getting very close to my comfort level.
In this
to allow short-term interest rates to fall too far too fast.
sense, I share Bob Black's feeling of the need for some caution in the
rate at which we ease policy. Having said that, I think we have to do
I would hope for something between "A" and
better than alternative B.
I would be very
"B" and I am not uncomfortable as we move toward "A."
happy to go along with Tony Solomon's recommendation of borrowing at
$600 million and adjusting the fed funds rate range down to 7 to 11
percent and hope that the aggregates show some improvement.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

In view of what I perceive to be the weak spots
MR. BALLES.
in business that could be spreading rather than about to improve, and
given the sustained undershoot in M1 since the middle of the year, I
am getting quite concerned about that problem. The well known
volatility of M1 on a monthly basis begins to wash out when it has had
I take no comfort in the fact
a weak performance for four months.
that M2 has been rising steadily because it did so preceding the last
I would be ready to err on the side of
major recession that we had.
ease for a while and if that proves to be too much, we can always
correct it later. By and large the one alternative that to me at
least would be unwise is alternative B, since that anticipates a
borrowing level of $700 million and an expected federal funds rate of
10 percent.
In sum, I would be happy to see alternative A or possibly
And if we were to go for "A," I would be
halfway between "A" and "B."
a little cautious in going down to a borrowing level as low as $400

11/7/84

-37-

million right away; I would prefer to start at about $500 million for
much the same reasons Governor Partee has already set forth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. On cyclical grounds, I really find it very hard
to make an argument for any kind of easing.
I see the risks of making
the same old mistake of easing in the latter stages of an expansion.
But the discussion of M1 may provide a justification for how I can
perhaps get myself off the hook of being-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't know we had that problem of
easing too late in an expansion.
MR. WALLICH.

I think that has been what has often happened.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We always got accused of the opposite.

MR. WALLICH. Cyclically, I see--maybe it's inadequate
tightening. But your remark, Mr. Chairman, that if we overshoot on
the down side we could catch it again and tighten, does encourage me a
little in a different interpretation of the situation. We obviously
have very high real interest rates.
As Chuck said, each time
inflation expectations come down real interest rates go up. Over time
we have to bring these down. The main way of bringing them down is to
reduce the budget deficit. But I think it also has something to do
with monetary policy in the sense that there isn't enough money in the
economy to allow interest rates to be lower. Now, the difficulty is
getting that money into the economy without going to a very high
growth rate of the aggregates--which looks terrible, sends the wrong
signal, and may never be caught up with and never be stopped. When
you have a temporary reduction in demand for M1, or maybe a permanent
reduction, that does provide an opportunity without seeming to gun the
aggregates to increase the amount of money in the economy in a limited
way and thereby put pressure on real rates.
So, with that analysis, I
could go somewhere between "A" and "B."
I think $600 million would be
the maximum, given the danger that borrowing could become too low and
the funds rate might be destabilized.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[You mean]

$600 million would be the

minimum.
MR. PARTEE.

That's as far as you would go?

MR. WALLICH. That would be as far as I would want to go.
And for the funds rate range, if this is an effort to bring rates down
by increasing the stock of money and not the rate of growth of money
in the economy, 7 to 11 percent would be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Although there is some uncertainty as to where
the economy is going, from the earlier comments it does seem to me
that on balance the tone has changed very substantially from our past
meeting and that we are in an environment where some easing is a
reasonable expectation. I wouldn't make too much of the M1 number for
one month but, as has been pointed out, this [weakness] has been
persisting for some period of time now and just maybe it's telling us

11/7/84

-38-

something.
I would not in turn overreact, but as I look at the dots
on the charts it seems to me that neither alternative A nor
alternative B is an overreaction. Rather, I would think we ought to
be aiming toward the middle of the range over a longer period of time
as we look into the next year. And that leads me to alternative A.
I
would reduce the federal funds range to recognize a reduction that has
taken place in the market--not so much because I think that 7 percent
would be an operative rate. But if the federal funds rate were to get
back into the 11 percent area with any persistence, I certainly think
that would be an opportunity for a telephone call. With regard to the
borrowings, I think going down to the level suggested in the Bluebook
under alternative A is pretty severe; therefore, I would think a
borrowing level of, say, $500 to $550 million would be appropriate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I am voting for alternative A for two basic
reasons.
One, of course, is what I see as the slowing in the economy
and the sobering of the moods out there in the business world.
Secondly, although I am not obsessed with what happens to M1, I am
depressed with what has happened to M1 growth in the four months from
July to October.
In fact, what is shown even under alternative A for
the final quarter this year does not look like red hot growth.
Also,
looking at M2, whose expected growth in the fourth quarter is 7-1/2
percent, which would be the midpoint of the long-term range, that
doesn't seem excessive either.
And then getting to where this would
put us at year-end, we would be below the midpoint though within the
long-term ranges for both M1 and M2.
So, this doesn't strike me as
easing irresponsibly. Also, when I look at the reserve figures, I am
not surprised that monetary growth was as slow as it was in October.
I guess I am surprised it wasn't slower when I see the dive in
nonborrowed reserves and total reserves.
So, I would vote for
alternative A.
In terms of the directive, I would use the number II
alternative.
I don't feel that the relationship between borrowing and
the fed funds rate is clear enough to me to know what kind of
borrowing numbers would come through.
It seems to me this is somewhat
of a crap shoot; there is obviously a number out there some place that
is the right one, whatever that is, and it will give us fed funds in
the range of 7 to 11 percent and would satisfy me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. In my opinion the pause in the economy and several
months of flatness in the money supply argue for active support of
growth in the money supply.
Both "A" and "B" accept a shortfall in
money, which I favor, but of the two I would favor moving toward
alternative A.
I would like to see that kind of growth rate in
November and December. I think we ought to move carefully toward that.
I wouldn't want to jump to a $400 million borrowing level.
And as we
test borrowing levels below $700 million, I would like to see a 9
percent plus federal funds rate and something around 9 percent
triggering a call.
I am assuming something quite far toward
alternative A.
In that assumption I assume no change in the discount
rate.
I am sympathetic with the people who have said that we have
come a long way with regard to interest rates; they are down
considerably and we ought to wait and see [the impact of] what we have
already done.
In addition, I still believe that the long-term
underlying problem in the economy, and our top priority, is inflation.

11/7/84

-39-

So, if we adopt something toward alternative A, we may have to reverse
our actions if the recovery comes on as strongly as I think it might
or if the growth in money resumes.
But I prefer to take the risk of
the reversal to the risk of waiting. That's where I come out.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
difference between alternatives A and B, given the money numbers that
we have looked at, clearly a move to alternative A would suggest some
further easing immediately after this meeting. We don't have a lot of
hope, judging from the comments around the table and from the staff,
that we will reach the level of money growth that is incorporated in
alternative B; therefore, if we move to alternative A, we are going to
be easing more aggressively immediately after this meeting. The
second point is that in accordance with the staff's projection,
alternative B suggests a federal funds rate in the neighborhood of 10
percent with a $700 million borrowing level.
I think there is fairly
good evidence that there has been some shift in the demand for
borrowing and, therefore, the relationship between the borrowing level
and the federal funds rate is perhaps less precise than in the past.
Let me just make two points in that regard.
One is that, clearly, the
unwillingness of large banks to borrow following the Continental
situation has reversed itself. They don't seem to be experiencing
that unwillingness and as a result have come back to the discount
window. The second and more important thing is what Lyle Gramley has
spoken of and that is the relationship of the borrowing level to the
federal funds rate when you incorporate seasonal borrowing into that
borrowing level. Traditionally, seasonal borrowing has commenced
growing around the first of the year, grows through August, and then
declines to almost zero by the end of the year.
This particular year
Seasonal borrowing
that pattern did hold, but at a much higher level.
And there has been little or
has been much higher than in the past.
no decline from August forward, as we would have experienced in the
past. We're now in the $300 to $325 million range for seasonal
borrowing; if you consider that that has become less sensitive to
If you take that away from
interest rates, there is very little room.
the total borrowing level of $700 million, we are at a frictional
level, it seems to me; adjustment borrowing would be virtually
nonexistent if we go to the $400 million level and at the frictional
level if we remain at the [current] level.
The conclusion that I would draw from all of this is that I
would opt for alternative B because we don't know what relationships
will come to pass as the result of the interest rate drops that have
I would consider those fairly aggressive--1-1/2
already taken place.
Secondly, I would
to 2 percentage points over the last five weeks.
also anticipate that if we adopted "B" as specified in the Bluebook
with a $700 million level of borrowing, we would see some further
easing in interest rate levels, maybe to the 9, 9-1/4 or 9-1/2 percent
area. It would seem quite appropriate to me that we get to that 9 to
9-1/2 percent area, but I think we can achieve it with a $700 million
borrowing level.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Why do you say that, Roger?

Simply because a good part of the seasonal is
MR. GUFFEY.
inelastic now or unresponsive to interest rate levels, which I think

-40-

11/7/84

Then you're really operating on a borrowing
the record would reflect.
function of something in the neighborhood of $400 million and that is
closer to a 9 percent federal funds rate than a 9-1/2 percent rate, as
suggested by the Bluebook. Alternative A would get you there with a
$400 million borrowing level.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I agree with you on the $400
I am just a little surprised that you said to continue the
million.
$700 million level would bring fed funds down to about 9-1/2 percent.
MR. GUFFEY. I think fed funds right now are probably at the
If we don't do anything, I think
9-1/2 percent level or thereabouts.
we will see them come on down to that level. The last point I want to
make is that if I were running policy by my own prescription, I would
rather take "B" and a $700 million borrowing level for the reasons I
have just expressed--expecting fed funds to come down to the 9-1/2
percent area. Then, if we saw a need for further easing, I would do
it with a discount rate decrease rather than letting the fed funds
rate run down to 9 percent or maybe even below 9 percent and then
making a 1/4 or 1/2 point cut in the discount rate, which could push
[rates] down to a level that I would not want to see occur.
MR. PARTEE.

May I just ask Roger a question?

MR. GUFFEY.

Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Roger, I've never looked all that closely at
these seasonal borrowing arrangements. Do they have a terminal date?
MR. GUFFEY. Yes, there should be a terminal date on seasonal
borrowing; it can run out as far as 11 months, Chuck.
MR. PARTEE.

And you said it started in April?

MR. GUFFEY. Historically, such borrowings start at the first
On
of the year.
Just to give you the figures from '81 to '83:
average, they would go up to a $250 million peak level in July and
The pattern
then decline back down to about $60 million in December.
this year was that they started out at about $80 million in January,
progressed up to a $350 million peak in August and are currently in
the $310 to $325 million range; we don't see that falloff in the last
half of the year.
MR. PARTEE. That was why I asked that question. I just
wondered whether there would come a point where you would want to
clean up and call them off and say the year is over.
If you consider that it is inelastic and that
MR. GUFFEY.
there has been a shift in demand for borrowing, then those banks that
run out of their seasonal privilege are going to come back in for
adjustment credit or they are going to be illiquid.
MR. PARTEE.

Then it will be adjustment credit at that point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I came into this meeting with a lot of
uncertainty about the economy and the outlook and, as it draws to a

-41-

11/7/84

close, I really don't feel as though I have been overwhelmed by an
abundance of clear vision.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
we're uncertain.

The clearest vision we may have is that

MR. BOEHNE.
I think we are all pretty much in the same boat
of uncertainty. It really comes down, then, to how you posture
yourself when you aren't sure and where you have more room for error.
I think there is considerably more room for error on the expansion
side than on the slowdown side.
So, for all the reasons that have
been given in support of that position, I come down on the side of
alternative A.
I think it is easier to undo a mistake on the
stimulative side at this point than to undo a mistake of not being
stimulative enough.
I do think $400 million on borrowing is a little
low; $500 million makes sense to me.
Initially, my main concern is
that it is a long time between now and the next meeting. If we tack
on to the four months or so of slow growth in the economy and slow
growth of the money supply, we could end up with six months of the
wrong kinds of numbers.
I am not a great fan of money but I think it
does tell us something when it begins to cumulate like this.
So, I
think we ought to be awfully careful as we go through the intermeeting
period. And if it turns out that the incoming figures on the economy
are weaker and money continues to be weak and we don't have any really
good reasons to explain it other than a weak economy, then I think we
may have to become increasingly aggressive as we head toward the end
of the year.
I don't have strong feelings on the directive language;
I have a slight preference for alternative I.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated a little earlier,
my view of the economic outlook is not quite as pessimistic as some.
I find myself in a dilemma because I find myself agreeing with the
last speaker regardless of what he has said!
Intuitively, the
uncertainty that we all share, which is obvious, tells me that we
shouldn't do very much that is different from what we are doing at
this point.
I really agreed with Karen Horn's description of the
situation except that I come to a different conclusion about what to
do about it.
I would remain where we are, alternative B as
prescribed, and then as events unfold move to a little more ease if
necessary as opposed to going the other way to a bit more ease now in
the recognition that we could move policy back. I would not go that
way. On the borrowing assumption, however, I would not feel as
strongly that it has to remain at $700 million. I rather agree with
Roger:
Alternative B as prescribed but with an initial borrowing
assumption of $600 million would be all right with me.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since I have not looked at these
directives very closely, the first one is just like last time, right?
We would have to put in different numbers.
MR. PARTEE.

We are going to have to put in a lower Ml.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I ordinarily have a strong bias toward not
changing these directives in mid-quarter, but this time we are so far
off on M1 that maybe it would be better to change the whole thing than
to put in a funny number, which leads me to alternative II.
A number

-42-

11/7/84

Let me ask whether we
of people, but not everybody, mentioned II.
I am not saying every dot and tittle of it, but
should work from II.
the difference is that it involves saying something special about M1.
That's the substance of it.
MR. WALLICH. I see a case for alternative I because I don't
If we do ease
think we want to show a very high rate of money growth.
I don't think one would want to
some, we would be doing enough.
signal on top of that that something is being done that is really
irrelevant [to our decisions], which is the sense [of the difference]
between alternative I and alternative II.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am a little concerned also about
the market speculating as to why we gave two-month instead of threemonth growth rates.
A lot of [market observers] will presume there
If the
are reasons; and if so, I wonder if they're worthy ones.
numbers add up to what they add up to, then I don't see why we should
put ourselves in the position of treating M1 specially in order to
come up with a higher-sounding number when anybody who really is a Fed
watcher is going to know exactly what it will mean and that it will
I have a mild
say the same thing for the quarter as a whole.
preference for alternative I.
I have not really examined this closely
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
but the thought just occurred to me:
Suppose we combine alternative I
and II and avoid the two-month number.
It may be a bad precedent
since we haven't the vaguest idea whether we are going to come close
But
to it for two months and part of the two months is already over.
"This action is expected to be
suppose we said something like:
consistent with growth of M2 and M3" at whatever [rates we decide].
Those rates are not changed in substance or even not changed at all.
However, then we'd
Maybe we could even say "as indicated last month."
"In view of the shortfall in M1
put in a special sentence about M1.
in October it is anticipated that the quarterly figure would be"-whatever. And then maybe we should pick up this part "More rapid
growth would be acceptable in M1 in view of the substantial decline of
M1 in October which brought that aggregate in the bottom half of its
Maybe that's
Or we could leave that last part off.
long-term range."
Just put in a quarterly figure and a sentence on M1
the way to do it:
and then say, just as you say here, that more rapid growth would be
Make that the third
acceptable in view of the substantial decline.
sentence of alternative I.
MR. PARTEE. My objection to leaving it the way it is is
this:
It seems to me that either we make a mockery of having had
targets or we have to ease an awfully lot more to get growth up to 6
How can you reduce it from 6 percent to 2-1/2 percent just
percent.
Paul's way of dealing with that at
because you have had a bad month?
least makes it understandable, I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.

At least we are admitting--

That's right.

MR. GUFFEY. But the number that we will put in there with
that change will be something in the neighborhood of 1-1/2 to 2
percent for M1 growth in the fourth quarter.

-43-

11/7/84

MR. PARTEE.

It will be pretty small.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
whatever we put in anyway.

II,

Well, I don't think it is going to change

MR. GUFFEY. That is the reason I would opt for alternative
so we don't have to deal with it in mid-quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presumed we were going to put in 2-1/2
to 3-1/2 percent or compromise between them and put in 3 percent.
MR. AXILROD.
months for M1.

Well, alternative II is only focused on the two

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
some quarterly figure.
MR. PARTEE.

I know, but I presume that's the same as

Yes, it's 2-1/2 or 3-1/2 percent, depending on--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's going to take 1/2 percent
bigger growth for the two months because we are one percent lower in
October than we thought we were.
MR. PARTEE.

So we can't really put in more than 3 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three is a nice round number and that
implies a little over seven percent, I take it, for November-December.
I don't even know what you have. What are you intending to put in
What was
You said 7 percent for "B."
here on the two alternatives?
it for "A"?
MR. AXILROD.

"A" had 8-1/2 percent.

So, it is 8 or 8-1/2
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible.]
For "B" you had 7 percent and for "A" you had 8-1/2
percent, I guess.
percent and it is starting out a little low so that adds another 1/2
percent.
So you would have 7-1/2 [and] 9 percent for those two
If we put in 3 percent--if I'm doing this arithmetic right-months.
that implies 8 to 8-1/2 percent for-MR. GUFFEY.
percent.

Something more--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 3-1/2 percent presumably implies 9
If my arithmetic is right, it comes out about 8-1/4 percent.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes, it's about 8-1/2 percent.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right; you need 8-1/4 percent for
November-December to get 3 percent for the three months.
MR. AXILROD. Well, our numbers are 3-1/2 percent for
September to December and 8-1/2 percent for October to December.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.
[unintelligible].

With the new October figure?

No, I am sorry.

That's with the old October

-44-

11/7/84

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if you haven't written off
alternative II altogether, I think you can do essentially that same
thing fairly easily if you change the second sentence right after the
semi-colon and say something like "which would partly offset the
unanticipated decline in October."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't that much difference between
these two [alternatives].
The only difference is that one sentence
really.
It's a question of whether we state it as a quarterly figure
or as a two-month figure.
MR. BLACK.

That's exactly right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The rest of this is all open.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, not only have we used quarterly
figures but, as I said before, Fed watchers are going to come out with
the same arithmetic.
Thirdly, if we do fall short of this 8 to 9
percent growth in November and December-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know how you got that figure.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
--it clearly makes it even fairly
obvious to non-Fed watchers and casual Fed watchers that there was
this enormous shortfall.
I just don't see why we want to play around
with moving away from the quarterly numbers.
The minute we do that
they are really going to take out their pencils and do all the
arithmetic.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only issue here, which is not
a substantive issue but a cosmetic issue, is precisely that:
whether
we want to cite a two-month number--whether that's a good policy on
balance or not.
I have some sympathy for saying it's not.
We've
pretty consistently used quarterly numbers.
MR. MARTIN. We don't have any real reason for the shortfalls
and how to read them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I am saying that we might as well
stick with the quarterly figure.
In either event, I would make a
special sentence about M1 and say whatever we want to say about a
shortfall in it.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Let me ask a minor question, Steve.
If my recall is correct, and it probably isn't, didn't we always use
the word "reduce" rather than "decrease" existing pressures on reserve
positions?
MR. AXILROD.

Oh heavens, I don't remember.

MR. GRAMLEY.

You think there's a difference?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. AXILROD.

People are going to wonder why.

I can't imagine that they will.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
"reduce"?

Yes.

But am I correct that we always used

-45-

11/7/84

MR. AXILROD.

I don't know.

I can check.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to resolve the problem we
have here and then we can come back and try to write something.
Again, I don't think there is a substantive difference. After "This
action is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3" why
don't we put in the same figures we had before.
We're within a half
percent of them, aren't we?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say "growth of M2 and M3 at annual
rates of 7-1/2 and 9 percent."
All right?
MR. AXILROD.
we are not actually--

That is, we are projecting to be within that;

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What do you mean?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the October figures are quite different:
6 percent for M2 and 10 percent or so for M3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

It's still a reasonable target, right?

Yes, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Shall we stick a phrase at the end of that
such as "as indicated at the last meeting" or something like that?
Then go with another sentence on M1?
Well, maybe we don't need that
"as indicated at the last meeting."
MR. AXILROD.

though.

You could say "continue to be consistent."

MR. PARTEE. Except we're changing the specifications,
So, "continue to be consistent"--

MR. GRAMLEY.
those rates.

No matter what we do, they are going to grow at

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "M1 is expected to grow over the period
by" whatever. Let's say 3 percent tentatively, which is halfway
between and a round number. We could just put a semi-colon and then
say "more rapid growth would be acceptable in view of the substantial
decline of M1 in October."
Or we could say "M1 is expected to grow
over the period by 3 percent, less than anticipated earlier in view of
the shortfall in October."
MR. AXILROD.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. GUFFEY.

That's better.
What period are we speaking of?
From September.
Oh, September to December.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then we could go on to say "In the
light of that shortfall, more rapid growth in that aggregate would be
acceptable."

-46-

11/7/84

Do you want to say "In view of the
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
negative number in October" rather than "the shortfall"?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "decline in October" is all right.
Then we're going to say more generally "Lesser restraint on reserve
positions would be acceptable in the event of significantly slower
I sure don't know whether we need
growth in the monetary aggregates."
that greater restraint sentence.
The whole thing starts out with "decrease
MR. PARTEE.
I wonder whether we want the "somewhat."
somewhat."
Is that general
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get to that point.
framework of the directive--just in terms of the language--all right?
SPEAKER(?).

Mind over matter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me take the funds rate first; that
seems to be easier. Most people have said 7 to 11 percent, which
It's more centered and we raised it not so long
makes sense to me.
ago.
I think after all this period of time it might be appropriate to
have some gesture toward reducing it.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's a lucky number.

Generally, we are at 7 to 11 percent?

MR. MARTIN.

Yes.

SPEAKER(?).

I guess so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The critical figure will be the borrowing
I
assumption. There we are dealing with a great deal of uncertainty.
think all these comments about the seasonal borrowing are relevant but
also I suppose it's possible that the seasonal borrowing will decrease
now that market rates are so low. We had an experience recently with
a big bank waltzing in for a large amount of borrowing for no apparent
reason. And if one or two big banks waltz in during a reserve period,
that uses up all our borrowing here and we're left in a peculiar
position. We have a full range of proposals here--from $400 or close
to it to $700 million, which averages to $550 million.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

You may have two groups of dissenting

votes.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think there is some danger in easing
I don't think that analogy in '80 is a
too aggressively here.
terribly good one to give because we had those credit controls and
But we have had a pretty
other factors that were driving down M1.
I personally feel a little more
good decline in interest rates.
comfortable about the outlook simply because interest rates have
I think we have to show some motion here and that seems to
declined.
be the prevailing sentiment. What anything means I don't know. As a
practical matter, I take it nobody would be very happy at this stage,
contrary to a few weeks ago, to see the rates backing up appreciably
in the market; the bill rate can go up a little from where it is today
But I don't know what borrowing level provides
and so forth.
assurance against that.

11/7/84

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I'm afraid that at $700 million there
might very well be some backing up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that. We don't know that,
but I would agree that the odds are substantial in that case.
It
could happen with $600 million but that is less likely, depending upon
where you think it is now. Driving it down to $500 million seems to
me a bigger step than is appropriate at the moment. Maybe it will be
appropriate in a few weeks. My view is that that could put the funds
rate at 8-1/2 percent, given-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

If we have a volatile--

MR. PARTEE.
I thought we had a staff projection that $400
million would be consistent with 9 percent.
MR. RICE.

Yes, that $400 million would be 9 percent.

MR. AXILROD. We think that borrowing of $400 million will
keep the funds rate slightly above the discount rate. And it might go
below that; I don't think it will.
A lot depends on how we manage
operations and the signals given.
In general, that's probably right.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, if the markets think that we're
going to be easing aggressively, they will go even further, Chuck.
MR. PARTEE.
discount rate.

They probably won't cut it much below the

MR. AXILROD. Well, I ought to add a caveat, Governor Partee.
With this two-week reserve period what President Solomon mentioned is
perfectly right.
If we have to push reserves in aggressively to get
the borrowings down or if some big bank comes in early and creates a
lot of excess reserves and the funds rate tends to go down,
anticipations of a discount rate decrease will come into play and the
actual funds rate may actually fall below the present discount rate.
Now, I can't imagine that the borrowing will be particularly high in
those circumstances, but there is some give there.
It would be pretty eccentric to have the funds
MR. PARTEE.
rate much below the discount rate.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, not for any sustained period.
been for a few days; it was on Monday and Tuesday.

But it has

MR. PARTEE.
Maybe we just ought to provide some reserves and
forget about this borrowing number.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We could do that, but we're going to get

the-MR. PARTEE.

We don't know what will happen then.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply is weak, we are going
to drive [the funds rate] way down and then you get into the '80s
That's what we did in 1980-[situation].
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

-48-

11/7/84

--until we finally stopped and the funds
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
rate got way below the discount rate. Maybe that's what we want to do
at the next step but I am not sure we want to do it right now. Given
the way this market has been acting, my gut feeling is that we ought
to be in the $550 to $600 million range. And if the rate shows signs
of backing up at that level--unless we get some really good business
numbers--we ought to let borrowing go down further pretty promptly but
We have one two-week reserve period and
do it over [a few weeks].
I'd do it by the next
then we have another two-week reserve period.
Are we in the first week
reserve period maybe, but not all at once.
of a reserve period? No, we're just ending a reserve period.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. AXILROD.

It starts on Thursday.
The reserve period starts tomorrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, by the beginning of the next reserve
period we will have the retail sales and the durable goods orders
figures and some more data on unemployment claims, won't we?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We will have more flexibility and
more options to move or not to move on the discount rate if we go down
I think the
to the $600 million, or possibly the $550 million, level.
$600 million level is better, because otherwise we are going to have
real problems with what may be a psychological situation in the
markets where the expectations are so heavy for a discount rate cut
and so affecting behavior that we may feel that that's what we want to
do if conditions indicate further easing.
MR. PARTEE. That second reserve period, if I am reading it
Is that a
correctly from the calendar, starts with Thanksgiving.
problem?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.
MR. PARTEE.
the holiday.

We serve pressed turkey here!

You have a thing for pressed turkey.

We don't want to end up being the turkey!
That second period may be eccentric because of

MR. STERNLIGHT. There might be reserve problems because of
the holiday then, but I don't think it presents any problem for edging
the borrowing down.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, particularly--

--particularly at the beginning of the period.
MR. CORRIGAN.
It could at the end of the period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to be too arithmetic about
it, but the great majority of the Committee is within $50 million of
$550.
MR. PARTEE.

I could accept $550 million as a first step.

MR. MARTIN.

What would the second step be?

-49-

11/7/84

further.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it would depend on whether we had to go
We would have to go down toward $400.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the money supply is weak and the
economy is weak and so forth-MR. PARTEE.

If everything is still weak, probably.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or a discount rate cut rather than go
completely down to $400 million in the second step.
MR. PARTEE.

Maybe both.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

But that would be a half-point cut.

I would just remind you that the borrowing level
MR. GUFFEY.
was just reduced from $750 to $700 million this week. And federal
funds today--although to be sure it's Wednesday--are trading below the
I don't know what all of that means and the funds rate
discount rate.
shouldn't remain there, obviously, but we've already taken one cut
Now
from $750 to $700 million that the market doesn't know about.
you're suggesting cutting it another $150 million.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But at the conference call, you
remember, there were some people who wanted to ease aggressively and
some of us--and I was in the other group--wanted to ease only to a
point where we avoided going down to 9-1/2 percent [on the funds
rate].
We thought that the Chairman and the Open Market Desk might go
as low as $650 million on the borrowing assumption. Some of us hoped
I think they stayed very
the rate would not go much below 10 percent.
faithfully within the spirit of the consultation by bringing borrowing
down only to $700 million. And the average fed funds rate recently
has been a shade under 10 percent. So I think it was a perfectly
appropriate move; I was a little surprised it didn't come earlier
In a sense, that's
because the market situation was very strange.
past history almost, Roger, and I think-MR. GUFFEY.
Let me be sure to be understood.
I am not
critical of having moved to $700 million. I am just noting the fact
that we very recently moved to the $700 million level and to talk
about taking it to $550 million seems to me to be a rather large
change in policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a pretty good microscope if you
can tell the difference between $750 and $700 million.
MR. GUFFEY.

Well, to be sure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It was a feeble gesture to--

MR. GUFFEY.
I cannot tell the difference, but the fact of
the matter is that there has been an overt move and we don't know what
the result is.
MR. CORRIGAN. I personally think that whatever we do the
market is at a point where it is likely to try to run beyond it, which
is another reason I would favor a more conservative approach. I think
the market psychology is a big factor here.

11/7/84

-50-

MR. ROBERTS.
There is the possibility, of course, that the
market, having already discounted a discount rate decrease and a move
[by this Committee], might react adversely if we didn't move enough.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If they did, then we ought to move more;
don't think anybody is talking about a backup.

I

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I still feel that $600 million gives
us the maximum flexibility to respond to any changing circumstances
either in the market psychology or in the real economy or--well, I
don't think we'll see much change in the money numbers in the next few
weeks.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Frankly, the difference between $550 and
$600 million is not going to be visible in anything we do.
It's
within the range of error that we hit anyway.
MR. CORRIGAN.
[It's not] the difference between $550 and
$600 million.
I think the only thing that matters is the extent to
which there is an implicit automatic assumption that you'd go down
further to $500 or even $400 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think the assumption is that we
would automatically go down; the assumption is we would go down if the
money numbers come in weaker than anticipated and if the business and
general news is biased on the less strong side rather than the strong
side.
If we come up with a positive retail sales figure in October
and a strong new orders figure and the money supply is up $3 billion
in the week of the 15th and another $2 billion in the following week,
the 22nd, I don't think there's any assumption that we'd do anything.
MR. MARTIN.

Would it be at $550 million then?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If we start at $550 million, it would.

MR. PARTEE. We also ought to take a look at this seasonal
question.
I don't know whether we'll get all that much detail but I
have a feeling that we may get the decline mainly from the seasonal
dropping off.
I'd forgotten about it until it came up today that this
seasonal borrowing must be running toward the end of its period and
that, therefore, there will be a drop in seasonal borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
following year?

that way.
believe.

Why won't they just renew it for the

MR. PARTEE.
Oh, I don't think they can; it's not really done
They have to have a time when they're out of debt, I

MR. AXILROD.
It may be a big factor this year. Normally
it's not a big factor because the variations in the other borrowing
and the errors in their relationship swamp it.
But we're getting so
close to it now that it may very well be a factor and we would
certainly want to look carefully.
MR. CORRIGAN.

It has been a factor, hasn't it, Steve?

11/7/84

51-

MR. AXILROD. Well, it's a factor technically in the
intercept, not necessarily in the slope of the relationship.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Why don't we compromise by saying the
initial borrowing assumption is in a range of $550 to $600 million and
leave it [to you] as you feel your way over the next couple of days?
MR. PARTEE.

How about $500 to $550 million?

MR. GUFFEY.

$600 to $700 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting pretty narrow. From my
standpoint, if you want to make it $550 to $600 million, it's fine
with me.
I'll make it whichever I feel like.
SPEAKER(?).

That's the actual state of the art,

I guess!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think everybody is saying we play this a
It depends
little [flexibly]; we've been playing it this way anyway.
If the market gets way ahead of it,
upon what happens in the market.
we go slower; if it doesn't, we go faster.
MR. MARTIN.
I'd just like to see you have the flexibility to
go to $400 million if the market conditions and the economy dictate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is within this anyway. You
can have an argument as to whether the market conditions and the
economy dictate it but it's certainly within the range of where we can
go as I understand it.
MR. PARTEE. I would like to think that we're doing this
within the context of alternative A, but we're--

means.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what alternative A
That's just a question of the number to put in, isn't it?
MR. PARTEE.

I just say that to give a sense of--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Frankly, the number that I thought of
putting in there--but it's not going to make any difference to me--is
If we do it on
the round number that is halfway between "A" and "B."
a quarterly basis, I'd put in 3.
MR. PARTEE.

I have no problem with 3.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's a danger in the sense that
the market is so bullish that they are going to seize on almost
anything. We're getting a very significant bond market rally; I don't
know that we've seen evidence of it in the stock market. Whatever we
do they're going to do more, if they think there's more to come.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To some extent that doesn't bother me
because I don't think the general business picture is very risky on
And if it gets moderately risky on the up side, we can
the up side.
tighten up.
I don't want to get the money supply [expanding so
rapidly] in the next few months that we've got a problem, but--

-52-

11/7/84

MR. PARTEE.
It gives you one more chance to adjust the
portfolio if you're an FCA or something like that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Steve], did you write down the language
that we had?
I'll fill in some numbers as you go along.
MR. AXILROD.

Maybe Normand has been writing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In sentence number one, I don't care
whether it says "reduce" or "decrease."
We'll take a vote on that.
"In the implementation of policy in the short run, the Committee
seeks..."
"To reduce" is a better Anglo-Saxon term; no they're both
Latin, aren't they?
MR. AXILROD.

The staff sees no difference, but--.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"Reduce" sounds better to me.

"...seeks

to reduce somewhat existing pressures on reserve positions.
This
action is expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 at annual
rates of around 7-1/2 and 9 percent during the period from September
to December."
We're putting in there the same figures we had before;
we're not very far away. Now I don't remember what I said before.
MR. BERNARD.
"M1 is expected to grow over the period at a
rate of around 3 percent...."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

3 percent semi-colon.

MR. BERNARD. Or [comma]
view of the decline in October."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

"less than anticipated earlier in

The unexplained decline.

MR. BERNARD. And you thought about possibly putting in there
"In light of that decline, more rapid growth would be acceptable."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of Ml would be acceptable.
MR. PARTEE.

In light of that decline more rapid growth

And then "More generally..."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and then it would go on to say "More
generally lesser restraint..."
Instead of "acceptable"--we just used
the word "acceptable"--let's say "Lesser restraint on reserve
positions would be sought in the event of significantly slower growth
in the monetary aggregates, evaluated..." etc.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if you go that far and use the
word "sought"--which is all right with me--then I think we ought to
leave in the counterbalance sentence.
Otherwise, if we leave that out
too, then it's really going to look silly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all right with me.
The other
sentence says "acceptable," which is weaker than this other one.
If
that sounds generally all right, we're still left with what level of
borrowing we're starting off with. I am perfectly happy with an
understanding of $550 to $600 million that would be played in the
first week depending upon how the market conditions look. We'll stay

-53-

11/7/84

there if things are very equable.
If things come out on the strong
side, well, we'd stay for a while; if things come out on the weak
side, we'd make another step downward.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And if you have to make a very
substantial step downward, we could have a consultation unless you
decide to do it through a discount rate.
I think the second step is to go down to $400

MR. PARTEE.
million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might well want a consultation staying
Is
within this, but we will have to see how obvious or clear it is.
Let's see whether we've got the votes.
that reasonable?
MR. MARTIN.

7 to 11?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KEEHN.

And 7 to 11 percent on the funds rate.

Not to stir the soup but-But it will.

SPEAKER(?).

MR. KEEHN. On this M3 number of 9 percent, I'd ask what the
Neither alternative A nor B would suggest that.
basis for that is.
MR. CORRIGAN.

It's the one we had the last time.

MR. KEEHN. The fact that we had it the last time I don't
find necessarily compelling.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're quite right, neither "A" nor "B"
has that, but they are within 1/2 point of it and I think that's-MR. KEEHN.
Just to carry over the language doesn't seem to
be a clean way of developing a directive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
when it's very close.

We've typically done that, or tried to,

MR. AXILROD. Looking back, the Committee has accepted pretty
much staying there when the expectation was within a percentage point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, M3 is running a little high and
M2 is running a little low. But gosh, we should be so close on these
things ordinarily!
If we end up with interest rates
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
[down] much further with your second or third step, there's going to
be absolutely no incentive in the Congress to do anything about that
deficit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
slowing down so much.
MR. MARTIN.

It works the other way if the economy is

That's the problem.

-54-

11/7/84

MR. BOYKIN.
Governor Partee's comment that this would be
done in the context of alternative A disturbs me a bit.
I can
probably agree to what you're saying in the context of alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what "in the context of"
means and I don't think I understand Governor Partee's comment.
MR. PARTEE.

I'll retract it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's in the context of what we're talking
about, which is a figure of 3 percent for M1 and 7-1/2 and 9 percent
for M2 and M3 and these general borrowing numbers.
It is talking
about going to, say, $400 million, without making a great deal of it,
if there is a succession of weak economic or monetary numbers.
MR. BOYKIN.
additional comment.
MR. BLACK.
you got through--

I just could not let his comment go without

You just have a short-term attitude ever since

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If no one has a better proposal at the
moment, I think we ought to vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Corrigan
Governor Gramley
President Horn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Seger

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Governor Wallich

Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We are finished.
END OF MEETING

