August 13, 2002

1 of 92

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

August 13, 2002 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 13, 2002, at
9:00 a.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 

Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman 

Mr. Bernanke 

Ms. Bies 

Mr. Ferguson 

Mr. Gramlich 

Mr. Jordan 

Mr. Kohn 

Mr. McTeer 

Mr. Olson 

Mr. Santomero 

Mr. Stern 

Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, Moskow, and Parry, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Minehan, and Mr. Poole, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist 

Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 

Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 

Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 

Ms. Johnson, Economist 

Mr. Stockton, Economist 

Mr. Connors, Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Howard and Lindsey, Ms. Mester,
Messrs. Oliner, Rolnick, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Ettin and Madigan, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Research and
Statistics and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors

August 13, 2002

Messrs. Slifman and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Divisions of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Clouse, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Connolly and Stewart, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston and New York respectively
Messrs. Goodfriend, Hakkio, Hunter, and Rasche, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, Chicago, and St. Louis
respectively
Messrs. Bryan, Cox, and Cunningham, Ms. Hargraves, Messrs. Rudebusch
and Tootell, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas,
Atlanta, New York, San Francisco, and Boston respectively

2 of 92

August 13, 2002

3 of 92

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

August 13, 2002 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To start, I’d like to welcome Governors Bernanke and
Kohn to their first meeting. This is the first time we’ve had a full contingent at an FOMC
meeting in four years, I believe. Jack Guynn is back. How are you feeling, Jack?
MR. GUYNN. It’s nice to be back, thanks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can kick us around again. [Laughter]
MR. GUYNN. I wouldn’t dare do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Turning to our first agenda item, would somebody move to
approve the minutes of June 25-26?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have in front of us a proposal to
nominate Vincent Reinhart to replace Donald Kohn as Secretary and Economist of the FOMC to
serve until the election of a successor at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31,
2002. Would somebody like to officially move that nomination?
MR. FERGUSON. I’ll move that nomination.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?
MR. JORDAN. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All in favor say “aye.”
SEVERAL. Aye.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I won’t ask for the “no’s.”
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Don Kohn isn’t sure! [Laughter]
MR. KOHN. He’s very sure!

August 13, 2002

4 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was more worried about Vince myself. Dino Kos, would
you start us off, please?
MR. KOS.1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. I’ll be referring to the
charts that were circulated a short time ago. On the first page, the top panel graphs
U.S. and euro-area three-month interbank cash deposits rates as well as rates three
months forward and nine months forward. The U.S. rates are in red, and those for the
euro area are in green. The U.S. cash three-month deposit rates edged lower by a few
basis points in the intermeeting period. But the three-month forward rate fell about
30 basis points and now trades slightly below the current three-month cash rate. The
three-month rate nine months forward fell nearly 1 percentage point. All of these
rates were influenced by lower equity prices, economic data that came in weaker than
the market had hoped, and budding expectations of lower official rates at some point.
The euro-area rates, shown by the green line, exhibit a similar if somewhat less
pronounced pattern in recent months. Forward rates for the euro area are now at or
below cash rates. The market’s fling in early May with a possible tightening of
policy has evaporated, as market participants downgraded their forecasts of the
economic situation in the euro area and as the euro’s appreciation came to be viewed
as doing some of the ECB’s work for it. In the bottom panel, Japanese short-term
rates continued to stay low, and there’s not very much to say there. U.S. Treasury
yields moved lower in the intermeeting period, responding to the same economic and
equity market news that affected U.S. forward rates. Liquidity in the U.S. Treasury
market has been good, as is the case generally in the mortgage backed and swaps
markets.
But one segment that has frayed a bit is the corporate sector, which is covered on
page 2. The top panel on page 2 shows—with the dark bars—weekly issuance of
investment-grade corporate debt for the year to date. March and early spring were
active, as many corporations termed out commercial paper into longer-term liabilities.
Issuance subsequently turned down and in the most recent weeks has slowed to a
trickle. Perhaps there are seasonal effects, though that is only part of the story. As
depicted by the red line, issuance held up during this period in 2001 with the
exception of the July 4 week, which is always a week when there’s little or no
activity. On the demand side, investors who have taken losses in their portfolios in
recent months have been reluctant to expand the amount of credit risk in their
holdings. And on the supply side, companies appear to be a bit more restrained about
raising funds in the current atmosphere.
The middle panel depicts the spread over Treasuries of investment-grade debt
since April 1. This is a Lehman Brothers index, which indicated a spread that was
hovering mostly between 175 and 200 basis points for much of the spring. That was
an already elevated spread, but perhaps understandable given the accounting and
corporate governance issues that investors have had to factor into their pricing. From
late June until early August, spreads widened another 50 basis points, to more than
1

Materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

August 13, 2002

250 basis points. Liquidity in the corporate sector decreased during this period, with
dealers widening out spreads and reducing the amount for which a quote would be
good down to about $5 million in many cases. This has made it very difficult for
investors to transfer larger positions.
While telecom names have been problematic for some time, new sectors have
become tainted. Energy trading and power companies are one example. And in the
past few weeks, the bonds of the auto companies have also been repriced downward.
Representative of that, I’ve shown in the bottom left panel the spreads over Treasuries
of Ford Motor Credit and GMAC bonds since July 23. The spreads for both have
widened sharply in the two weeks, particularly for Ford, which was hit by rumors of a
possible downgrade. The 7¼ percent bond of 2011 widened from 350 to 450 basis
points, and other Ford bonds rose to as high as 500 basis points over Treasuries in the
past few trading days. The bottom right-hand panel depicts the bid-asked spread,
expressed in basis points, for the same two bonds shown at left. This spread in a
normal environment might be 2 or 3 basis points. By late July it had already widened
out to 5 basis points for GMAC and 10 basis points for Ford Motor Credit. The
spreads then ballooned to 20 and 30 basis points, respectively, in the first seven or
eight trading sessions in August.
As the equity markets declined and fixed income markets turned volatile, the
price of insurance expressed by implied volatilities rose. The top panel on page 3
graphs the implied volatility on the S&P 100 equity index, which had been rising
steadily since late May but spiked higher in July and peaked at about 50 percent in
late July and again in early August. This is slightly higher than the peaks reached in
1998 and higher than the peak in September 2001 after the terrorist attacks. The
middle panel shows the volatility index for short and intermediate swaptions. These
are implied volatilities on options that give the holder the right but not the obligation
to exercise and roll into an interest rate swap. These instruments are used extensively
in hedging operations, especially by mortgage investors. Both indexes have hit very
high levels recently. The short-term swaption index has nearly doubled to almost
45 percent. By way of comparison, that index peaked at about 20 percent in 1998 and
at 36 percent in the aftermath of September 11. The intermediate-term index is also
at elevated levels and is currently near levels observed in October 1998. In contrast,
implied volatilities on currency options rose in late June but quickly began to trend
lower again. None of the three major currency pairs is now near the peak levels
observed in either 1998 or 2001. Part of the reason currency volatilities have been
restrained is perhaps that speculative positions appear to be relatively small; hence
there is less demand by that segment for hedging purposes. It may also reflect the
market’s lack of conviction about the future course of volatility in exchange rates, as
the major economies are expected to move broadly in sync.
Turning to page 4, the top panel graphs the dollar’s exchange rate against the
euro, the yen, the Swiss franc, the Canadian dollar, and the Australian dollar reindexed to April 1. The dollar had been falling against all major currencies through
mid-June, and it continued to depreciate against the euro, the yen, and the Swiss

5 of 92

August 13, 2002

6 of 92

franc. But the U.S. dollar actually began to appreciate against the Australian and
Canadian dollars, as investors came to view a slowdown in the United States as
adverse for major commodity currencies. More recently, the reassessment of growth
prospects in Europe has resulted at least in a pause in the dollar’s trend to the
downside against other currencies. The reduced growth prospects overseas can also
be seen in equity markets. The middle panel depicts changes in the S&P 500 and
major global equity indexes since April 1. All major indexes are lower, though those
for France and Germany, with heavy representations of telecom and media firms,
have performed worse than the others. Finally, in the bottom panel is the spread on
ten-year minus two-year government yields for the United States, Canada, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and Germany. As growth expectations have come down, the curves
have steepened, primarily by virtue of the two-year note declining faster than the tenyear note in each of these countries. The exception, of course, is Japan, where yields
at the short end can’t go any lower than they are now.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations for the System account in this 

period, and I will need a vote to ratify our domestic operations. I would be happy to 

take any questions. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Refresh my memory. What was it that occurred on
August 1 that abruptly opened the bid-asked spreads on Ford Motor Credit Company and GMAC
debt? Obviously, as shown in the graph, the spread was flat prior to that time, and then it
suddenly bounced.
MR. KOS. I don’t know that there was any single event. There were rumors at about
that time that Ford Motor might be downgraded. Since then those rumors have taken on even
more steam.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But General Motors did not have the same problems, as I
recall.
MR. KOS. Yes, I agree with that. Again, what seemed to be involved was a liquidity
shift and not really a single event. Now, corporate governance and accounting stories were
circulating, but these companies were not tied to those. I think that’s one of the more interesting
aspects about these bonds. The issuers are not in industries that have been tainted by those
problems, which does point to some interesting questions.

August 13, 2002

7 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What would happen if you were to choose a number of
other similarly situated so-called “untainted” companies? Well, today nobody is untainted,
unfortunately. Would you get the same sort of pattern? What is very interesting about this is
that the widening in the spreads starts on the first of the month. While I vaguely recall that that’s
not the same period in which BBB and high-yield bonds really began to take off against
Treasuries, it’s not that far off, is it?
MR. KOS. This is a very short period; it’s only about two weeks. Again, these spreads
had already begun to rise earlier. They were then stable for a few days and subsequently began
rising again. If I could approach your question in a slightly different way—I think if we looked
at a number of companies, the patterns in their spreads might depend in part not only on
perceived creditworthiness but on how much debt they have outstanding. Ford Motor Credit is, I
believe, the largest issuer in the bond market. It’s a very, very large issuer, and of course,
GMAC is as well. A year or two ago investors wanted to hold these jumbo issues. They were
considered desirable because investors perceived them as having a lot of liquidity. Now, we
know what has happened to some of the jumbo issues like those of WorldCom. Suddenly
investors don’t want to have these big positions on their books. They actually prefer to have debt
of issuers that don’t come to market that much, which will help to diversify their portfolios. So
to some degree a firm’s having lots of paper out there was perceived to be an advantage from the
investor’s perspective two years ago, and it is not viewed as advantageous today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it’s not the corporation; it’s the investor. It’s the
demand not the supply, so to speak.
MR. KOS. Well, it’s a mix. To some extent it may be that investors have some
questions about the auto companies specifically. They’re selling a lot of cars—auto sales have

August 13, 2002

8 of 92

been strong—and yet they don’t seem to be making any money. So there may be a repricing of
their creditworthiness as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They need the debt, but the debt service capability is not
there.
MR. KOS. Exactly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What does GE Capital look like in that regard?
MR. KOS. I don’t have the exact numbers in mind, but if I remember correctly, they
haven’t had quite this kind of deleterious performance.
MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, one way to look at it would be the credit defaults swap
spread for GE Capital—this is for five-year protection against default—which is 75 basis points
versus 290 for GMAC and 455 for Ford Motor Credit. It did rise, however, about 15 basis points
over the intermeeting period. But in comparison, the Ford Motor Credit spread rose 265 basis
points over that period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. What I find interesting about the profitless sales
argument is that the markets knew that July was going to be a really big month for auto sales.
Indeed, they caught on to it very early, and the estimates in the marketplace didn’t change much
throughout the month. Yet there is no evidence of this move until the end of that month. So, the
system doesn’t square in a number of respects.
MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, one other aspect that was talked about at that time was
the financial strength of the parent. There were a number of stories about GM particularly and
the unfunded pension liabilities associated with the declines in equity prices. So it’s also
possible that that could have affected investor sentiment toward those companies, independently
of what they sell.

August 13, 2002

9 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s true, a pension fund problem would clearly be
reflected in these types of numbers. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I think another factor that
increasingly has crept into the market, and for some reason it seems to have increased a lot on or
about August 1, is the risk aversion on the part of marketmakers. One can see it in the bid-asked
spreads and investors’ willingness to hold in portfolio amounts that would have been considered
quite manageable a year ago. One can see it in the international markets and the domestic
markets. Market participants are just running scared; and when they’re running scared, they tend
to manage much lower positions, and we get much greater volatility in markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think that’s clearly what the data show. But that’s
like taking somebody’s temperature and then saying it’s high. It doesn’t tell us why it’s high.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Well, I think one is looking for a rational
explanation of fear, and fear is not entirely rational.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that’s a good point. But sometimes, regrettably, it
tends to be.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think they have reasons to be frightened, but
they’re a little more frightened than one would wish they were.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, I’ve been impressed with the tightness of the
Australian and Canadian dollars for the obvious reasons of the nature of their international
positions. But that relationship looks peculiarly tight over the intermeeting period. Has it
always been that tight going back?
MR. KOS. Broadly, they do tend to move together, but we can have periods when the
correlation is fairly low. It seems that at times—such as now, when the perception about the

August 13, 2002

10 of 92

outlook for the economy is changing—they tend to move together. At other times, they’ll move
on local factors and not as much on international ones.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The composition of their internationally traded goods is
really quite similar. They are very heavy in wheat, minerals, and metals.
MR. KOS. I think the answer to your question is “yes, often.” But at times the
correlation will break down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Dino?
MS. BIES. I have a question. Can you comment just a little on what you see happening
in the commercial paper markets at this time?
MR. KOS. Well, the amounts of outstanding commercial paper have come down. I
would note two developments in particular in that market. One is that commercial paper for a
long time was a very low cost way of raising money. But having seen the commercial paper
market shut down to so many issuers, other corporations now are thinking twice about how to
structure their liabilities. They’re being a little more cautious about how much they want to rely
on commercial paper. There is also an interesting effect between commercial paper backup lines
and credit default swaps. That is, a firm wants to issue commercial paper and needs to have
backup lines of credit. The firm gets these cheap backup lines, and the people who provide the
backup lines then run out and hedge through the credit default swaps. We then have this effect
that Vince mentioned that the credit default swap rates go up and that makes it appear as if the
market has less confidence in the creditworthiness of those specific issuers. It has this
unintended consequence for the issuer. And I think people are finally beginning to figure that
out. To some degree I think issuers are having some second thoughts about how much paper

August 13, 2002

11 of 92

they want to issue, given that there’s this avenue through which other people might view them as
being less creditworthy.
MR. REINHART. Also, Governor Bies, July was the first month in which commercial
paper outstanding increased this year. One important reason was that there have been large
inflows to money market mutual funds and the fund managers had to invest those dollars
somewhere. So probably on the margin that made commercial paper a little more attractive.
MR. PARRY. But didn’t the turnaround occur in nonfinancial commercial paper?
MR. REINHART. Yes, July was the first monthly increase in nonfinancial commercial
paper this year.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I move approval of the domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you, very much. We’ll now go
to David Wilcox and Karen Johnson.
MR. WILCOX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I suspect that the typical reader of
the recent business press would find the outlook described in the August Greenbook
surprisingly bright. After all, the drumbeat of negative news during the last few
weeks has been nearly unrelenting, with news of corporate accounting scandals,
somber warnings about future earnings, stock prices that have been headed more
south than north, negative results on hiring and especially hours in July, sour reports
from various associations of purchasing managers around the country, a disheartening
reading on consumer sentiment, and the spectacle of the nation’s top CEOs and CFOs
having to swear that they are telling the truth in the documents they submit to the
Securities and Exchange Commission. One of the few upbeat counterpoints has been
the persistent strength of consumer spending, most strikingly for new motor vehicles
but also, according to this morning’s advance report, for other goods as well. But the
brisk pace of traffic in auto showrooms hasn’t dissuaded many observers from
focusing on the possibility of a second bout of contraction. In that context, how do
we explain a projection featuring 2½ percent growth in real GDP on average this
quarter and next, with the unemployment rate edging up only a little and privatesector payrolls starting to show some life?
Unfortunately, of course, it is all too possible that the pundits have it right. But I
want to begin by outlining a few of the reasons why, based on the information
currently in hand, we think the more likely path forward involves continued recovery,
even if at a sluggish pace by historical standards. First, by far the bulk of the earlier

August 13, 2002

12 of 92

inventory problem now seems to have been worked off. There are still a few entries
on the “watch” list—most notably communications equipment—but for most goods,
inventory holdings are in much better alignment with sales, and if anything, even a bit
lean. While the timing of the lift from inventory investment is highly uncertain, we
are reasonably confident that the lift will come and probably not too long from now.
Second, monetary policy remains accommodative. Measured in real terms, the funds
rate is in the neighborhood of zero, a very low level by historical standards. If you
prefer to measure the stance of policy in terms of the deviation of r from r*, you could
take comfort in the fact that the actual real funds rate still appears to be well below
the equilibrium rate, even if by a somewhat smaller margin according to our latest
estimates. And one important lesson of the recent experience is that the policy
channels are working fine: Low prevailing market rates allowed the automakers to
offer the cut-rate financing deals that attracted so many customers, and historically
low mortgage rates have helped sustain residential investment in the face of steeply
declining wealth and uncertain prospects for the labor market.
On the fiscal policy side, the marginal-rate cut implemented at the beginning of
this year still should be feeding through into household spending. And we continue
to believe that businesses will be encouraged by the temporary partial-expensing
provision to boost their spending on new equipment and software. Part of the
impetus from the federal level will be offset on the state and local side, but the
government sector as a whole should be a net plus for the growth of GDP. At the
margin, the downturn in the dollar during the last few months will also be a plus,
especially in comparison with the run-up during the preceding two years.
Taken together, these factors are enough to support sustained growth in GDP in
our baseline projection. We had projected that consumers would not flag in their
actual spending—even if they continue to share their apprehensions with the
University of Michigan and the Conference Board—and this morning’s retail sales
report provides reassuring evidence on that point. And in the business sector, while
we have become much gloomier about the outlook for nonresidential structures, we
still see spending on equipment and software as being on a slow but steady path to
recovery.
We also updated our views about a number of important parameters on the supply
side of the economy. First, the annual revisions to the national income and product
accounts told us that the average pace of growth during the last few years was several
tenths lower than previously estimated. From this information, we inferred that the
pace of structural productivity growth probably had been slower—and likely would
remain slower—than we had previously estimated, so we revised down our estimate
of the rate of growth of potential GDP. But with the slower rate of growth of
structural productivity, we were left with an incipient puzzle: The favorable inflation
performance of the last few years stood essentially as before, but now it appeared that
structural productivity growth was a less powerful explanation. To fill the gap, we
marked down our assumption for the NAIRU, from 5¼ percent to 5 percent, thereby

August 13, 2002

13 of 92

generating enough additional labor market slack to make the inflation picture fit
together.
Over the intermeeting period, the volatility in the stock market left major indexes
down substantially on net. Two items in this regard are worth noting. First, if the
long-term earnings growth projections of the equity analysts are to be given any
credence—and that is a mighty big “if”—then a real possibility has emerged that
stocks are currently undervalued. This points to one of the upside risks that we
highlighted in the Alternative Simulations section of the Greenbook. Second, perhaps
on cue from our Alternative Simulations section, stock prices have rebounded some
since we put the Greenbook to bed last week. If we had had the foresight to
anticipate that mini-recovery, we wouldn’t have altered our projection for the
remainder of this year materially but would have shown another tenth or two of
growth next year.
All in all, we see the incoming information as telling us that the economy is
moving along a growth track that is slower than previously projected but moving
forward nonetheless and with a slightly wider gap in resource utilization. In that
context, the prospects for future inflation remain extremely favorable. In the near
term, the greater margin of slack and its implication of even less inflationary pressure
are essentially offset by the reduced contribution from structural productivity growth
and by the acceleration we anticipate in import prices. Although the net effect of
these factors is essentially nil in 2003, if we had shown you a projection this time
around for 2004, as we will in the next Greenbook, you would have seen core PCE
inflation edging down another tenth or two from its already very low level.
Having highlighted the upside risk from the possible undervaluation of the stock
market, let me close by underscoring the possibility of a shortfall in aggregate
demand. As you know from reading the Greenbook, one of the downside risks we
featured was a further disappointment in business spending for equipment and
software. In particular, we simulated the effects for the rest of the economy of
assuming that outlays for E&S are flat for the remainder of this year and increase
only half as fast next year as in our baseline projection. According to our model, the
probability of an investment surprise of this magnitude is in the neighborhood of
10 to 15 percent. In the simulation we reported in the Greenbook, the funds rate was
assumed to be held fixed in nominal terms, and in that case, the output gap was
estimated to widen by nearly 1 percentage point relative to the baseline. However, a
policymaker following an aggressive version of the Taylor rule could limit the
increase in the GDP gap to a little more than ½ percentage point by moving the funds
rate down by about ¾ percentage point by the fourth quarter of next year.
A second downside possibility we examined is that households adopt the same
type of caution that seems to have characterized recent business behavior and so push
up the personal saving rate 1 percentage point higher than in our baseline. The model
suggests that the probability of such a large ongoing shift in the personal saving rate,
quarter after quarter, is very remote. But one can alternatively view this shock as a

August 13, 2002

14 of 92

stand-in for the full range of shocks on the demand side of the model; and under that
interpretation, a shortfall of this magnitude has about a 10 percent probability of
occurring, according to our model. In the results that we showed in the Greenbook,
the GDP gap finishes 2003 about1½ percentage points wider than in the baseline.
However, a policymaker whose behavior is described by an aggressive Taylor rule
once again can limit the damage, in this case holding the increase in the GDP gap to
about ¾ percentage point by dropping the funds rate about 1 percentage point by the
first half of next year. Karen Johnson will now continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. As we tried to convey in the Greenbook, the staff outlook for
the global economy over the remainder of this year and next is a bit weaker than last
time and less certain. The factors behind this change in tone with respect to global
prospects can be grouped into three categories: (1) recent developments that are
broadly global in nature, in particular global financial market developments;
(2) consequences for key foreign economies of the downward revision to our forecast
for U.S. real growth; and (3) developments that essentially are external to the U.S.
economy and are being driven by economic and political shocks abroad.
The sharp decline and heightened volatility in equity prices over the intermeeting
period was a common feature across most global stock markets. European equity
prices were particularly hard hit. As in the United States, the effects of the resulting
loss of wealth on total spending are partially offset by the declines that have occurred
in many long-term interest rates. But long rates in the other major industrial countries
generally moved down less than did those in U.S. markets. Although foreign stock
markets seemed to take their cue primarily from movements in U.S. markets, issues
of corporate governance and accounting accuracy have also arisen with respect to
some large foreign firms. And a general reduction in the willingness on the part of
investors to bear risk seems to be widespread. Certain sectors, such as European
insurance firms, have been particularly penalized in the current market environment.
We expect that these less favorable financial conditions will weigh on confidence
and spending abroad. Indeed, we have some early readings on confidence that
indicate such a reaction. Negative wealth effects are to be expected particularly in the
United Kingdom and Canada, where our research tells us that consumers are quite
sensitive to wealth changes. The contractionary effects of these financial market
developments should be cushioned, however, by the absence of monetary tightening
on the part of most major foreign central banks in the near term. Although in June we
had incorporated such tightening into the forecast, we share the view currently
reflected in short-term interest rate futures that monetary policy will remain generally
accommodative into next year in the major foreign industrial countries.
As we noted in the Greenbook, several of the regions that evidenced strength in
the first half of the year, in some cases more than we were expecting, depended for
that strength on their export sectors. This was the case in Japan, in emerging Asia,
and to some extent in Europe. For Japan and emerging Asia, a significant part of the
rebound in exports was in the high-tech sector. Continued recovery in that sector

August 13, 2002

15 of 92

depends broadly on global developments. But a key risk to ongoing expansion in
these export-dependent economies is a negative surprise in U.S. output growth.
The downward revision made to the outlook for the U.S. economy fed directly
into our less optimistic outlooks for Canada and Mexico. Canada has been something
of an outlier among the industrial countries during the first half of this year, recording
rapid output growth in both quarters and strength in final domestic demand. In
response, the Bank of Canada has raised its policy rate a total of 75 basis points since
April. We expect Canadian growth to slow to a more sustainable rate, and we have
edged projected growth down a bit more to reflect the somewhat weaker path for U.S.
real GDP this time than in the June Greenbook. Similarly, we are looking for
recovery to become established in Mexico, the one bright spot in our outlook for
Latin America. However, we have shaded our projection for Mexico in light of the
less favorable U.S. projection.
Finally, a series of developments in the past several weeks in a few foreign
countries, importantly several in South America, have cast significant gloom over the
foreign outlook. To some degree, problems in these countries have interacted to
reinforce the negative effects being felt in each and to raise the risk of a serious
collapse in economic activity and stability in the region. Because of the size of its
economy and the extent of its participation in global financial markets, Brazil is
arguably the most important of the potential crises brewing in South America.
The proximate cause of Brazil’s current financial distress is concern on the part of
investors, both domestic and foreign, about the future course of economic policy in
Brazil as a result of the election to be held in October. The current government has
generally followed policies since the January 1999 crisis that have met with market
approval. But there is nothing that this government can do to ensure the continuation
of such policies. And statements alone by the candidates have not been reassuring to
markets, especially in light of the long-standing differences in political positions and
sources of support of the three principal candidates. Spreads on Brazilian dollardenominated debt rose from 1,500 basis points to around 2,400 basis points over less
than two weeks, as political news swayed markets. Reports circulated that
international banks were withdrawing trade credits and similar short-term lines.
After the Greenbook was finalized, the IMF announced an extension and
enlargement of Brazil’s existing IMF program that will total about $30 billion. One
important feature of this new program is that only $6 billion is to be disbursed this
year, with the remainder slated for 2003, after the new government is in place. Thus
the program should create strong incentives for the new government, regardless of
who wins, to follow policies consistent with the program in order to obtain those
funds. Market participants now understand that those incentives are in place and that,
because of the IMF commitment, the Brazilian government could have sufficient
resources to manage its sovereign debt in 2003.

August 13, 2002

16 of 92

To be successful the program has to result in lower spreads and improved 

exchange rate stability for Brazil following the election and perhaps much sooner. To 

help in that regard, the program gives Brazilian officials more scope to use their 

existing reserves to provide liquidity to bond markets and to intervene in the foreign 

exchange market. Although the program is large and designed to reassure markets, it 

is something of a gamble. Enough capital needs to remain in Brazil for the private 

economy to function reasonably between now and the election. After the election, 

market-compatible policies need to be followed—either because of the incentives 

created by the IMF program or because, once elected, the new president will have to 

weigh election rhetoric against the cold light of reality in making his choices. 

Following the announcement, spreads first narrowed sharply and the real appreciated. 

However, investor enthusiasm for the loan package is already waning. The real has 

subsequently more than reversed its post-announcement gains, despite intervention 

support for the currency, and spreads have backed up to more than 2,300 basis points. 

The Greenbook baseline forecast is for Brazil to weather this storm. Output is 

expected to stagnate during the rest of this year, as turbulent financial conditions and

heightened uncertainty disrupt economic activity. But low growth is projected to 

resume next year as financial conditions improve. However, the risk that financial 

conditions will instead deteriorate further and force some kind of debt standstill 

and/or capital controls before the election even takes place is certainly present. In 

that situation, the incentives for the new government, once elected, to follow market-

compatible policies would be greatly reduced. If that is the course followed by 

Brazil, the pressures on other South American countries and their financial systems 

will intensify and prospects for even low growth of economic activity in the region 

will be sharply reduced. That concludes our report. We’d be happy to take any 

questions. 

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’ve been meaning to ask you this recently. I notice that
the export data on high-tech equipment from Singapore, Taiwan, and other East Asian countries
tend to be quite current. I always have the impression that I somehow seem to be getting insights
into the American high-tech order pattern in advance from those data. Is that an illusion, or is
there something systematic in that relationship?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, first of all, they are industry data. There is a good apparatus for
monitoring developments that is generally industry based.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Especially in Singapore.

August 13, 2002

17 of 92

MS. JOHNSON. Yes. In those economies, high-tech exports are such a large part of
what is going on that it is a focus. So I think in some sense, yes, it might be an early reflection of
the orders of their principal purchaser, the United States.
CHAIRMAN GREESPAN. What I’m trying to get at is that we order, for example, from
Singapore. But it seems to me that before data are available on our orders, exports coming out of
Singapore are reported. I don’t know whether that’s factually accurate though.
MS. JOHNSON. I think it is close.
MR. STOCKTON. Actually we now get fairly timely data that we purchase from the
semiconductor industry on global production, which I think are probably as timely as the export
data. But there’s a very high degree of correlation because of the global integration of this
industry across all these data sources. I think in some sense we’ve seen that show up fairly
reliably in the export data and on the import side as well, and in the global production data that
we’re using to construct industrial production.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I had a question for David on the very large drop in the workweek in
July. In the Greenbook you said that you expect that to be reversed. We looked at the historical
data and over the last fifteen years there has only been one time that we’ve seen a drop this
significant where it wasn’t associated with a strike or bad weather or something of that sort. So
I’m just wondering if you had any further insights on that from your deep background contacts at
BLS. Or was it just a question of probabilities that you’re expecting this reversal?
MR. WILCOX. It’s a risk. We brought the workweek back from 34.0 to 34.2 hours in
our assumptions for August and September partly on the judgment that this year July 4 fell on a
Thursday so it was particularly easy for employers to grant a four-day weekend. That’s relevant

August 13, 2002

18 of 92

for those employers who are on a biweekly reporting basis because that period would be
included in the time frame of the reports that they submitted to the BLS. In addition, we saw the
weekly claims data coming down over the month. So our guess was, partly on the basis of
statistical considerations and what we read as the trajectory of the labor market over the month,
that the survey results were not representative of the month as a whole.
MR. MOSKOW. The BLS people didn’t have any further insights into this?
MR. WILCOX. I think they concur in the judgment regarding July 4, and I don’t believe
they offered an opinion on the remainder of our logic.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry?
MR. PARRY. David, in the Greenbook forecast the growth rate has been revised down a
full percentage point, roughly, for the second half and about 0.6 percentage point for next year.
It seemed to me in looking at the Greenbook that a very large portion of that change was a result
of the annual revisions and the effects of those revisions on productivity and potential. Not
much of the change appeared to be due to what I guess was referred to in yesterday’s Board
briefing as the “headwinds” and some of the negatives you’ve been talking about that have
affected the economy very recently. Would you agree with that assessment, or do I have those
proportions differently parsed?
MR. WILCOX. I have a different take on it. We took potential GDP growth down
0.3 this year and 0.4 next year, and our model simulations suggest that that should feed through
essentially one for one into the growth of aggregate demand. So the way I’d parse it out is that
I’d say about 0.3 of the roughly 1 percentage point revision for the second half reflects the
adjustment to our trend rate of growth of potential GDP. For next year, I’d attribute a larger

August 13, 2002

19 of 92

fraction of our revision, perhaps 0.4 of our total revision of 0.6, to the adjustment to the growth
of potential GDP. In growth rate terms, the negative news from the stock market is very
important for this year as are the adverse signals that we think we’re getting about production in
the near term from the labor market report and from the negative purchasing managers’ surveys.
We also gave a nod to the adverse results from consumer sentiment surveys, as modulated by
strong auto sales. So the larger fraction of the revision this year is due to other indicators that we
think tell us that the gap is going to be widening.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I’d like to compliment Karen on
what I thought was an extremely sensitive and unfortunately highly accurate picture of the
dangers in Brazil. Her report was very well done. Aggravating the Brazilian situation is the fact
that the major international banks dealing there are, as I mentioned earlier, part of the “running
scared” group. The two big Spanish banks are very active in Brazil. They’ve taken severe losses
in Argentina and are very concerned about what could happen to them in Brazil. The major
American banks are seeing their names in the paper in a rather unflattering way and are also
quite risk averse. So, unfortunately, what seems to have happened in the last few days is that the
international banking community is taking advantage of the IMF package to reduce their
exposure. That in any long-term sense is very much against their interest and is not very smart,
but that seems to be what they’re doing.
Another effect of their conduct, if it continues—which I sincerely hope it will not—is
that it will almost certainly bring about a much higher likelihood that any future IMF program
will have as a conditioned precedent a quite formal agreement between the country and its

August 13, 2002

20 of 92

international creditors. The reason that the IMF didn’t do so in the case of Brazil, I think wisely,
is that the situation was sufficiently precarious that, if they sat around negotiating some sort of
“stand still” agreement with Brazil’s creditors, the country certainly would have tanked. So it
was a risk that the Fund had to take. But if the international banking community continues to
behave as it has in the last few days, I think it will be very difficult in the future for the Fund to
organize a major package like this and take the risk of the same thing happening. So, in addition
to the very accurate picture that Karen gave, there is this potential aggravating factor. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for our colleagues? If not, would
somebody like to begin the Committee discussion? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On balance, the general tone of the reports
on business conditions in the Seventh District continues mixed. Most of our contacts are still
waiting to see the light at the end of the tunnel. However, for the first time in a long while, I
started to receive some upbeat reports from several of my regular contacts who are directors,
CEOs, or other senior leaders of businesses with large national operations. It’s still too early to
tell whether these reflect a turning point, but I was encouraged by the unexpected good news.
Reports on consumer spending remain mixed both within the District and at the national
level. Discount chains still appear to be doing all right. However, a large developer and operator
of retail malls said that traffic slowed in June and weakened further in July and early August.
Air travel had been trending back toward pre-September 11 levels but has flattened out since
June. For manufacturing, our regional purchasing managers’ indexes in Chicago, Detroit, and
Milwaukee present a picture of anemic growth in the District. But the motor vehicle sector is
relatively strong. The return of zero percent financing programs has boosted sales, and we’ve

August 13, 2002

21 of 92

heard that light vehicle production plans for the third and fourth quarters are likely to be raised
again. Heavy-duty truck production and shipments will be strong through October but are
expected to drop off markedly after that, as the new EPA regulations on engines take effect.
Some of the positive news that I heard was from our contacts in the railroad and packaging
industries who indicated that shipping volumes were up in June and July. Trucking contacts also
were upbeat, but this may reflect the shakeout of excess trucking capacity during the last year
instead of a pickup in overall demand.
Turning to capital spending, we still are not hearing any reports of plans to increase
outlays. We asked our directors and our Beige Book contacts whether the recent special tax
depreciation allowances had affected capital spending decisions, and only a very few indicated
that they had moved up the timing of some investments. Of course, it’s still early, and there was
a sense that spending might pick up closer to the time when the provisions are set to expire.
The vast majority of our contacts continue to say that they have little pricing power.
There were, however, a few reports of price increases—for example, in steel, plastic resins, and
tuition costs. Within the District, employers remain reluctant to take on new permanent hires.
At the national level, Manpower’s latest survey, which will be publicly released on August 26,
shows hiring plans for the fourth quarter remaining at the improved third-quarter level. Our
Manpower contact also said that he did not think that the decline in temporary employment in the
July payroll numbers was indicative of conditions in the help-supply industry, which he
continues to view as being better than in previous recoveries. Our Kelly Services contact was
less optimistic.
Turning to the national outlook, we appear to have hit quite a rough patch in the recovery.
The incoming data have been disappointing though not uniformly so. We must make a judgment

August 13, 2002

22 of 92

on whether the economy is currently experiencing a temporary slowdown in activity, a prolonged
period of subpar growth that is being generated by special circumstances in this expansion, or the
beginnings of another downturn. In doing so we must think about the consequences of the latest
shock to the financial sector, the recent revelations suggesting that failures in corporate
governance extend beyond a handful of black sheep firms. These revelations have added a great
deal of skittishness to an already uncertain business climate. They also have broadened the
perception that during the late 1990s markets had been overestimating the returns and
underestimating the risks associated with many investment projects. So, what is the fallout of
this on economic activity? One impact may be the recent disappointing readings on orders.
Indeed, when I combine all of this with what I’m hearing from my contacts I’m concerned that
we may be in for further weakness in business spending.
There are negatives for the household sector as well. Confidence is down, and the drop
in equity prices since our May meeting has made a substantial dent in households’ balance
sheets. However, the strong response to the latest set of auto incentives reminds us not to give
up on the consumer. Furthermore, even after the NIPA revisions, the underlying trend in
productivity still appears to be positive. This suggests that some of the recent disappointing
news regarding real activity reflects transitory movements in volatile data as opposed to a more
persistent weakening in activity. And we have to remind ourselves that, given the typical lags,
we are now entering the period when last fall’s rate cuts should have their strongest effects.
So balancing these factors we, too, have marked down our forecast for growth, but our
best guess is that the softness we’re currently seeing will not cascade further either into an actual
double-dip or a prolonged period of growth well below potential. Similar to the Greenbook, we
now are thinking that real GDP growth will average closer to 3 percent in 2002 and 3½ percent

August 13, 2002

23 of 92

in 2003, down from the projected rate of 3¾ percent for both years in our previous forecast. This
outlook is conditioned on our prolonging a period of accommodative monetary policy. So, I
think maintaining our current stance is appropriate. But it will be important for us to
acknowledge in our statement the current rough patch in the expansion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the West continues to expand but at a
modest pace. Lackluster job growth, stock market volatility, and the daily announcements of
corporate scandals have worked to damp consumer confidence in the West in recent weeks.
More-uncertain consumers appear to have reined in spending somewhat, especially on
nondiscounted products. Consumers also have pulled back on investment activity, prompting
another round of layoffs at local brokerage firms. Charles Schwab, for example, recently
announced that it will lay off 1,000 more people in coming quarters, about 5 percent of its
current staff. On the bright side, aggressive pricing practices have kept car sales robust, and
home sales continue to increase, although there are some signs that real estate markets are
cooling. Visitor counts and travel spending also improved in the District, driven by solid
increases in domestic demand. Although job growth remained subdued in most District states,
productivity growth likely has kept output expanding. However, District growth probably is not
outpacing the rest of the nation, as we appear to have lost most of our productivity growth
advantage over the last year.
The District’s high-tech sector has continued to expand recently but at a more subdued
pace than many had expected. Demand for personal computers, consumer electronics, and
telecommunications equipment has fallen in recent months, moderating the outlook among
District semiconductor makers. Intel, the District’s largest chip producer, announced plans to lay

August 13, 2002

24 of 92

off 4,000 workers, and about half of Intel’s 83,000 employees actually reside in the Twelfth
District. Conditions among software makers were mixed, with Microsoft announcing plans to
expand payrolls but firms like Oracle cutting costs to maintain profitability. Overall, District
technology contacts have pushed back their time frame for full recovery in the sector. Moreover,
a number of firms are saying that things may get slightly worse before they get better. The long
downturn in the tech sector is taking a toll on a number of District investment companies. The
technology-oriented investment bank, Robertson Stevens, closed its doors last month, as you all
know, letting go more than 800 employees. Venture capital firms also are feeling the strain. We
now expect a number of these firms to merge or to go out of business by the end of this year.
I’d like to comment on the West Coast port situation. There’s no doubt that any work
disruption at West Coast ports would be extremely costly. However, the threat of such an action
either by labor or by management has diminished significantly over the last several weeks.
Contract negotiations resume today, and our contacts believe that both sides are eager for a
settlement. As the probability of a strike has decreased, reports we’ve received of precautionary
importing on the part of firms have subsided.
Turning to the national economy, while some recent news on real activity has been on the
weak side, we have lowered our forecast for GDP growth in the second half of this year only
about ½ percentage point, not nearly as much as the reduction in the Greenbook forecast. After
the surge in the first quarter, domestic demand has held up fairly well. We believe the
1.1 percent increase in real GDP in the second quarter gives an overly pessimistic impression, as
several temporary factors such as a spike in imports and mild winter weather probably restrained
second-quarter growth and boosted growth in the first quarter. Furthermore, real consumer
spending and disposable income turned up strongly in June, and auto sales, of course, jumped in

August 13, 2002

25 of 92

July. Both of these developments bode well for third-quarter growth. I would add that I think
the retail sales data that we have just received are certainly supportive of that as well.
In addition, I’m encouraged that real capital spending on equipment and software posted
a long-awaited increase last quarter. Of course, some other recent indicators of economic
activity have fallen short of expectations, especially payroll employment, aggregate hours, and
orders for capital goods. Also, the roller coaster that financial markets have been riding should
sap some strength from the economy, particularly next year, although interest rates often have
tended to follow equity prices up and down and may have partially offset the damage.
On balance, we continue to see a moderate expansion as the most likely outcome. In
particular, a double-dip still seems to be only a remote possibility. We anticipate growth in the
second half of this year of almost 3½ percent. Assuming a steady funds rate, we project real
GDP growth of about 4 percent in 2003, and we continue to expect inflation to remain well
contained, with the core PCE price index increasing about 1½ percent next year. I’d also say that
significant slack in resource utilization certainly remains, especially in manufacturing. However,
the current easy stance of monetary policy appears well calibrated to provide sufficient stimulus
to ensure economic recovery. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District economy for the most part has
followed the national economy. After rebounding in the first half of the year, it has slowed
appreciably. Layoff announcements rose noticeably in July and early August. Let me talk about
the manufacturing sector in our District, which appears for the most part to have improved since
last fall and winter. But it also, in a sense, has topped off. Our July survey shows about the
same level of manufacturing activity as in June and, while firms are still optimistic about the

August 13, 2002

26 of 92

future, they also indicate that they’re cautiously optimistic. And that’s a bit of a change since the
spring. Labor markets remain slack, with firms having no difficulty filling almost any position at
this point. Retail spending and housing activity continue to hold up well. Retailers are generally
optimistic about future sales and are showing some willingness to build inventories. Auto sales,
as in the rest of the country, have responded to the financing incentives. And home sales and
construction remain solid on the retail side though, of course, office space is pretty much dead.
Energy activity in the District actually remained strong, with the rig count holding on to earlier
gains. However, there are some issues in Wyoming because energy firms have produced a lot of
natural gas but have no way of getting it out of the area. So that’s causing some pressures there.
Price pressures remained subdued across the District. District manufacturers expect further
increases in materials costs, but they have no intimation that they can pass them on at this time.
I want to talk briefly about the drought. I know there is a drought generally in this
country, but it has been particularly severe in our part of the country. If you draw a line northsouth through the middle of Kansas and Nebraska, the area surrounding that line has been
enormously dry. In some parts of Kansas the residents consider themselves lucky to have had
almost three inches of rain since January 1 of this year. It shows in the soil. I recently drove
through a good part of these areas in the District, and the picture is quite dramatic. Reservoirs in
Colorado are at anywhere between 20 and 60 percent of capacity in terms of their water levels.
Dillon Lake, which some of you may know because the Interstate and the Eisenhower Tunnel are
near there, is reported to be between 50 percent and 60 percent of capacity. It looks like a wheat
bed in much of that extremely dry area. I talked with some of the agricultural people in
Colorado about the cattle situation. Hay production, which is very important to them, is
somewhere in the range of 15 to 20 percent of normal. That puts them in a dilemma because

August 13, 2002

27 of 92

they need a lot of snow this winter and, if it materializes, then they can’t afford to feed the
livestock. That’s why we have the liquidation of cattle inventory going on. In fact, cattle
auctions in some areas are being held seven days a week and there is no market. So the situation
is particularly dire there. As for land sales in the ranch area, as one major real estate dealer said
to me, the market is virtually dead. In sum, the drought is very severe. It’s as bad as in the
1950s and actually as bad as it was in the 1930s in much of this region. One likely impact of this
may be on fiscal policy, because as I understand it there is a fairly strong effort under way to
enact some type of bailout or support for stockmen in the western part of the United States.
We’ll watch and see how that goes.
Turning to the national economy, I’ll be relatively brief. We have no major
disagreements with the Greenbook. We also have revised down our forecast to below 3 percent,
for the reasons that others have delineated here. One point I do want to note, though, is that in
talking with contacts at major companies that are not investment grade but one level below that, I
am being told that credit standards have become tighter. One man in particular said that his
firm’s financial numbers—and they’re standing by their numbers—show pretty good
improvement in the past year. But even with that, when they’ve gone to their bank lenders to
discuss rolling over debt, they have been asked to show improved ratios before the banks will
renew those lines. So in that sense credit standards have tightened quite noticeably.
As for the outlook, I think growth will be slower but still positive. The reason for that is
the stimulus that continues to exist in this economy. We will watch that carefully, obviously.
But we do look for somewhat less than 3 percent growth this year and into 2003. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.

August 13, 2002

28 of 92

MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic conditions in the Southeast have
deteriorated somewhat further across almost all sectors since our June meeting. I keep looking
for positive signs of a pickup in growth, but evidence seems sparse at this point. One
consolation is that activity remains at a relatively high level.
Turning to individual sectors, regional retailers report that sales weakened overall despite
an improvement in auto sales. Manufacturing activity in the Southeast continued lackluster, but
executives remain relatively optimistic, and inventories are reportedly balanced in most cases.
Our contacts report that technology spending in the District has generally been restricted to
software upgrades, with substantial new investment remaining on hold. Our growing regional
auto industry is one area that continues to invest and expand. One announcement was unique.
One of our Tennessee directors is a top North American executive for Nissan, and he told us that
Nissan plans to increase capacity at their yet-to-be-completed Canton, Mississippi, plant by
adding some 1,300 additional jobs even before producing the very first car. I believe that may be
the first time that kind of thing has happened in the United States. The rest of our regional auto
industry also continues to expand, reflecting the strong auto sales nationwide. Honda is
expanding its Lincoln, Alabama, plant and plans to add 2,000 jobs in 2004. And a number of
other such announcements have been made in recent months.
Reflecting the slow pace of manufacturing, employment growth in that sector remained
modest at best. However, overall District employment shrank about 0.7 percent, slightly less
than in the nation as a whole. Florida and Georgia did register modest job gains in June, but the
other four states in our District posted job losses. Despite the lower payroll numbers, the District
unemployment rate actually declined 0.2 percent, to 5.2 percent, in June because the labor force
shrank for the second consecutive month.

August 13, 2002

29 of 92

The other positive sector continues to be housing. Residential markets posted moremoderate growth in recent months, but activity remained at very high levels. New home
construction was essentially flat, and inventories were balanced in most markets. Home sales
rose modestly in June compared with a year ago, and realtors generally anticipate that sales in
the third and fourth quarters will exceed year-ago levels. The chairman of our Bank’s board is a
large custom homebuilder, operating in several states, and he reports that the high-end market
clearly has softened in a number of cities. Multifamily housing and commercial real estate
remain weak, although some improvement in industrial leasing is showing up in a few markets.
In contrast, as elsewhere, the office market shows no sign of improvement yet, and my inquiries
among leading architectural firms have picked up few signs of new activity in the pipeline.
Meanwhile reports from the tourism and hospitality sector were not as upbeat as earlier
this year. Disney says it is operating at 90 percent of normal capacity for this time of year, and
visitors appear to be staying for shorter periods and spending less this year compared with last
year. Business travel is still quite weak.
There have been some concerns expressed recently about a possible credit crunch, but
that isn’t consistent with the information provided by my examiners or what we are hearing
anecdotally. Consumer lending continues to increase moderately, and the share of problem
assets remains relatively low. In most areas, banks continue to report little growth in commercial
loan demand. And mortgage lenders, not surprisingly, say that they expect continued strong
demand from borrowers in the second half of the year.
Finally at the regional level, I would note that the only current price pressures showing up
are for health care, insurance, and steel. The impact of the 30 percent tariff on imported steel is
particularly pronounced and is being felt in steel prices across the District. Some car

August 13, 2002

30 of 92

manufacturers and others tell us that they are now facing double-digit increases in prices of
imported steel goods.
On the national front, the high-frequency data combined with recent revisions to both the
GDP and the productivity statistics are not as encouraging as we might have hoped following our
last meeting. Virtually all forecasts have been revised downward, reflecting lower growth rates
for key components such as investment, weaker data on consumer expectations, construction,
manufacturing, core capital goods, and all the other things that people have already listed. My
own expectations going into the year were perhaps a bit more modest than some. But I’ve been
disappointed that we are not yet seeing some early signs of building momentum. As a great
believer in technology, I had expected to see more investment spending of that type by now, both
to reduce costs and to exploit new product opportunities. But even that has been slow to get
restarted.
Putting all the data and the stories together, the picture that emerges for me is one of
businesses still very much hunkered down, putting off both investment spending and additions to
staff. Despite that, unemployment, if it does not rise appreciably further, is still at a relatively
modest level compared with some other cycles. One of my economists half jokingly reminded
me that current unemployment is actually below some earlier estimates of NAIRU. The current
level of employment is still providing income at levels to support some growth in consumer
spending despite the adjustments taking place there. And it’s hard to see any big kick from
government spending over the period ahead, as growing pressures on revenues and spending at
the state and local level are offsetting some of the federal spending that we’re getting.
All things considered, I share the Greenbook’s view that the most likely path over the
near term is slow, unexceptional, growth that only gradually moves back toward potential next

August 13, 2002

31 of 92

year. While it is easy to get impatient, as many people are now doing, it’s important as we move
into the policy discussion later to remind ourselves and others once again just how
accommodative policy already is. And we need to avoid the unintended consequences of
possibly doing something at this point that would thwart the generally orderly adjustment
process that is still taking place in a number of areas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over and over again from people who come
through the Bank and from those I meet in traveling around the District, the very common refrain
I hear on the cost side is that health insurance and other insurance costs are causing a lot of
problems. Labor turnover is down, and labor is readily available. I hear that repeatedly. I’d say
that the pessimists are only mildly pessimistic and that the optimists are only mildly optimistic.
The overall view is sort of blah. But I think it’s important that it’s blah and not yuck!
[Laughter] Slow growth seems to be the expectation.
Based on the comments I hear from contacts at some of the big firms that I call,
inventories are reported to be slim. My contact at Wal-Mart said that the company has sold out
essentially all its summer merchandise. My FedEx contact reported that all of his customers
indicate that inventories are slim. Probably the most interesting thing I learned from my recent
phone calls had to do with developments abroad. Obviously, South America has severe
problems. But a number of people I spoke with pointed to good performance in Asia. My
J.B. Hunt trucking contact said that their domestic business is very slow but they see a lot of
demand for capacity to move goods out of the West Coast ports. So the goods are coming in for
the fall and the holiday shopping season. My FedEx contact indicated that his firm’s volume
from Asia to the rest of the world was up 25 percent in a recent month compared with the same

August 13, 2002

32 of 92

month last year. For goods of European origin, business is up 15 percent on a year-over-year
basis. And my UPS contact has the same judgment on that. So I reason from that information
that a lot of goods are flowing into this country from abroad. That would, of course, also fit with
the import numbers that we got for the second quarter. And the expectation seems to be that that
will continue. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Economic growth appears to be slow right now, whether we look at it
regionally, nationally, or internationally. The latest data from the Eleventh District point to
widespread weakness across the region and across industries. A modest recovery appears to be
under way, but it lacks the economic drivers—energy, high-tech, and trade—that usually provide
boosts to economic activity in our region. Sluggish growth and continued productivity gains
place the District in pretty much the same position as the United States, with a jobless recovery
similar to the one following the 1990-91 recession.
After losing hourly wage and salary jobs nearly every month from April to December
2001, Texas seemed to turn the corner in January with a solid gain in employment. However, the
advances of early this year have slowly evaporated, and private employment levels for the
second quarter of 2002 have fallen back to those of the fourth quarter of 2001. The three-month
rate of job loss has been greatest in mining, manufacturing, transportation, communications, and
trade, all of which saw job losses accelerate in June. Some offsets came in government
employment and in services to consumers and businesses but not enough to stop the overall
decline.
Whether we look along the border, in the oil patch, at the farm belt, at the high-tech
electronics-based economies of Austin and Dallas, or in the District’s largest economy, Houston,

August 13, 2002

33 of 92

we see few encouraging signs of strength. Our leading indicators index for Texas has been flat
since January and continues to point toward sluggish growth ahead. There is little reason to
expect any of the key drivers of regional growth in the 1990s to return soon. We still have a
substantial overhang of regional high-tech capacity, and Mexico is yet to pull decisively out of
recession. And travel reductions and war rumors plus the slow pace of industrial recovery have
kept oil and gas reserves relatively high. In sum, District economic activity is still weak and is
expected to remain so for some time. We likely won’t be helping to lead the national economy
into expansion. We’ll probably be following this time, as we’ve become more reliant on the
nation for good news.
Turning to the nation, I find it difficult to be sure that a solid recovery has taken hold
when so much of the growth we thought we had achieved vanished with the GDP revisions.
Moreover, as in the Eleventh District economy, the drivers for growth in the national economy
appear to have weakened as well. The recent recession was marked by two distinctive elements:
a dramatic decline in investment with a hard hit high-tech sector yet consumers who kept on
spending. Recent data suggest that investment has hit bottom and has begun to rebound. But
this rebound can’t continue apart from consumer uptake of the products firms are offering. In
the last expansion, my sense is that firms got a little ahead of consumers in terms of their vision
for the future. Firms were able to offer tons of new and better products, from faster computers to
videophones, at a rate beyond what consumers could absorb. So they inevitably had to pull back,
and investors’ cash got burned. With such a recent experience, I don’t expect investment to
return to anywhere near the levels of the late 1990s—nor should it. Consumer spending is not as
strong as it was in the mid-to-late 1990s, and it is not likely to return to that pace in view of a
more cautious consumer. Stock market declines, extremely volatile financial markets, recent

August 13, 2002

34 of 92

accounting scandals, and corporate ethics problems plus continued concerns over war and
terrorism have made consumers more reticent, and that is likely to continue for some time.
I’d also feel better about the national economy if I saw a brighter international one. But I
don’t. Across Europe the pace of recovery seems to have slowed in recent months. Argentina is
stuck in a crisis. Brazil may be headed for a double-dip recession or worse. And the strength of
Mexico’s recovery is in question as is the condition of most Latin American economies. The
economies of Japan and Taiwan have stabilized but remain sluggish. About the only robust
economies internationally are those of China and Korea.
Overall, coming back to my opening statement, growth appears to be slow now and for
the foreseeable future almost no matter where we look. The currently slow expansion needs
something new to drive it forward. And the risks have clearly shifted downward toward
economic weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If at our last meeting the recovery in New
England seemed to be bubbling along, albeit unevenly, it now seems that the heat really has been
turned down. Activity hasn’t ground to a complete halt, but areas that seemed poised to improve
in May now seem to be pausing or perhaps even stalling out as the effect of weaker national
economic growth and the overhang of financial market uncertainty and risk aversion have cast a
considerable pall.
New England lost jobs in June relative to a year earlier, and on a month-to-month basis
the region registered its sharpest employment declines since last October. In May it seemed that
regional job levels were poised to grow, and two states actually had employment levels above
their pre-recession peaks. Now only one state—the smallest, Rhode Island—is above its earlier

August 13, 2002

35 of 92

high, and the largest states in the region are both below their peaks and below year-earlier job
totals. The District’s steepest job losses continue to be in manufacturing, especially in the hightech arena. These employment losses reflect not only weak domestic demand for manufactured
goods but also falling exports. Data available for the first quarter show merchandise exports for
the region down 21 percent versus 15 percent for the nation as a whole, with all six New England
states and virtually all major industries and export destinations registering declines. Contacts in
manufacturing expressed considerable uncertainty and see cost cutting, not revenue growth, as
key to their near-term survival. They see the stock market affecting both capital goods demand
and consumer willingness to spend. Some view this as a race between a collapse in consumer
sentiment that could undermine growth and an improvement in employment that could buoy
confidence.
Residential real estate markets are vibrant. Indeed, some contacts fear a bubble is
growing there and report price increases in some areas that border on those of the late 1980s.
Commercial real estate markets remain weak, however, especially in Boston. Data from three
sources all point in the same direction. Vacancy rates have multiplied and are likely to get worse
before they get better. This is not a real estate problem affecting the major banks as it was in the
1980s since overbuilding using bank credit is not the issue. Over-committing on the part of
tenants is the problem. Rental rates are falling. Considerable amounts of unused space have
been sublet or currently remain unused, and new tenants could be hard to find as lease terms
expire.
Both consumer and business confidence dropped in July after a modest decline in June.
Consumers registered pessimism about current as well as future conditions, and perhaps
reflecting this pessimism, retail sales were reported to be flat or down in June and July. Business

August 13, 2002

36 of 92

confidence, as measured by a local index, fell below 50 into negative territory. The drop was
said to be related to the fact that the expected third-quarter upturn was not materializing and that
prospects for sustained growth seem to be receding into the future. An index of leading
indicators from Massachusetts moved down in tandem with the confidence index. Both point to
the delayed turnaround in technology industries as a key source of the region’s economic
softness. While the pace of job layoffs nationwide seems to have abated, industries that are key
in our region such as telecommunications, computers, and electronics continue to register large
layoffs. A review of job postings on Monster.com and a quarterly confidence survey of
technology executives conducted by the Massachusetts high-tech council pointed to a continuing
employment drought within the region’s technology sectors.
The gloom, doom, and volatility in the financial markets have taken a toll as well. Equity
mutual funds in the region experienced large outflows in July, though much of this flow found its
way to bond or money market funds in the same family. One contact reported a marked change
in the attitudes and even voices of individuals as they called customer service centers in July. In
this person’s words, fear seemed to predominate. An executive at a major insurance company
reported the worst losses in the company’s corporate bond portfolio in its long history. Finally,
the perfect storm of Latin American turmoil, the demise of the dot-com world, and continuing
negative credit surprises have taken a toll on one major regional banking organization. In sum,
it’s not a pretty picture in New England.
Incoming data for the nation as a whole haven’t been that pretty either, with booming
auto sales—albeit at discounts—and residential investment the major exceptions. Whether it was
slow or nonexistent employment growth, downward projections for corporate profits, falling
nondefense capital orders, dropping confidence and sentiment indicators, or the cooling off in

August 13, 2002

37 of 92

foreign markets and economies, the data have been downbeat on the state of the real economy.
But the 300-pound gorilla is clearly the volatility and negative direction of U.S. capital and
equity markets. Reflecting the data and the overhang of market sentiment, the Greenbook
authors have written down their forecast, and we have, too, in Boston. Since we both use many
of the same frameworks, it’s not surprising that our forecasts for 2002 and 2003 look very
similar, with below-potential growth for much of the period. But we show somewhat lower
inflation and higher unemployment in 2003 than does the Greenbook.
More important than a particular forecast, however, is where the risks are and whether we
are adequately poised to address them. It’s hard to see how the consumer can continue to be the
mainstay of economic growth without better news on the job front. And without that, I think the
confidence indicators are telling us that spending on residential investment will slow. Businesses
seem so preoccupied with market volatility and cost cutting in order to maintain some profit
margin that new hiring and new investment seem further off in time. And as we’ve seen, if the
U.S. economy does not bounce back, foreign economies won’t either. Real economic data no
longer seem at variance with the markets. Together they both paint a darker picture of the future.
So I see the risks largely on the downside to a forecast that, given usual post-recession
patterns, is pretty downbeat already. Is monetary policy poised to address a slowly growing
economy with downside risks? I wonder. Until recently I thought the current historically low
level of the federal funds rate was more than accommodative and not consistent with price
stability over time. I thought that our next move had to be up as conditions in labor and other
resource markets began to tighten. Now, however, the financial market headwinds of equity
downturns and widening credit market spreads combined with the sense that the real economy
has stalled call into question how accommodative policy is. The Bluebook assessment of

August 13, 2002

38 of 92

equilibrium rates seems to indicate that current real rates are less accommodative than earlier.
The perfect foresight modeling indicates that further reductions in rates would be consistent with
maintaining and even lowering inflation over the next couple of years. Now, models need to be
taken with a grain of salt. But the direction of this analysis and what we’re seeing in the
economy and the markets seem to me to point to the possibility that further policy support, a bit
of insurance perhaps, might spur growth without inflation risk. When and how to ease policy
further and what to say about it—even if we don’t do it right away—without causing further
market uncertainty are obvious questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Incoming data point to continued
moderate recovery in economic activity in the Third District, but the pace has slowed from
earlier this year. Retail sales in the region were mainly flat in July but were up from year-ago
levels in most product lines. Local auto dealers report that the new rounds of incentives
supported increased sales in July. Many of the area retailers we contacted did express some
concern that the recent turmoil in financial markets and lower consumer confidence could lead to
a pullback in consumer spending. As a result, retailers have become a bit more cautious in
placing orders for goods. Regional real estate markets are consistent with national trends:
Residential markets remain strong while commercial markets remain weak. Residential
construction contracts, housing permits, and home sales have all been increasing this year
compared with the same period last year. Housing markets have shown somewhat more strength
in our region than in the nation as a whole. In the first quarter, house-price appreciation was
above the national average in New Jersey and about at the national average in Pennsylvania and
Delaware. In contrast, commercial real estate markets remained soft. Office vacancy rates are

August 13, 2002

39 of 92

around 12 or 13 percent in the city of Philadelphia and even higher in the suburban markets
where construction of some new office space has been completed. New buildings coming on
line in the first quarter were only half leased.
Labor markets in the District remain stable. Employment in our region increased slightly
in June for the first time in eighteen months. The unemployment rate in Delaware, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania remained below that of the nation. The tri-state unemployment rate stood at
5.4 percent in the second quarter compared with 5.9 percent for the nation. Activity in the
region’s manufacturing sector is mixed. In July our business outlook survey index of general
activity posted its seventh positive reading in a row. Although manufacturing activity in the
region expanded in July, it did so at a slower pace than earlier this year. Based on our August
survey, which will be released this Thursday, that trend continued in August. The new data
suggested some contraction in regional manufacturing this month; the August number is minus
3.1. To me this is not good news. However, I caution you that it is only a single month and that
recoveries are not always linear.
Inflation remains modest in the region. Wages and house prices are rising at a somewhat
faster pace in the Philadelphia region than in the nation, but industrial prices are mostly holding
steady. The sluggishness of the recovery has taken its toll on the budgets of the three states in
our District. All three cut spending to below plan during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2002.
Pennsylvania and New Jersey have also used their rainy day funds to replace a large portion of
the revenue shortfall. The increase in New Jersey’s fiscal year 2003 budget over its 2002 budget
is based upon very optimistic assumptions about income and sales tax revenues. Because state
revenue growth generally lags the end of a recession, state fiscal problems are expected to
continue at least through fiscal year 2003.

August 13, 2002

40 of 92

Nevertheless, the incoming data suggest that the Third District has continued to
experience a gradual recovery. It is more gradual than I would like, but perhaps I should be
content. In the past our District has felt recessions more deeply than the nation and has lagged
the nation in its recoveries. This time we have kept pace.
Turning to the national outlook, incoming data on the national economy have been
weaker than expected. This is undeniable. And the stock market retreat is likely to further damp
both business investment and consumer expenditures. As a result, my outlook for the economy
has been tempered from my earlier view, which was not overly optimistic. Nevertheless, in my
view the data taken as a whole continue to tell us that a moderate recovery is under way, albeit a
more gradual one than we would like. Consequently, monetary policy will probably have to
remain accommodative for longer than we had previously thought. However, we should keep in
mind that the weak second-quarter GDP growth reflected a surprising surge in imports rather
than unexpectedly weak domestic demand. Inventory decumulations slowed substantially in the
first quarter, and inventories were essentially unchanged in the second quarter. In addition, we
saw a moderate increase in business investment in equipment and software in the second quarter.
Labor markets have stabilized, although they have not yet bounced back. All this is consistent
with a recovery.
Going forward, the recent declines in the stock market, if sustained, will temper
consumer spending and business investment. But it is still too soon to know by how much and,
for that matter, the market’s future course. In my opinion the sluggishness in labor markets is
potentially a larger downside risk to consumer spending than the stock market declines. Could
the recovery derail? Yes. But by and large the weaker economic data we have seen pertain to a
single month. We should remember that recoveries usually proceed in fits and starts and that our

August 13, 2002

41 of 92

data are subject to revision. For example, the data available to the Committee in October 1992
showed that economic growth was weakening. GDP growth had come in at 2.9 percent in the
first quarter and 1.5 percent in the second. Employment reportedly had fallen in three of the four
previous months for a cumulative loss of 87,000 jobs. But subsequent data revisions showed that
GDP growth was 3.8 percent for the first half of 1992 and that employment, in fact, grew by
312,000 jobs for the four-month period between June and September of that year.
In short, I don’t think we have sufficient evidence today to make a case that the recovery
has stalled. Responding at this point would appear to be an overreaction. Such fine-tuning is
dangerous in my opinion. We are just as likely to generate instability as we are to improve
economic outcomes. At a time like this, when there is increased uncertainty in the markets, it is
tempting to respond. However, we must keep in mind that the monetary policy we already have
in place is quite accommodative. It seems prudent to stay the course and keep watching the data.
Should the data suggest that the economic recovery is faltering, then we should take decisive
action. Nevertheless, I would have to say that, in my view, the risks have tilted toward weaker
economic activity in the short term and a key question is whether we should say so. I think some
recognition of the weakness of economic conditions is probably in order, but that is not
necessarily the same as shifting the bias. We all know that such a shift in the statement at this
time is likely to be interpreted as a signal that we plan to or think it is likely that we will cut rates
at our next meeting in September. At this point I’m not convinced that such action will be
needed in September. So, to avoid sending the wrong signal, I have a slight preference for
leaving the statement unchanged at this meeting. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.

August 13, 2002

42 of 92

MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First on the region, our District economy
clearly lost momentum in recent weeks. Both factory shipments and auto sales were flat in July
after rising significantly earlier this year. More broadly, our business contacts from the furniture
industry and other principal regional industries tell us that demand is weak and hence factories
are reducing output and hiring. All of this, not surprisingly, is affecting capital spending plans. I
probably had twenty or more people in various manufacturing companies tell me that whatever
little capital spending is going on now is aimed almost entirely at increasing productivity rather
than enlarging capacity. So the manufacturing sector, which of course is a big part of our
District economy, clearly is showing signs of weakness, at least for the moment.
Not all of the news in the region is gloomy, though. Housing activity in our District, as
elsewhere, is still strong pretty much across the board. But business expectations overall in our
area are clearly more downbeat and pessimistic than they were at the time of the last FOMC
meeting. These expectations were summed up rather well, I think, by a comment I heard
recently from a guy in the furniture industry. He said the good news was that a recent survey
they had done showed that 67 percent of American households had definite plans to buy
furniture. The bad news was that they didn’t know when. [Laughter]
Turning to the national economy, the period since our June meeting was a remarkably
unsettled and, in my view, unsettling period. Financial markets were obviously nervous and
pessimistic, and much of the latest economic data—such as the 10 point drop in the new orders
component of the ISM index and the decline in weekly hours in July—rather dramatically
confirmed the reluctance of both businesses and households to make future spending
commitments. Taking all of the quantifiable negatives into account, the staff has revised its
forecast for the second half down a full percentage point, to 2½ percent. I think that’s reasonable

August 13, 2002

43 of 92

under the circumstances. But the softening in the economy in the projection is expected only to
delay the recovery not to derail it. The problem, of course—and I know the staff is well aware of
this—is that there are currently an unusually large number of significant downside risks in the
outlook that are very difficult to quantify and to incorporate in a forecast. Those risks include,
for example, the possibility of a renewed and perhaps sharper drop in stock prices than we’ve
already seen, a war in the Middle East, financial collapse in Brazil, or another terrorist attack in
the United States. There are positives in the picture. Structural productivity growth still appears
to be running above 2 percent. The Fed has now achieved price stability, and we have in place, I
would argue, a highly stimulative monetary policy as indexed by the zero real funds rate. But
these positives may be insufficient to shield the recovery if one of the downside possibilities
were actually to materialize.
Broadly, the challenge for policy in this situation is that the tentative character of the
current recovery—and “tentative” is the word I would use to describe it—makes it very
vulnerable to negative shocks, especially with the nominal funds rate near the zero bound. Since
we’ve achieved credible price stability, I think it’s reasonable and natural for us to ask whether
we might ease policy today to speed the economy up just a bit and reduce that vulnerability to an
unanticipated negative shock.
Last November I strongly favored a preemptive policy easing in the situation we faced at
the time. But I would not favor such a move today. I think there are significant differences in
the two situations. Back in November we were still responding to the immediate fallout from
September 11. We had seen the fastest increase in the unemployment rate since the 1981-82
recession and a substantial widening in the output gap that threatened a big acceleration in
disinflation and, with the proximity to the zero bound, actually posed the risk of deflation. We

August 13, 2002

44 of 92

haven’t experienced another shock like September 11 at this point, and both the unemployment
rate and the output gap, at least for now, are relatively stable. Again, the real funds rate is
already at or near the zero level. Our experience with go-stop monetary policy in the past—and
this goes to a point that Tony made a minute ago—teaches us that the Fed isn’t likely to be able
to speed up the recovery by making the real funds rate negative without sowing the seeds of
future inflation. We haven’t talked about that much lately, but that can happen. Too much
monetary stimulus could sow the seeds of inflation that over time could destabilize the
economy—maybe not in the near future but at some point down the road.
I can think of circumstances where we might want to ease. If inflation drifts down, we
obviously should reduce the nominal funds rate to prevent the real funds rate from rising. If the
disinflation were sharp enough, I think we should consider reducing the real funds rate below
zero temporarily to preempt deflation. And if we experience another substantial negative shock
that disrupts financial markets, then too we should consider making the real rate negative to
preempt the widening of the output gap that again would pose a risk of deflation. But we’re not
faced with any of these conditions yet, as I see it. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m used to speaking at these meetings after a
jolt of caffeine for me and for you! The economy certainly has been working through a difficult
adjustment to previous overbuilding and overvaluation of the capital stock. This type of cycle is
highly unusual in post-World War II economic experience, and the Committee has been
uncertain as to how it would play out. I certainly saw this uncertainty at recent meetings as a bit
one-sided. That is, my suspicion was that the rebound in aggregate demand could be a bit
weaker than the modal forecast and considerably weaker than the market seemed to expect. This

August 13, 2002

45 of 92

suspicion was balanced against a belief that the current stance of policy was unsustainably
accommodative over the long run. And that view about short-run shortfalls and long-run
accommodation produced a balanced risk assessment in our statements.
In my opinion there were already hints before the last meeting that the process of
recovery might be encountering impediments. Those indications were largely in financial
markets where equity prices had declined. Risk spreads were starting to open up, importantly
under the influence of the uncertainty-heightening effects of accounting irregularities. The
economic data were better, but there was a question as to whether the uncertainties and doubts
manifest in financial markets would also show up in spending. The information becoming
available since the last meeting suggests that in fact they have—that demand is not strengthening
as much as expected. Businesses probably were always going to be responding cautiously to the
good fundamentals, given their experience with overbuilding. But the recent data suggest that
they are being even more cautious than we anticipated. We can see this in the hiring and new
orders data, which didn’t pick up to the degree expected at the end of the second quarter and the
beginning of the third. Judging from earnings forecasts, businesses have reduced their
expectations about sales. And I think every Federal Reserve Bank president around the table
today has noted that business people in their Districts are less optimistic and are revising down
their expectations.
Recent declines in commodity prices tend to confirm an easing in demand in the
industrial sector. And as a number of you have pointed out, financial market conditions have
tightened in some respects, which could damp the growth of demand going forward. Markets are
reflecting this less optimistic outlook for sales and are carrying the added burden of working
through the uncertainty of how firms will be affected as financial results are restated. This is

August 13, 2002

46 of 92

affecting not only savers but also, as Dino noted, intermediaries. They are shying away from
making markets and taking positions. The resulting rise in risk premiums has lowered prices of
shares and lowered bond ratings. Markets are much more volatile and brittle, reflecting
uncertainty and the lack of marketmaking. Indeed, the corporate bond market has virtually dried
up in the last month or so.
Banks also are tightening terms, and accounting concerns have prompted them to be
much more cautious, demand more information, and enforce covenants more closely. As a
consequence, although the market response to weaker data has been to take out a good deal of
the expected policy tightening, this marking down of intermediate- and longer-term rates has not
flowed through to many business borrowers. Now, households are seeing lower rates in
mortgages, and that is bolstering housing prices and facilitating the unlocking of housing equity.
But household wealth levels have fallen in recent months, and the greater risk aversion is
reflected in shifts from longer-term securities into money. Undoubtedly, skittish markets are
reinforcing business tendencies toward caution in spending and hiring, not only owing to the
adverse financing conditions but also to concerns about conserving cash in case their particular
firm is affected by future volatility in markets.
This disappointing performance is not only a U.S. phenomenon. Foreign industrial
economies now seem to be on a slower growth track, prices in their equity markets have been
marked down, and the perception that they’re facing a weaker outlook has kept the dollar from
falling. All this implies that the United States will receive little help from the foreign sector in
terms of boosting demand. And Karen Johnson and Bill McDonough have pointed to the
downside risks in South America.

August 13, 2002

47 of 92

I want to emphasize that these recent weaker indications do not in my mind undermine
the basic expectation that the expansion will proceed at least at a moderate clip. The growth in
household and government spending will bolster increases in demand and income. By and large,
excess stocks of capital inventories have been worked down. Weakness in investment spending
has abated, and investment fundamentals do look good. The earlier pickup in sales has activated
the accelerator. Cash flow is improving, as gains in productivity and softness in labor markets
hold down labor costs. And prices of high-tech capital equipment continue to plummet, giving
an inducement to purchase them. But I do have greater concern that it could be some time before
the rate of expansion is fast enough to begin to reduce margins of underutilized resources.
Indeed, such margins could widen before they begin to narrow. As a consequence, inflation
could fall further before it stabilizes. A limited shortfall or delay in the economic pickup
wouldn’t be much of a concern if we weren’t already at 1½ percent inflation, 6 percent
unemployment, and a 1¾ percent funds rate. But my thoughts on the implications for the
Committee’s posture policy going forward should wait for the next round of our discussion if
I’m to practice—at least in my first meeting as a Governor—what I’ve been preaching to the
Committee over the last fifteen years about separating the two discussions. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Most, but not all, of the anecdotes and
readings on the District economy have been positive. Retail sales and consumer spending
continue to advance. That’s true of autos, but it’s also true outside the auto sector as well,
according to the reports we get. Spring and summer tourism has been pretty good in most parts
of the District. The agricultural situation actually has improved. To the extent that there were
drought conditions in our District, for the most part that has been relieved. The energy sector in

August 13, 2002

48 of 92

western North Dakota and eastern Montana is operating at a relatively high rate. The
employment situation is mixed, with no change in white-collar employment but some
improvement in hiring of production and temporary workers. And while there certainly are no
broad-based signs of inflation, some materials prices are reportedly moving up.
Nonresidential construction activity is slow, and vacancy rates, especially for Class B and
lower-rated buildings, are high and rising. Residential construction activity and all that
surrounds it, including sales and permits and so forth, remain very favorable. Reportedly, for
example, home prices in the Twin Cities are up 15 percent over the past year. Meanwhile,
though, apartment vacancy rates have increased, and I think rents are stabilizing and perhaps
even weakening a bit. And at some point the relative price shift will feed back into relative
changes in activity. But I think that’s probably some time off.
Let me offer a few thoughts about the national economy and outlook. We’ve already
talked a lot about that. Obviously, I don’t want to dismiss the disappointing nature of the
incoming aggregate data we’ve seen, the revisions, and the weakness in equity values. But I
don’t want to exaggerate it or overreact to it either. I haven’t changed my forecast of the
economy over the next six quarters or so. My forecast was a little lower than the Greenbook’s as
of the last meeting, and now we’re closer together. We really don’t know whether the economy
is going to grow at a rate of 2½ percent or 3½ percent, just to throw out a couple of numbers,
over the second half of this year. But it seems to me that the outlook remains basically
satisfactory. As many people have commented already, policies, both fiscal and monetary, seem
to be expansionary. I do think that we will see some material improvement in spending on
equipment and software next year, and I believe consumer spending will continue to advance.
And as I’ve noted before, when we see the activity we’re seeing in housing and homebuilding

August 13, 2002

49 of 92

and people’s willingness to make fifteen- to thirty-year commitments, which is inherent in most
purchases, it seems to me that consumers remain relatively positive about their circumstances
and about the outlook. Finally, history is on our side in the sense that the economy has proven to
be resilient in the past and I think it’s proving to be resilient again. After all, we’ve had three
consecutive quarters of growth, albeit modest growth, following September 11. And if you had
told me back in September or October that that was the performance we were going to get, I
certainly would have been pleasantly surprised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As others have already noted, during the
intermeeting period we’ve seen a number of indicators, all of which have been a little weaker
than expected. Labor market indicators, consumer confidence, manufacturing activity, and
business investment all have led forecasters to shade down their outlooks to one degree or
another. That has been true of those who have done our Greenbook, and I have no basic quibble
with their baseline forecast. Having said that, I think at this meeting the most important issue
about the economy in some sense is not the forecast per se but rather the risks to the forecast.
While the usual etiquette is to leave the answer to that question about the balance of risks until
the end of one’s opening statement, I will actually be more transparent and tell you up front that I
think the risks to the forecast have shifted notably downward.
I say that for two or three reasons. First, the incoming data as weak as they have been,
while not signaling a so-called double dip, obviously do put into question—more so than I at
least am comfortable with—the basic baseline forecast. Second, the markets—which should be
and most people think are more forward-looking—also suggest that the outlook is less certain
now than just a few months ago. Investors appear to have serious concerns about the continued

August 13, 2002

50 of 92

deterioration in business conditions and subsequently, or consequently, credit conditions. This is
doubly worrisome because obviously a general decline in equity wealth such as the one we’ve
experienced even in the intermeeting period will continue to weigh on households and put into
question to some degree the ongoing strength of consumer spending. It is also worrisome
because the capital required to finance business investment depends on hospitable financial
markets. However, equity issuance has been extremely light. The data I have show that in July,
in fact, the net equity issuance was negative. In addition, we’ve seen with respect to bond
issuance and bank loans as well that conditions are far less accommodative than they were even a
short time ago. So the basic building blocks for investment strike me as much less certain than
they were a little while ago.
Consequently, on the side of our mission that deals with sustainable growth, I think the
odds of a large shortfall have increased. This is summarized in the changed levels of output gap
that at least the Board’s staff has estimated. At the time of the June Greenbook, the staff thought
that an output gap of 2 percent of potential GDP growth in 2001 would come down to
1.3 percent in 2002 and to 0.6 percent in 2003. Now the staff estimates that the output gap
started at 1.7 percent in 2001, a slight improvement, but unfortunately stays stubbornly high at
1.7 in 2002 and 1.3 in 2003. So in terms of the sustainable growth side of our mission, I would
say that the risks are clearly that we are moving further and further away from achieving
sustainable growth.
The other side of the mission obviously looks to the question of inflation. I’d say that the
risks of inflation, if anything, have receded during the intermeeting period. That’s due in part to
the limitation of pricing power that a number of you have already referred to plus still strong
increases in productivity growth as well as slack in labor markets and capacity utilization, which

August 13, 2002

51 of 92

look as though they will linger on longer than we had thought originally. With those
developments plus sluggish growth abroad and the associated risks that Karen has already
indicated as well as tame commodity prices, it is hard to see that inflation pressures are likely to
emerge during the forecast period. By almost any measure, inflation expectations appear
relatively unchanged.
Taken together, it seems to me that the balance of risks has moved from what I described
at the last meeting as uncomfortably balanced to at this stage being much more negative. Now,
this is the part where I will do what Governor Kohn has pleaded with us not to do. [Laughter]
From the question of the outlook I’ll touch on what might be thought of as policy. But since I
believe that the balance of risks statement has very little to do with policy and has everything to
do with the outlook, I will move forth.
President Santomero has put on the table some concerns about having the Committee
signal that we think that the risks have changed distinctly to the downside. I’d like to recognize
in all honestly that there are three concerns that one might have in making that shift in language
but, if you will let me do this, I will go through them and reject each one of those concerns.
The first is a concern that we might surprise the market. But indeed all the incoming
survey data that I have seen, including some from this morning, suggest that almost all
government securities dealers think that we will probably change the language that we use and
describe the risks as being tilted toward weakness. So I don’t think we would surprise the
market if we were to make that change.
The second concern that I think President Santomero raised quite explicitly relates to the
implications of this change in language for real policy, which is the setting of the funds rate—a
topic I will not discuss at this point. I would say that I, as do many of you, get copies of some of

August 13, 2002

52 of 92

these very expensive Fed-watching materials. The one I found most interesting was one I read
this morning that said, and I quote, “Indeed, the Fed has emphasized that the economic risk
statement should not be interpreted as a signal of what will happen at the next meeting but rather
is more an assessment of how it sees the future.” If we in fact have emphasized that and we
believe it to be true, then I wouldn’t let a concern about a misinterpretation filter in since indeed
the real meaning of that language is becoming much better understood by the public.
The third issue is one that President Minehan alluded to already to some degree. And
that is, if we should deem it necessary—following, let’s say, the perfect foresight model in the
Bluebook or one version of the forward-looking Taylor rule—to reduce rates over time, then by
definition having suggested that there’s some weakness in the economy would provide some
explanation of why such a move is needed.
So I see very few downsides, but I do see a couple of upsides to being clearer about our
outlook. One of the upsides is that it would reinforce our view of transparency, which I think is
obviously helpful. Second, I think it would allow the markets to focus more fully on incoming
data and not perceive that we are hamstrung in one way or the other with respect to the future.
So, Mr. Chairman, I do believe that the risks are mainly to the downside. And I think the
Committee ought to have the courage of its conviction and indicate that that is the case. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. In preparation for the meeting today, I surveyed a number of bankers, and
in many respects my findings basically are consistent with what we’ve heard around the table
today. Consumer lending has remained strong. The growth is starting to level in nonmortgage
consumer products, but loan quality remains strong. Home equity lines continue to grow and

August 13, 2002

53 of 92

perform well. Mortgage lending both for refinancing and purchase are not simply strong but in
some cases will continue to set records. On the commercial lending side, the medium and
regional-sized banks are reporting flat loan growth—in fact, almost no loan growth—but steady
loan performance, which suggests that loan quality is still good. The most notable observation
came from two CEOs of large commercial bank lenders who both reported a significant change
in what one might call the temperament of their largest borrowers. The resulting combination of
risk aversion on the bank’s side and hesitancy on the borrower’s side is quite consistent with
what we’ve seen in the commercial paper markets and the commercial bond markets.
With respect to agriculture, there was an acknowledgement of the drought around the
country, although some of the areas where the drought is the worst are also areas where the
irrigation systems are the best. So the farm economy is expected to be fairly strong, on balance,
in part because yields are high. And the lenders say with some chagrin that the agricultural bill
also will add price improvement on top of the high yields. So the farm sector will be in
relatively good shape.
The other point I want to mention is the fiscal discipline issue that the Congress will face
when it comes back after Labor Day. This Congress, as we’ve discussed before, will adjourn
without having passed a budget resolution—for only the second time in history and for the first
time since 1997. On the House side they’ve passed a budget, and that is their focal point now as
they go through the appropriations process. In the Senate, the lack of a budget resolution means
that there is no spending discipline in the Senate because with a budget resolution there is a
requirement of sixty votes in order to exceed the budget. So the prospect for legislation of the
type that President Hoenig mentioned is very much alive. Moreover, the expectation is that this
Congress will adjourn having passed perhaps only half of the thirteen appropriation bills required

August 13, 2002

54 of 92

and that the government will be funded on a continuing resolution basis from September until
probably February.
All in all, the reports still suggest underlying strength on the consumer side of the
economy, a very strong wariness with respect to business investment, and a lack of fiscal
discipline on the part of the Congress. That certainly reinforces the view that there is some
uncertainty in the marketplace. Incidentally, the President’s economic forum in Texas today is
expected to focus significantly on the fiscal issues, anticipating what is going to happen in the
fall.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I suggest we take a ten-minute break for
coffee.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke, would you start us off?
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we search for the signal of an
incipient recovery, we have heavy noise coming from two sides. The first source of noise is the
financial markets. Our financial markets usually exhibit controlled hysteria, but lately we
probably could drop the adjective “controlled.” The stock market in particular seems to be
searching for a consensus valuation without too much luck so far. The other source of noise is
the data. Of course, revisions in the data show that the recession was worse than we thought.
We were always pessimistic about forecasting, and now backcasting seems to be a problem as
well! I have a modest proposal, which is that if the BEA can restate GDP figures and firms can
restate their earnings, the Fed should have the option to go back and restate interest rates from
last time. [Laughter]

August 13, 2002

55 of 92

How should we respond to these noisy conditions? First, regarding financial markets, I
think the best thing to do is to keep our heads while all about us are losing theirs. Monetary
policy should be directed at the underlying economy and should respond to financial markets
only insofar as they contain information about or affect the underlying economy. I think on net
the effects of financial markets on the current economy are not very large. The direct effects of
the stock market are being partly offset by strong house prices, lower interest rates, and a falling
dollar. It’s true that the volatility that we’re currently observing at record levels is feeding
anxiety and caution, but volatility by its nature tends to be temporary. So on net the current
market volatility in my view is an argument for waiting to see where things settle down before
taking action.
Second, regarding the other source of noise, the data revisions, we can no longer blame
the shallow recession for the weak recovery. [Laughter] The economy is not booming
obviously; but looking again beyond the financial markets, it seems to be reasonably sound. In
particular, the revision has largely left intact the growth in productivity, which I believe in some
sense is the most crucial element of the recovery and bodes well for both profits and economic
growth. I note the comments that Governor Kohn made about financial conditions, but overall I
think the financial headwinds are not very strong. Banks are healthy, consumer and firm balance
sheets are reasonably strong for this stage of the cycle, and a lot of what is happening in the
markets with respect to risk spreads and the like has more to do with volatility and financial
market uncertainty than with fundamental conditions.
Third, the policy stances, both monetary and fiscal, remain expansionary. It’s true that
there are some uncertainties as we look forward. Consumers and the government are doing their

August 13, 2002

56 of 92

part, but firms in particular seem relatively hesitant both on the investment side and on the hiring
side.
I think it’s worth noting that there’s an awful lot of heterogeneity among industries in
terms of growth potential. Certain industries—telecommunications, aircraft, commercial real
estate, and others—are doing very poorly. They are suffering from overhangs, and it’s
questionable whether small changes in interest rates, for example, would substantially affect their
activity. On the other hand, residential housing, autos, and consumer goods look very strong,
and other areas like equipment and software seem to be improving.
My bottom line here is that there’s a lot of uncertainty and that any of the three responses
suggested in the Bluebook would not be unreasonable. But given the uncertainty that we have
now, my inclination is to wait and see and to get more information. At the same time, I don’t
think we want to appear tone deaf to legitimate concerns among the public about the state of the
economy. And I think we ought to set the stage to respond in case conditions worsen. So I
would indicate my preference to communicate either in the statement or in the balance of risks
sentence that the Fed is vigilant and is willing and able to cut rates in the future if conditions
worsen. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. As many of us have already noted, the economy is continuing to expand but
at a slower pace than earlier in the year. As we have noted in our prior meetings, we have been
revising downward our forecast since spring. At this stage it is hard to identify major risks of
inflation over the intermediate term. Thus the focus now should be on the strength of economic
activity. While real GDP growth is now reported to have slowed from 5 percent in the first
quarter to 1.2 percent in the second, the Greenbook forecast is for growth to move toward its

August 13, 2002

57 of 92

long-term potential growth rate in 2003. The unusual growth of imports in the second quarter
significantly reduced real GDP growth while the conclusion of inventory liquidation should
provide the basis for continued expansion of industrial production as final sales advance.
Survey measures of consumer confidence have fallen, with recent reports of corporate
fraud and the fall in equity values. But real consumer activity, not the surveys, continues to be
resilient in this cycle. Both housing and auto sales remain near record highs. This is due partly
to thirty-two-year lows on mortgage rates and incentives by auto manufacturers that make cars
more affordable today than they have been in thirty-four years. Consumers do not usually make
such major purchases if their outlook for the future is really dim. Rather, the persistent growth
of real disposable income and slowing new claims for unemployment insurance serve to provide
a foundation for continued, though perhaps uneven, increases in consumer spending. And
today’s retail sales numbers support that view.
To me the real focus should be on the pessimism of corporate CEOs. The drop in
business investment led this recession, and the lack of conviction about future revenue growth
has continued to slow the recovery of new investment commitments. We did see growth in
equipment and software sales in the last quarter for the first time in six quarters, and industrial
production has grown every month this year. But the July drop in the ISM index and the decline
in hours worked raise questions about the strength of the recovery. And because of my concern
about the pace of business investment, I am becoming more concerned about the overall outlook
for the pace of economic growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy seems pretty clearly to
have suffered a relapse since our last meeting. Equity prices have dropped sharply, and various

August 13, 2002

58 of 92

spending, employment, and confidence measures have been weaker than expected. Even the
GDP revisions have lowered the recent growth numbers. There are some bright spots, notably
autos and housing. But even these bright spots could be tainted if they imply lower future
spending. The staff, for example, has auto production dropping in the fourth quarter after a
robust third quarter. Housing is less likely to follow this pattern, but there are uncertainties about
housing. Since homeowners are both consumers of housing services and wealth holders, there
has always been a question of why increases in housing wealth should stimulate other types of
spending. The answer to this puzzle seems to be cash-out refinancing. But this cash-out
refinancing may not last if either mortgage rates or house prices stabilize, and in any case it’s a
very weak reed to support the whole recovery.
One way to measure this weakened sentiment is to follow the changes made by the Blue
Chip forecasters. As I’ve said before, the Blue Chip forecasters as forecasters do not particularly
impress me. What they seem to do is to react to the recent economic data and give an aggregated
measure of what these data are saying. Last fall these observers dropped the consensus forecast
for 2002 very sharply as the economy weakened. This spring they brought the consensus
forecast for 2002 up fairly sharply as they found signs of strength. But now they are lowering it
again. In the August poll their consensus forecast for 2002 was reduced a full ½ percentage
point, a huge change for people forecasting a year that is almost over. Clearly, these forecaster
observers are seeing plenty of negative signs.
Another relevant indicator is the perfect foresight simulation exercise in the Bluebook.
As the Bluebook explains, this is not really a perfect foresight simulation because the model is
used as it stands now. But again, it does aggregate all the latest information on equation
variables and residuals to show the path of monetary policy consistent with NAIRU and with

August 13, 2002

59 of 92

various suggested inflation targets. This perfect foresight simulation suggests that the economy
could use additional doses of monetary expansion even if our long-run inflation target were as
low as 1 percent.
Turning to policy, I’m sitting between Roger and Don, so let me go about halfway
between them in terms of what I say about policy. At our last meeting the signs of weakness
were still incipient. The Blue Chip forecasters, for example, had not written down their forecast
at all. And it was argued that if the Fed recognized these signs of weakness by changing the
stance of monetary policy, it would in effect enshrine those signs and spook markets.
Apparently the signs of weakness are so pervasive now that they are already enshrined. Now the
argument is that if the Fed does not recognize those signs, it will look as though the FOMC is out
to lunch and that will spook markets. What a difference a month makes! [Laughter] But
whether all this market talk makes any sense at all—and I don’t know if it does—in the last
month we probably have crossed an important recognition threshold. Therefore, it probably does
make sense in developing our policy stance to show at least some cognizance of the spreading
signs of weakness. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Developments in the
Second District’s economy have been mixed since the last report, though housing has continued
to be robust. On the price side, despite continued escalation in nonwage benefit costs, prices of
finished goods and services have remained remarkably stable. Retail sales, which were weak in
April and May, seem to have improved and gone up with the temperature gauge in June and July.
Consumer confidence slipped in June and July, but labor markets, although sluggish, were quite
stable. Housing markets and home construction activity were robust in the second quarter.

August 13, 2002

60 of 92

Office markets weakened a little more. Surveys of manufacturers and purchasing managers in
the District suggested some rebound in activity in the last few weeks, following a pause in July.
And our bankers reported some softening in consumer loan demand but improved commercial
lending. They also noted tighter lending standards, which are appropriate, and steady
delinquency rates.
I would like to talk a bit more about what I see as the fragility in the financial sector both
in the United States and in other industrialized countries. I think that fragility is a result of both
real developments and, perhaps even more, a high degree of risk aversion, especially in the
commercial banking sector. The banks have been quite profitable. Their capital ratios are good,
and therefore, in my view their degree of risk aversion is considerably overdone. If we look at
Europe, their insurance companies are very heavy investors in equities both in Europe and the
United States. And many of those companies would be of questionable positive net worth if they
were marked to market. Banks in Europe are very heavily involved in the telecom sector, much
more than those in the United States, and their risk-taking ability is quite severely affected as a
result. As for Japan, the Japanese bank institutional situation has not improved any. An
indication of where some of the big banks in the United States stand is that the spread between
Treasuries and credits of Citigroup, the holding company, is considerably wider than that of its
much lower rated customer, Gillette. And even though I hope lots of us are shaving with
Mach-IIIs, one would think that Citigroup is a little better credit.
The syndicated loan market is very, very quiet. Now to a large degree, that’s because of
lack of demand. But when we have more demand for credit in the economy, I think the
availability of the syndicated loan market is going to be quite questionable. The reason is that
there are three strong managers of syndicated loans: Citigroup, J.P. Morgan Chase, and Bank of

August 13, 2002

61 of 92

America. All of them have lost a great deal of credibility with the banks that make up their
syndicates, much more than would be the case with proper banking. The syndicate leader had
done the due diligence, and most of the members of the syndicate took the word of the syndicate
leader on that score. There has been a question in recent times on whether the syndicate leader
was quite as loyal to the syndicate as it was to its own shareholders and in addition on whether
the due diligence of the lead bank had been what it should have been. Therefore, I think it will
be difficult for syndicated credits to be put together for quite some period of time until that faith
is restored.
We, like all the other people who have commented here today, believe that the economy
is clearly weaker than we thought it was at the last meeting. And I think it’s important that the
central bank of the United States show that it lives in the real world by reflecting that in our
statement. On the other hand, given the vast importance of this institution to the stability of the
United States and the world, it is imperative that we act with prudence. When we have to ease
monetary policy, if we do—and I certainly believe the time is not today—I think we should do so
with some degree of boldness in order to show the leadership that will be required of us. In the
meantime, it seems to me crucial that we remain prudent and appear to be prudent. Not even St.
Jude himself, the patron saint of lost causes, would hope that this entire group would remain
silent. But in our public statements I think it would be unwise and even dangerous if we shared
some of the discussion of the downside risks that we have traded among ourselves today. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had absolutely no desire to speak last this
morning. In fact I thought I had indicated the desire to speak early, but it seems that my

August 13, 2002

62 of 92

presence at the table has already begun to fade! [Laughter] Had I spoken earlier about the
region, right after Mike Moskow, my remarks not surprisingly would have sounded very similar
to his. So at least on that score maybe it was good that I wasn’t next to speak. As for the rest of
what I heard this morning, to a remarkable degree common themes ran through the commentary.
Mainly, as far as I could tell by listening to all of you and based on the notes I made for myself,
the go-around has really been a way for everyone to express some of the same concerns and
ideas somewhat differently.
The contrast between what I’ve been hearing in the District versus reading about the
national economy suggests that our region is continuing to do somewhat better than the rest of
the country. Certainly, the rather panicky tone of Wall Street letters is not mirrored in the
comments that I hear in the region. An article in the Wall Street Journal a few weeks ago
regarding the effects of the decline in the dollar on manufacturing mentioned a couple of small
Ohio companies. That prompted our research analysts to get a list of over 100 companies and
their phone numbers to call. Most firms reported no increase in export orders. But the reason
turned out to be that over half of all the exports coming from Ohio alone are to Canada, and
another significant chunk goes to Mexico. And, of course, the Canadian dollar was only briefly
higher than the U.S. dollar, and the Mexican peso has been fairly steady. For those companies
that did see a pickup in orders, it reflected exports to Asia and not at all to Latin America or to
Europe. A few contacts, however, said that, though their orders for exports have been steady, the
profitability of their export business has been improving.
We did a roundup regarding capital spending by companies located in the District, and
that produced mixed results, of course. Those increasing spending supply mainly the auto,
housing, and health care sectors. Only one company cited the new tax incentives for investment

August 13, 2002

63 of 92

as the reason for undertaking some capital investment that they had not previously planned to do.
We asked them why they did it now rather than wait since the incentives will be in effect for a
while. Our contact said he was quite sure that the Congress was going to remove that tax
incentive after the November election.
Another topic of discussion in the District this summer has been the effects of weather.
The farming region tells us that, even if normal rain were to resume now, the corn crops are
wiped out. We don’t have irrigation of our corn crops in our District. And the yields of
soybeans would be cut in half even if normal amounts of rainfall were to resume. That, of
course, means that the ag sector lenders have big credit quality problems and are voicing a lot of
concerns. We’ve heard concerns registered not only about the smaller banking companies but
also about the Farm Credit Banks. It’s still too early to know who really holds the worst of these
problem loans. The flip side of the effects of the dry weather is that both highway construction
and theme park destinations have lost fewer days due to bad weather. Revenues at these parks so
far this year have considerably exceeded expectations. We also were told that roadside
restaurants and motels are operating at very high capacity levels, while central city hotels,
especially in large metro areas, have very high vacancy rates. Some of that has nothing to do
with recent developments in the economy. In Cincinnati, for example, a lot of conventions have
been cancelled, but that has nothing to do with anything going on elsewhere. Electric power
generation companies, not surprisingly, are also operating at flat-out capacity. So demand for
coal has been strong, and the price of coal has been high.
Reports from the residential housing market continue to indicate a very tight market at
the lower and moderate price ranges, while upper-end houses are staying on the market for ever
longer periods of time. The income generated from building houses is being spent. People are

August 13, 2002

64 of 92

buying vehicles to park in front of their houses, and the housing-related sectors, such as furniture
and appliances and other items that homeowners put inside their houses, are all doing quite well.
All are generating income, and that income is being spent. Meanwhile the telecom sector
continues to contract. Metals companies produce more tonnage with fewer people. And the
commercial and industrial construction sector continues to decline. Nevertheless, in spite of
what we also are hearing—as Tom Hoenig and others reported—regarding state and local
financing problems, public sector construction for schools and that sort of thing is very strong,
based on bond financing.
One large employer in the region said that turnover in employment is declining because
of what he described as “the fear of joining the already unemployed.” He said this is reducing
employees’ resistance to the shifting of some of the sharp increases in health care costs to them.
Not a very nice thing to do! At a recent small business advisory council meeting I learned that
those manufacturing companies that are getting strong orders are not only using temps but also
mandatory overtime rather than add permanent workers. This, of course, is contrary to the
monthly report indicating reduced hours. Union contract negotiations have been reported to be
settling for pay increases in the 3½ to 4 percent range.
Regarding the national economy, as always it’s a contest between the strength of forces
generated by the inherent resiliency of market mechanisms versus the frequency and the strength
of various adverse impulses. When asked what is causing so much caution in the business sector
as well as the declared nervousness of households—an attitude not necessarily reflected in their
spending—people point to three major uncertainties. And here “uncertainties” is the right word,
not “risks.” Somebody else mentioned—I think it may have been Cathy—the word “fear.” I
heard the word “fear” much more than the word “risk” during this recent period. There are

August 13, 2002

65 of 92

uncertainties about where, when, and how bad the next terror attack will be, about the startling
loss of confidence in the quality of balance sheet and income statements of businesses, and about
when and how the violence of the Middle East can be brought to an end. None of these sources
of uncertainty has a clear, easy, or near-term solution. There will not be a VT day—victory over
terrorism day—that we will mark on our calendars to celebrate in the future. The credibility of
financial statements will be restored only very gradually. It may be comparable to when a
central bank loses the credibility of its commitment to price stability; it takes a long time to get
that credibility back. And I think the business sector is going to have to wait a very long period
of time before it deserves the public’s faith in the credibility of companies’ reports. Our ultimate
occupation of the Middle East will last decades. People not yet born will serve in our armed
forces in the Middle East.
It’s significant that neither business contacts nor economists identify monetary or fiscal
policies as among the negative impulses. If there is a second downward leg of this cycle, it will
be caused by new or strengthened negative impulses that are already present. The staff produces
what I consider to be very useful alternative simulations of various types of risks, but these are
not the things that people talk about when they are asked about their concerns and sources of
uncertainty. I look forward to the staff’s forecast every September when they add that extra year
and look further out into the future. Of course I don’t know what that projection is going to say,
but I’ll forecast what it’s going to say. It’s going to say that on average over the subsequent
eight-quarter period the economy will have growth of about 3 percent. That’s because for the
last half-century, the last time I looked at the data, it has experienced about 3 percent growth.
The last time I did look at the figures—and this was before the most recent revisions of the
data—some 70 percent of the quarter-to-quarter changes in real GDP growth, almost three­

August 13, 2002

66 of 92

quarters of the observations, were below 2 percent or above 4 percent. My guess is that six out
the next eight quarters of the staff forecast will not show growth below 2 percent or above
4 percent, but I bet they will average close to 3 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A splendid way to end—with a very large question mark.
I think we can now move on to Vince Reinhart.
MR. REINHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talk about the dog days of
summer: Over the intermeeting period, share prices rode a roller coaster that left
equity investors 7¾ percent less wealthy, key emerging financial markets flared,
rumors of funding difficulties at several large intermediaries surfaced, and incoming
indicators suggested that employment and spending growth had softened. It is
beyond my ability to explain why financial markets were so volatile over the
intermeeting period. However, I believe that three threads of the complete story bear
upon your policy deliberations today.
First, as David related at the beginning and virtually every other speaker around
the table reinforced, the economic news, especially of recent vintage, proved
disappointing. But, second, those economic data were more of a surprise to market
participants than they were to us. At the time of your first meeting in 2002, market
forecasts of aggregate demand and its implicit balance with aggregate supply were
such that the federal funds rate was expected to be 2 percent by now and to move up
to 4½ percent by the end of next year. In the time since, the structure of expected
policy rates up to the end of next year has shifted down as much as 2¼ percentage
points. One question is whether, in the process of adjusting their outsized forecasts of
economic activity and the attendant policy response, market participants have
undershot the mark as much as they overshot it in January.
What was a surprise to us—and to virtually all other observers—was the
amplitude of the swings in financial markets. On six out of ten days during the
intermeeting period, the Dow Jones Industrial Average moved more than 100 points.
At their nadir, broad share indexes were 20 percent below their June 25 levels but
now have rolled back almost two-thirds of those losses in a couple of weeks. This
leads to my third observation: To some extent, market dynamics feed upon
themselves. One mechanism in that process is the unfortunate tendency for large
swings in prices to expose weaknesses on some balance sheets. In the 1994-95
episode of a substantial runup in long-term yields, a few mortgage-backed hedge
funds and a county treasury of note were found to have feet of clay. In 1998, the
losses came from a hedge fund that was even more noteworthy. This time around, a
less receptive capital market showed that some firms in the energy trading and
telecom industries were not much more than Potemkin villages, hiding hollowed
balance sheets behind the glitz. History suggests that there is a natural cycle of recoil,
recrimination, regulatory response with a lag, and relapse over the long run. With

August 13, 2002

67 of 92

investors apparently still in the recoiling stage, the staff projects in the Greenbook
considerably lower equity wealth over the next year and a half than in the last
forecast.
The disappointing economic data, the loss in equity wealth, and a tightening of
credit markets imply that the expansion has lost some traction in the second half of
this year. But as these effects on the level of demand dissipate, the economy should
recover to a growth rate just a bit above that of potential output. As a result, the staff
is forecasting that more resources go unused for some time but that the extra slack
helps to hold inflation around its current level.
Compared with the forecast in the June Greenbook, these outcomes are likely to
be less appealing to you in furthering the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. But you
might still elect to keep the federal funds rate at 1¾ percent even if you thought the
staff outlook was the most likely to materialize. In particular, your perception of the
lags of monetary policy may be such that action at this meeting would not materially
influence economic growth over the balance of this year. That is, today’s setting of
the policy rate would mostly shape economic performance in 2003 and beyond. And
while there is a weaker demand component to the staff’s revision to next year’s
outlook, a significant portion reflects a reassessment of the growth of aggregate
supply that you might view as outside the scope of your influence.
Moreover, you might have reason to believe spending will revive more forcefully
than in the staff forecast. Households have proven remarkably resilient over the past
two years and may do so again, a notion supported by continued strong auto sales.
With a real federal funds rate close to zero, policy has provided forward thrust to the
real estate sector and has facilitated the ongoing extraction of owners’ equity,
evidenced in part by another wave of refinancing that seems not yet to have crested.
The hesitancy of firms to hire and to invest may be due, in part, to elevated
uncertainty in financial markets. But if the deadline for executives to certify their
corporate reports passes without any major fireworks, perhaps that sense of
uncertainty will ebb and the advance of employment and capital spending will regain
vigor. Indeed, the nearness of that date when uncertainty might be considerably
reduced may further recommend a policy of watchful waiting to the Committee for its
meeting today.
The case for policy ease at this meeting would seem to rest on the sense either that
the staff’s outlook has it about right but the slow pace at which slack is whittled down
is unacceptable, given inflation holding steady, or that there are significant prospects
that outcomes could lean toward weaker aggregate demand and lower inflation than
in the Greenbook. As to the former, the perfect foresight simulations reported in the
Bluebook accept the staff’s assessment of near-term developments and the FRB/US
model’s specification of behavior with complete conviction. Within that framework,
policymakers desirous of smoothing employment and output gaps would ease policy
soon—even if the inflation goal were as low as 1 percent. In that exercise, a little
more than ¼ percentage point ease would trim a few tenths off the unemployment

August 13, 2002

68 of 92

rate while still putting inflation on a course that drifts lower. An inflation goal of
1½ percent could accommodate more-substantial easing now while moving the
unemployment rate down to 4¾ percent in the transition to its long-run equilibrium.
These exercises, of course, convey a false precision about our understanding of the
workings of the economy or your ability to use policy to shape outcomes. But the
general message is also conveyed by the decline in most measures of the equilibrium
real federal funds rate reported in the Bluebook.
Also arguing for easing policy at this meeting, the Committee might believe that
the staff was too tentative in reassessing the forces determining inflation. The sense
of heightened uncertainty, lessened earnings prospects, and withdrawal from risktaking evident in the substantial declines in equity prices could also surface as
unusual restraint on the spending decisions of households and businesses in coming
quarters. As Karen noted, the ongoing travails of key emerging markets also have the
potential for reducing demands for U.S. goods. And the revisions to the path of
productivity now seem to accord a greater role to a reduced natural rate of
unemployment in explaining the good performance of inflation. If the natural rate of
unemployment is, in fact, south of the staff’s new estimate of 5 percent, even more
disinflation may be in store than along the Greenbook baseline. Such further
disinflation would erode the inflation cushion the Committee has to put real interest
rates sufficiently into negative territory at some later date if events warrant
As gauged by money market futures rates, the federal funds rate is now expected
to drop below 1½ percent later this year. Thus, viewed from financial markets, the
question is not if the Committee will ease but when. And the answer from those
markets apparently is not now but soon, in that recent surveys indicate that the modal
outcome for this meeting is that you’ll keep the funds rate at 1¾ percent. So as long
as you do not disabuse market participants of your willingness to ease policy if the
situation warrants in coming months, the economy will benefit from the expectation
of imminent ease—that is, from lower capital market yields. If events over the
coming intermeeting period call for an easing move, the Committee can confirm
those policy expectations at the next meeting—or sometime sooner if necessary—to
preserve prevailing financial conditions. If the current run of subdued economic
reports gives way to a pattern more consistent with sustainable economic expansion
and markets settle down, investors will roll back that putative easing in coming weeks
of their own accord.
From this perspective, if you keep the federal funds rate unchanged, your decision
on the balance of risks depends on whether you share the assessment of risks apparent
in the markets. The retention of balanced risks to the Committee’s dual objectives
would work to send the message that it believes that market participants had swung
too much from their over-optimistic mood of the spring. Recent surveys and the
configuration of futures rates is consistent with significant probability weight massed
on a more accommodative message, so short- and long-term rates would back up
some if that proved not to be the case. If so, equity prices would soften.

August 13, 2002

69 of 92

If the Committee’s assessment is that the tail of adverse outcomes has fattened
sufficiently, switching to a balance of risks weighted toward economic weakness
would both more accurately convey that sense and likely encourage asset markets to
continue to support economic growth. Short- and long-term interest rates would
probably edge lower, and a bounce-up in equity prices would probably be in store.
While there is a risk that market participants would interpret the switch to unbalanced
risks as evidence of the Committee’s doubts about economic growth going forward,
that could be mitigated by emphasizing in the press release that the economy is
expected to continue to expand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Vince?
MR. PARRY. I have a question. In the Bluebook, the Taylor rule recommendation and
the recommendation of the perfect foresight simulations are quite different. Which of those two
approaches would best really model or characterize past policy?
MR. REINHART. Well, the Taylor rule is supposed to be in part descriptive of policy
decisions. That is, the parameters were fit to explain a good part of the 1990s. So in that sense
the Taylor rule is consistent with what the Committee has done in the past. The important piece
of information that the Taylor rule doesn’t have but the perfect foresight simulations do have is
the intercept—that is, r*. This particular picture has a real interest rate of 2½ percent. Well, if
you turn to chart 5 in the Bluebook, you see that just about all the model-based estimates of the
equilibrium funds rate are below that. So it wouldn’t take much shifting down of that intercept
in the Taylor rule to make them consistent.
MR. PARRY. Okay, thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, let me get started. All of
you have directly or indirectly emphasized the issues of the overvaluation of the stock market
and the irregularities of corporate governance that have led to a very significant contraction in
stock prices and a major widening of spreads in a number of financial markets. We were made
particularly aware after a congressional hearing a week or so ago how sensitive interest rate

August 13, 2002

70 of 92

spreads and indeed stock prices have become to the corporate governance issue. Both Citicorp
and J.P. Morgan Chase were accused of what three or four years ago would scarcely have raised
an eyebrow, namely their efforts to structure various forms of credit in ways that would be useful
to their customers without significantly undercutting the safety and soundness of their banking
institutions. But that kind of activity has turned into a major concern, and indeed its revelation
has resulted in a very large drop in the stock prices of both banking firms and has widened
spreads on their debt issues quite considerably.
That, of course, is not the only example of such a development. We see it throughout the
financial markets. We are now looking at equity premiums that have risen in the latest period
above their 1994 averages, after having declined to virtually record lows. This suggests, as
David Wilcox indicated, that stock prices by some measures may be undervalued or below their
“fair” value, as some people like to say. The trouble with that assessment, unfortunately, is that
stock prices historically have always moved above and below fair value in the sense that they
never seem to stop at fair value. This raises an obvious question: What in the world does fair
value mean? In any event, the very significant contraction on balance in stock market prices
over recent weeks has raised the possibility that such prices may finally be reaching some form
of bottom. I trust that when I reread these remarks when they are released to the public five
years from now they will not look anything less than thoughtful!
The problem is one that we have not had to confront in this way before. One interesting
aspect of the problem relates to the risk spreads in the stock market and the weakness in capital
expenditures. But another very interesting aspect is that, despite the extraordinary weakness in
capital spending, profit margins rose significantly in the fourth quarter of last year and
essentially stayed at the higher level in the first and second quarters of this year. This has

August 13, 2002

71 of 92

occurred in the context of quite small increases in unit labor costs, at least as judged by the
deceleration in the implicit price deflator for nonfinancial corporations, that in turn reflect very
strong growth in output per manhour. As I recall, the estimated four-quarter average growth in
productivity for nonfinancial corporations shows an increase of 5.7 percent. The staff estimates
that the second-quarter number by itself is 4.0 percent.
Most interesting in this very odd pattern of data is the fact that the evidently significant
flight to quality, which is implicit in the number of widening credit spreads, has been
accompanied by a very marked decline in the ten-year Treasury yield. At the last reading it was
about 4.2 percent. That decline, of course, has had a major impact on thirty-year fixed mortgage
rates. Indeed, those rates have fallen below 6½ percent, and I believe they are now close to
6¼ percent. At that level we are seeing very significant churning in the mortgage markets, and
as I have indicated previously, the increase in home equity is cumulative over a period of years
because the prices of homes very rarely turn negative. What we are observing at this point is a
very high rate of house turnover. Existing home sales are very high, and I’d say parenthetically
that the drop in July in the seasonally adjusted data coming from the National Association of
Realtors appears to involve a deficient seasonal adjustment factor. There is no evidence of any
contraction of any moment in existing home sales except, as a couple of members mentioned
previously, in sales of high-priced homes, which have been pretty soggy. The housing market
has been tight across much of the country, and it has been tight in part because of the strong
influence that immigration is having on the demand for housing.
The turnover of homes of necessity engenders realized capital gains, and those gains tend
to be the element in the housing market that extracts the most home equity. Indeed, what we
always observe is that the mortgage loan taken out by the buyer is significantly larger than the

August 13, 2002

72 of 92

mortgage cancelled by the seller. And the spread between the two, which is the net increase in
mortgage debt on that existing home, is very close in general to the realized capital gain. To be
sure, a very significant amount of equity extraction occurs without realized gains, and it occurs
largely because of the cash-outs from refinancings. Those cash-outs are becoming quite large.
An internal estimate by Freddie Mac for last year indicates that it was a little over $100 billion.
The total is down somewhat this year because the refinancings are not as large, and I believe the
ratio of cash-outs to refinancings usually comes down a bit when refinancings to total
originations go up.
All in all, there have been very large extractions from home equity. They do not seem to
be impaired or enhanced by fluctuations in stock prices. The result has been a very major
addition to personal consumption expenditures and to home modernization outlays, which, of
course, are part of GDP. What we have observed here is a major offset to the quite extensive
decline in wealth from equities. And what is also interesting is that we are looking at two
different segments of household incomes. A very substantial part of the wealth creation and
destruction through equity stock prices occurs in the upper-income quintile, while a very
substantial part of the home equity extraction occurs in the lower four quintiles. And the
evidence is that on average the impact on personal consumption expenditures from changes in
equity wealth according to the FRB/US model is about the same overall as the extraction of
equity from housing. In my view, however, the available evidence suggests that that may be in
error in the sense that we may find after the fact that the marginal propensity to consume out of
capital gains in homes, especially those that are realized, is very significantly above the marginal
propensity to consume out of either realized or unrealized gains in equities. Only in recent years

August 13, 2002

73 of 92

have unrealized gains in equities become a very prominent factor in both personal consumption
expenditures and home modernization outlays.
This process seems to be continuing. We are finding that the wealth effect is probably
negligible for the non-equity, nonhousing types of wealth. Consumer durable stocks constitute a
big portion of household wealth, and there is no evidence that the level of such wealth has any
effect whatsoever on consumer spending. But the point I want to emphasize here is that there is
very little evidence of which I’m aware that the continued rise in home prices and the related
expansion of home equity is going to cease. The basic reason is that home equity has almost
always increased. In fact, the average value of homes deflated by a GDP deflator has been going
up about 1½ percent per year for a very long period.
The explanation as best I can judge relates in part to the fact that the growth of
productivity in home construction is negligible. People essentially buy custom housing, which
does not lend itself to improvements in homebuilding productivity. Indeed, the manufacturing
component of home construction, even though it is rising, is held back to a remarkable extent by
the idiosyncratic desire of homeowners not to have a house that looks like the next-door
neighbor’s. The result is very low productivity in construction. In fact, the published figures on
gross product originating in construction show declining productivity on a per hour basis in the
last twenty or thirty years. In itself, that is not credible. But if we assume that average hourly
compensation equates across all segments of the economy, we would expect that the differential
in unit labor costs between the home construction sector and the economy overall would reflect
the differential productivity changes. And indeed, if we take nonfarm business productivity and
subtract home construction productivity, which is essentially zero, what we get is the long-term
1½ percent increase in prices. So in effect what we get in equilibrium is a constant net increment

August 13, 2002

74 of 92

to purchasing power from capital gains in homes over and above the increase in personal income.
When we factor these capital gains into the regular models, we do not get any reversal in this
increment at any time.
There clearly is concern at this stage about a housing value bubble that is going to burst.
But I think that most of those who look at this in some detail question whether that’s a valid
notion. And while the second-quarter increase in home values is now significantly below the big
rise of last year, I believe a 3 percent annual rate is the current estimate that’s being used for
existing home sales. So overall the notion that we’re going to lose the home equity part of the
current support for consumer expenditures does not seem reasonable at this stage. This does not
mean, of course, that we could not get a decline in home prices. It’s the notion that there is an
equivalency between equity bubbles and housing bubbles that I think is an illusion. Moreover,
as I think I’ve indicated several times in the past, it strikes me that with transaction costs as high
as they are in home sales and the necessity to move if the home is sold, the incentive to sell a
house is nowhere near what it is to sell a stock to take advantage of a capital gain. As I indicated
earlier, the impact of immigration superimposed upon the difficulty of finding viable land for
homebuilding is keeping significant upside pressure on home prices over and above the
construction productivity issue. So the likelihood of any really important contraction in the
housing area would in my view require a very major contraction in the economy overall.
Having said all of that, the general outlook still strikes me as being solid in an underlying
sense, but without question there has been substantial deterioration and it’s not going to be easy
to read the significance of the corporate governance problems. They are turning out to have a
much greater impact on the economy than I would have envisaged when the Enron issue first
surfaced and even when WorldCom showed up. There is no evidence at this stage that the

August 13, 2002

75 of 92

problem has stabilized. Conceivably, it may stabilize after tomorrow when most of the
reaffirmations of the quality of the corporate financial reports come in to the SEC. I doubt it.
But I think it is too soon to say where it will go.
I have no doubt that everything will look just fine in retrospect if we look back in
October and November of this year and we see that the growth rate was near the 2.7 or 3 percent
now expected for the current quarter. If that’s indeed what is happening, we can’t be
experiencing all the negative developments that are fostering the currently gloomy sentiment.
But we can’t know that at this point. In fact, most of the concerns that we have discussed are
largely based, I think, on factors that we cannot capture in the Greenbook or in any of the models
with which we are working.
I, like all others, think it is most premature to consider lowering interest rates in this
context. If we lower rates from their current levels, we will have a greater distance to go to
restore some reasonable level of noninflationary, non-accommodative short-term money market
rates. But I must say even in that context that I agree with the Vice Chairman, who stated that, if
we have to ease, he would not favor easing in 25 basis points increments because that would
send the wrong signal. If we have to move, my inclination would be to move from 1.75 to
1.25 percent, but I don’t think we’re going to end up having to ease. I would recommend that we
stay where we are with respect to rates today. But I do agree with those who have argued, and I
believe with some justification, that it is essential that we at least recognize what is going on.
Clearly, the risks are not balanced. They have turned from reasonably balanced, even though
what you called it the last time was—
MR. FERGUSON. Uncomfortably.

August 13, 2002

76 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To uncomfortably balanced. I would have said back then
that they were reasonably balanced. Clearly, that is no longer the case, and I think we need to
acknowledge that. In summary, I would hope for a resolution that holds rates unchanged but
does shift the balance of risks statement toward weakness. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I concur with your recommendation, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Wow! [Laughter] I certainly agree with leaving the rate unchanged.
Uncertainty about financial statements has created more headwinds than I had expected, and now
I have a feeling that they’re going to last longer than a lot of people may be thinking. So if that
means the balance of risks is toward weakness, I can live with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, I don’t favor easing policy further
today. I would not favor moving the tilt either at this stage. To me the key factor—and many
people have made this point—is that policy is already very accommodative. The real funds rate
is already very close to zero if not at zero. Since we haven’t experienced another really big
negative shock that threatens the stability of financial markets to the extent that the September 11
shock did and since we’re not facing significant further disinflation or a real threat of deflation
yet, I would ask what we expect to accomplish by signaling an increased probability of further
easing at some point fairly soon. I’ve thought about this, and the only thing that comes to mind
is that we want to show the public that we feel its pain or share its fear and that we’re not
insensitive to the downside risks in the outlook. I can certainly understand that. But I don’t
think that’s a persuasive argument in the current circumstance, given how accommodative our

August 13, 2002

77 of 92

policy already is. Moreover, and this is the key point I would make, I think there’s a cost. I
believe that changing the tilt today could cause some confusion. In my view, many people when
they think about the economy are focused on whether or not it is going to move back into a
recession. I think that’s more or less the issue that they see us dealing with here. And if we
move the tilt, that is going to suggest to a lot of people that we are putting higher odds now on
the economy dropping back into recession than we probably as a group really are, even though I
know we’re less optimistic than we were. I worry that by trying to use the tilt to sort of create
the appearance that we’re doing something actually might reduce confidence rather than bolster
confidence. So that would be my take on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Well, I have almost the opposite take. I think I would have been—if I
were voting today—one among perhaps not many at this table who could have voted for an
easing in policy. But I am perfectly willing to go along with your recommendation. I do think
that things have changed significantly enough to bring into question whether or not monetary
policy is sufficiently accommodative at this point. There are strong headwinds, and not to
recognize them in our statement—whether by a change in the tilt or some language in the
statement—would be to ignore what is out there and seem to be a little behind the curve. So I
agree with your statement, and I agree with what you want to do with regard to the tilt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of your recommendation. Although I
am somewhat concerned about the potential for subpar output growth going forward, I think the
signs of that are relatively recent and derive from noisy high-frequency data and from
developments in the financial markets, which could turn around, particularly after we get through

August 13, 2002

78 of 92

the middle of this month. So in my view it’s far too early to ease policy at this point. There’s a
lot of uncertainty, as Governor Bernanke mentioned, and that in itself is perhaps enough to slow
the Committee down even if we thought the economy was going to be sluggish going forward. I
do favor the shift in the balance of risks because I believe the risks have, in fact, shifted. I think
the inflation concerns that might have been inherent in our stance of policy have been pushed
much further out into the future, in my mind beyond the foreseeable future perhaps. And that’s
partly because we do have some more downside risks. We’ve revised down the forecast. Nearly
everybody around the table has said they’ve revised down their forecast for the next few
quarters. And there are downside risks to those forecasts. So, I see more downside risks on the
output side and less upside risks or certainly more distant upside risks on the inflation side.
Moreover, I think financial markets would welcome a shift in the balance of risks
statement. It would reassure them that we understand that the landscape has changed. But it
should be coupled with a restatement of our expectation that expansion will continue. This isn’t
about double-dips. Economic weakness in our statement refers to growth below potential not to
double-dips, and we should reinforce that view. It would liberate markets to build in more ease
if appropriate. Unlike President Broaddus, I don’t see a zero real rate as a natural bound for
monetary policy. If the economy is weak going forward, if output gaps appear to be increasing,
if unemployment gaps look as if they might be increasing, even without a recession I would be in
favor of easing policy. And I believe that’s particularly important because of a point that
President Broaddus has made before, the starting point for the economy. We already have very
low inflation and a very low funds rate. Waiting to ease until the economy turned down or until
a major shock hit us would risk running into a situation that would be hard to deal with. So I
think we ought to move quickly if it becomes necessary. It’s not necessary right now. And we

August 13, 2002

79 of 92

ought to make sure that the markets can behave in a stabilizing fashion, particularly in the
current situation. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I endorse both parts of your
recommendation. I obviously already spoke on the balance of risks issue. With respect to the
question of moving policy going forward, I think I’m somewhere between Cathy Minehan and
Don Kohn. On the one hand, the incoming data have been much weaker than one would have
anticipated, but I also recognize that the weaker performance really involves just high-frequency
data so it’s appropriate to wait and see. But if we get evidence of persistent weakness, then we
obviously should do the right thing. At this stage, though, I think changing the language is
sufficient.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can support your recommendation. As Vince
reminded us, earlier in the year market participants had priced in a significant and relatively early
tightening of policy. As it turned out, I think we were well advised not to act on that. Now they
are pricing in some easing of policy soon if not immediately, and personally I think we are wise
today not to react to that either. I would offer one caution about changing the bias in the risk
statement, although I can certainly go along with it. It’s one thing if we want to whipsaw
ourselves a little by changing the forecast as the numbers come in. But I think we should be
careful about having that feed into the financial markets and potentially the real economy. Now,
obviously what we’re talking about doing here is not likely to have a profound impact.
Nevertheless, I think there is a potential for trying to overanalyze the incoming data and to
exaggerate the possibility that somehow a new trend has been established.

August 13, 2002

80 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the recommendation to keep the
federal funds rate where it is, but I’d like to associate myself with the position that Al Broaddus
spelled out for the balance of risks statement. Mr. Chairman, I interpret your commentary as
saying that from what we know now and based on our best guess about the future, the federal
funds rate will probably stay about where it is in the near term. I think that a balance of risks
sentence biased toward weakness will be read by the markets as an indication of a rate cut to
come. That’s my prediction as to how the market is going to forecast.
It seems to me as a first step that the press statement could indicate that the evidence
suggests that the economy has downshifted to a lower growth path. I think that the outlook for
growth is still positive but it’s lower than in the previous forecast. I’d also like to point out that
there is ample room for long bond rates to fall. There is still an unusually large spread between
the federal funds rate and, let’s say, a ten-year Treasury bond as a benchmark. It seems to me
that we could accomplish what we want to accomplish by trying to convey that our present view
is that the policy target for the funds rate is likely to remain in its current neighborhood for a
longer period than we had previously thought. That should at least help to reflect—I think
accurately—what our position is. And if the market reads it that way, it should help to bring
down longer-term rates. But I am concerned that the balance of risks toward weakness will be
read by the market as a forecast of a cut in the funds rate at the next meeting or the one after that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation with regard to the funds
rate. At the time of the last meeting, the risks for the economy and inflation were fairly well
balanced. But it seemed to me that there was some sense in the room that it would take quite a

August 13, 2002

81 of 92

bit to induce a further easing of policy and that the bar would be lower for shifting policy into a
tightening mode. This time around I think we face a more evenly balanced set of risks.
Therefore, I have a preference for retaining a balanced statement of risks, and I believe that we
could communicate our current concerns through the wording of the press statement without
changing the actual balance of risks sentence.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I think where my
perspective may differ from President Poole’s is that I don’t really want to tie our hands right
now. I am concerned about weakness. I don’t believe we should respond to what is going on in
the market but rather to the implications that has in terms of consumer and business behavior.
And if, with the new initiatives that the Congress has passed, we don’t very quickly get
aggressive actions against individuals who’ve committed some of these frauds, I am concerned
that this problem could linger on and on. Furthermore, if we don’t restore confidence in the
markets, I think there will be some longer-term impact on business financing and consumer
investing. So I would prefer to shift the balance of risks to weakness now because we don’t
know how people are going to react in these very unusual times. And I’d like to signal that,
given the uncertainty, the risks we see in the outlook today are more to the downside.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. I support both parts of the recommendation. I do think—and this relates
to something that Governor Ferguson raised—that we have two roles here today. One is the
monetary policy role. But we also have a de facto role at this time as one of the few bastions of
credibility left in the country and particularly in Washington, D.C. So I would suggest that the

August 13, 2002

82 of 92

manner in which we describe our position today is particularly important. I think it has to be as
much analytical as explanatory for that purpose.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of the recommendation. I think it
would be premature to lower rates, though I have some sympathy for those who have some
affinity for that position. On the balance of risks, I’ve been mulling this over for the last week or
so and changing my view every few minutes! But in the final analysis I think I’ll just describe
my position by using a very homely statement: The bias toward weakness does reflect our
discussion and in my view is an honest assessment of what we think, so in the end we probably
ought to go with that.
Let me also say one word about housing. I’ll try to be quick about it. I agree that there is
no bubble. I agree that there is no productivity change in housing construction. So the relative
price of housing is rising compared with income and other prices for what we’ll call real reasons.
But I am still puzzled by why, since people are both wealth holders and have to buy housing
services, those whose homes have risen in relative value should spend more on other goods
because of that. The only answer—the one that you’ve suggested and the one that seems to
work—is the conversion of unrealized capital gains to realized gains. But it makes me
uncomfortable to base so much on this conversion, of just switching the gains to money. I
realize the empirical studies go against me. But I am just uncomfortable that the refinancing of
housing should be the source of so much of the support for our recovery. In any case, I do think
it is a weak reed. So, I’m not going to quarrel with anything you said, but I’m just puzzled by it
and uneasy with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You sound like a true conservative.

August 13, 2002

83 of 92

MR. GRAMLICH. Either that or a true idiot! [Laughter]
MR. FERGUSON. Ned, I think there are different interpretations, and sometimes being
called a conservative is a compliment. [Laughter] And I would not say you’re a true idiot.
MR. GRAMLICH. Ben was saying earlier that he had read the transcripts of some recent
meetings and there was a lot of laughter but he didn’t hear much laughter today. I said it comes
later in the meeting!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I can support your recommendation for no change in the fed funds
rate at this meeting and a change in the balance of risks statement. I have a slight preference for
leaving the balance of risks statement as is. As I noted earlier, however, I do believe that the
risks have shifted toward economic weakness, so I can’t argue about the change in the tilt. I do
worry a little about giving the public and the markets the wrong signal, namely that we plan to
change rates. I know it should not be viewed in that way, but it often is. That’s the reality, I
think. But I don’t want to make too much of this. A shift in the balance of risks mirrors reality,
so I’m quite happy to go along with the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just say parenthetically that I don’t deny that a
balance of risks switch will have that effect. But if we get a few good numbers on orders or sales
or in GDP or profits, I submit that the market will be way ahead of us.
MR. SANTOMERO. I agree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. I support your recommendation on leaving the rate unchanged. I, too,
have a slight preference for maintaining the balance of risk statement as it is. However, I
acknowledge that the risks have shifted. Nevertheless, I still think, as we look at our projections

August 13, 2002

84 of 92

and the stance of both monetary and fiscal policy, that a lot of stimulus remains and that will
carry the economy forward. But like others, I wouldn’t fall on the sword on this issue because of
all the uncertainties in the economy. On balance, though, I’d wait to see a little more evidence
before changing that balance of risks statement because it is going to change expectations about
future rate moves—although I agree that some good numbers would change expectations once
again for everyone. I’d just make that comment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Mr. Chairman, I concur with both parts of your recommendation. In
particular, the weakening of the economy is quite evident to the public, and I think it’s important
that we show that the Federal Reserve recognizes that and is prepared to respond to it. I’d like to
add that I also agree with you that if things take a turn for the worse, we should be prepared to
act very aggressively. I’m not one who worries about zero bounds, for example. In fact, one
might interpret the expected decline in the future federal funds rate as being not a certainty of a
small decline but a small probability of a larger decline. So to summarize, I do concur with your
proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I support both parts of your recommendation. Nevertheless, I do believe
that the bias statement is not serving us well and that we would be better off not having it. But
we do have it, so we have to tell the truth about it. And the balance of risks has clearly shifted
downward, so we have no choice but to acknowledge that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I can be comfortable with what you suggest, but I would
want to associate myself with the position that President Broaddus first expressed and a number

August 13, 2002

85 of 92

of people agreed with. I think we’re still learning how to use both the bias and the press
statement that we consider at the end of each meeting. I was looking forward more than usual to
the distribution of the draft press statement, hoping that the word wizards had found some
language short of a change in the bias that might convey the same message. I share the concern
expressed by some other people that many observers, probably most, will read a change in the
bias—at least until we get a string of good data—as suggesting that we’re going to ease.
Ironically, I think that’s an added uncertainty that we really don’t intend to convey today. But I
accept the arguments on the other side, and were I voting, I certainly would not dissent today
over the change in the balance of risks statement. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation not to move rates at
this time. The accommodative stance of monetary policy that we have in place is intended in
part to protect us against the hopefully short-term slowdown that we’ve seen over the last month
or six weeks. So with that insurance built in, I think the current level of the funds rate should
hold us in good stead going forward. I agree very strongly with your point that if we do move,
we should make a move of 50 basis points, not 25 basis points, because the catalyst would be
some significant weakness in the economy, some sudden shock, or some risk of a deflationary
environment.
On the tilt, I think it’s a very close call. Good arguments have been made on both sides.
On balance, I have a slight preference for conveying the message in the language of the press
release rather than by shifting the tilt, but I certainly can live with the approach that you
recommended. I do think that the markets will view this as at least a short-term increase in the
probability that we will move the fed funds rate down at the next meeting. But as you said, with

August 13, 2002

86 of 92

other data coming in they could clearly move in the other direction as well. So as I indicated, I
have a slight preference for the other approach, but I can live with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Will you read the directive language that has
no change in rates but shifts the balance of risks to weakness?
MR. BERNARD. This is from page 13 in the Bluebook: “The Federal Open Market
Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an
average of around 1¾ percent.” And for the statement in the press release: “Against the
background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the
information currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you call the roll please?

MR. BERNARD. 

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Bernanke
Governor Bies
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Jordan
Governor Kohn
President McTeer
Governor Olson
President Santomero
Governor Stern

Yes 

Yes 

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you circulate the draft statement, which tries to
capture that decision? [Pause]
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Bravo. Silence indicates admiration.

August 13, 2002

87 of 92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody wish to make any comments relevant to the
statement? If not, I will assume that it is adequate for our purposes and it will be released. Our
next meeting is September 24. We do not have a formal program for lunch, but the usual
exquisite cuisine is available for those who wish to stay!
MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to point out that August 14 is the
deadline for corporations’ SEC filings and today, August 13, is the deadline for your filings
regarding special topics for the January 2003 meeting.
MS. MINEHAN. They both have the same importance, right, Vince?
MR. REINHART. My goal would be to distribute a memo to the Committee on Monday
that lists the results of your returns. So there’s still a little time to come in under the wire.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The meeting is officially adjourned.
END OF MEETING

