Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 13, 1996
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, November 13, 1996, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Boehne
Jordan
Kelley
Lindsey
McTeer
Meyer
Phillips
Rivlin
Stern
Yellen

Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, Moskow, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Rolnick,
Siegman, Simpson, Sniderman, and Stockton,
Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Madigan and Slifman, Associate Directors,
Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Reinhart, Assistant Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

-2-

Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Eisenbeis,
Goodfriend, and Hunter, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City,
St. Louis, Atlanta, Richmond, and Chicago
respectively
Messrs. Cox and Judd, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Dallas and San Francisco,
respectively
Ms. Perelmuter, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
November 13, 1996
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. The first item
of business is to welcome John Moore, who as you know is First Vice
President of the San Francisco Bank and is attending his first
meeting. It means that Peter Fisher has to be on his best behavior!
MR. FISHER.

Why me?

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But before he exhibits that good
behavior, I would like somebody to move approval of the minutes for
the meeting of September 24.
MR. KELLEY.

I move it, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

Without objection.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Now, Mr. Fisher.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

Questions for Peter on either subject?

MR. MCTEER. I would like to congratulate Peter on his record
period of nonintervention.
I would like to second that.

MR. BROADDUS.
MR. TRUMAN.

[Laughter]

Congratulate the Chairman

MR. FISHER. Yes, I think congratulations are due at the
other end of the table, but since I get beat up occasionally down
here, I will take what I can get!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you had not run the Desk as well as
If there are no
you did, we would not have had a choice up here.
questions on either subject, would somebody like to move the renewal
of the reciprocal currency arrangements, which expire during December,
and ratification of the domestic transactions? We will vote
separately on each of them. Peter, how do you want to define the
motion on renewing the swap lines?
MR. FISHER. The Committee would be giving me the authority
to negotiate their renewal.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

So move, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?
MR. BOEHNE.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the swap lines say "aye."
SEVERAL.

All in favor of the authority to renew

Aye.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any opposed?

11/13/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
second motion-MR. FISHER.

The

To ratify our domestic operations.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

Hearing none, they are approved.

All in favor say "aye."

Aye.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed? The Secretary will note that
both motions passed unanimously. Would you like to move to our
domestic discussion?
[Laughter] Wait a second! Have we ratified the
domestic market transactions?
SEVERAL.

Yes, we did.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

Oh, that was the second vote!

We are just moving too fast!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, the trouble is jet lag, and even
though Peter and I were on the same plane, his jet lag is different
from mine. [Laughter] Slowing things down, we move to Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL.

Thank you.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, granted all the problems with the
data, there seems to be a gradual uptrend in the last two or three
years in the measured personal saving rate in the context of a very
rapid rise in household wealth. If we were to take the published
personal saving rate and adjust it for the econometric evidence of the
impact of changes in household wealth on that statistic, is there any
question as to whether we would be looking at a secular updrift?
MR. PRELL. I think there always is a question about the
behavior of the saving rate, particularly when we are estimating it
ahead of the annual revisions of the NIPAs. We have seen saving rate
trajectories altered considerably by those statistical revisions.
Given that we feel that GDP growth may have been underestimated, it is
not inconceivable that a part of those revenues could be in
consumption expenditures. I do not have any particular insight on
that, but that may be one aspect of the situation that should make one
cautious about jumping to conclusions. But on the face of it-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any correlation between the
saving rate and the statistical discrepancy?
MR. PRELL.
of my head.

I cannot give you an answer to that off the top

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would assume that Commerce would be
doing that sort of analysis in looking for the causes of the
statistical discrepancy and presumably making adjustments where they
could.
MR. PRELL. Obviously, each time they do their quarterly
estimate, they try to reconcile the income and product sides. If they
find income is stronger, they are presumably going to look for

11/13/96

opportunities to find product and add it in. But I think they are
limited by their source data. And now they are running behind on the
updating of the benchmarking to Census surveys and so on because they
were unable to do their regular annual revisions. That said, and
recognizing that the data may be throwing us a curve, one would have
anticipated over the past couple of years, all other things equal,
that the saving rate would have declined appreciably in light of that
increase in wealth. The saving rate might have been depressed by 1/2
to 3/4 percentage point this year relative to a path that would be
consistent with a stable wealth-to-income ratio, say, since the end of
1994. The apparent updrift that we have seen creates a considerable
differential from that, and so we look to other possible factors. One
of them, as we have noted for some time, may be the fact that the
wealth gains are not evenly distributed across the population. A
considerable number of households that have built up debts may now be
restricting their spending. The tightening of credit availability has
contributed something, even if it has not been very great to this
point. Earlier we were seeing a liberalization of credit availability
and that could have been enhancing consumption growth; now the credit
effect presumably is moving in the other direction. We also have
offered a laundry list of other rumored factors that may be affecting
the saving rate such as greater concerns about retirement security,
particularly in light of the perception that Social Security may not
be there fully for people now in the workforce; Medicare and Medicaid
issues that might suggest less security about medical coverage later
on; and the general notion of job insecurity. While we do not see
clear evidence that by historical standards people are unusually
uncertain at this point about job prospects, there remains some
general sense that all is not well and that jobs are not secure, so
there could be some rise in precautionary saving levels.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, one interesting aspect of the forecast is
the strength of consumption. PCE goes up 2.7 percent in 1997. I
assume that one of the reasons is the strong growth of income--you
have a strong 2.7 percent increase in real disposable income. A bit
of a puzzle to me is why there is such a difference between the growth
of real disposable income and that of real GDP. The 0.5 percent
difference is greater than anything we have seen in the 1990s, and I
do not know how far back one would have to go to see that kind of
difference in the growth of those two measures.
MR. PRELL. We do have some increase in real wages. We have
diminishing profit shares. So, some shift is occurring in income
shares.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There is also the CPI-product price.

MR. STOCKTON. Consumer energy prices, in particular, rose
quite rapidly this year and are expected to be flat next year. The
swing we get there acts to boost growth of disposable income.
MR. PARRY.

They push up real disposable income?

MR. STOCKTON. Yes. Because we are a net importer of oil,
declines in crude oil prices obviously are going to be one thing that
helps push up disposable income.

11/13/96

MR. PARRY. So maybe what one is using for the deflator shows
up in disposable income versus GDP?
MR. STOCKTON.

That is consistent with the historical

evidence.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mike, I am particularly interested in these
methodological changes that BLS is making in the calculation of the
CPI. You have a table on page 15 of Part I of the Greenbook that
shows how these affect the CPI going out through 1998. Could you tell
us more about this? I have a couple of questions. Is the BLS
planning other changes going forward? To what extent have the changes
made so far chipped away at the 1/2 to 1-1/2 percent estimate we
indicated before in testimony about how much the CPI actually
overstates the true underlying inflation rate?
MR. PRELL.
Mr. Stockton.

I should defer to our foremost authority on this,

MR. STOCKTON. At this point, President Moskow, I think what
we have built into the forecast through 1998 is all that the BLS has
officially announced in terms of planned changes. If we pressed them,
I am sure they would say that they have an ongoing program for
improvement and there will be further changes down the road. Thus
far, we think the changes they have made have reduced the CPI by
roughly .2 percentage point in 1996 relative to the 12-month change we
would have looked at using the 1994 methodology. So, we already have
.2 percent built into the data to date, and we are expecting another
.3 percent downward correction going forward between 1996 and 1998.
In terms of how that affects our current estimates of the
bias, according to a paper published earlier this year by my
colleague, David Wilcox, the estimated bias is .6 to 1.5 percentage
points. That estimated bias incorporated a number of the improvements
that we expected the BLS would be making. What we had not anticipated
was the change that the BLS will be making in January to the
measurement of medical care prices, which we think is going to reduce
the CPI by .1 percentage point. I guess we would adjust that range of
.6 to 1.5 percent by lowering it by .1 percentage point, but that is
all. So, we would say a range roughly of 1/2 to 1-1/2 percent is
still a reasonable estimate for the measurement bias.
MR. PRELL. I should note that our estimates of the effects
of these changes in method, or the market basket change in 1998, are
somewhat conjectural. It is not a simple, mechanical arithmetic
story, and that is truer in some cases than in others. But these are
estimates; they are not engraved in stone. I would remind the
Committee that the Boskin Group is slated to come out with their final
report on the bias by December. I do not think we have any inside
information on whether they will be revising their estimates up or
down, but there certainly will be considerable focus on the issue at
that time.

11/13/96

MR. MOSKOW. But if it were not for these methodological
changes, you would see a gradual updrift in the core rate of CPI
inflation?
MR. PRELL.

That is right, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I have a question on the material you sent us
last night. On the basis of the inventory data that were released
last week, I see that you reduced your estimate of third-quarter GDP
growth to a rate of 1.9 percent and traded that off with an uptick in
fourth-quarter growth. How sure are we of third-quarter final sales?
MR. PRELL. Well, final sales for the quarter could be
changed at least noticeably, maybe not importantly, by a possible
revision to September retail sales to be published tomorrow.
Moreover, we have yet to receive the net exports data for September,
which are always a wild card. At least some modest change in that
number is possible, but at this point we would not expect a major
change in the PCE estimate based on retail sales. We are talking
mainly about September. In effect, enough of the quarter is known at
this point that there is not going to be a big surprise. In addition,
there is only one more month of trade data. So, we know it was a weak
quarter for final sales.
The inventory situation is harder to gauge at this point.
Built into the estimate that we gave you is the BEA assumption about
retail inventory investment. It is a moderate number. We did not see
any reason to quarrel with it, but the translation of these data into
real inventory change is difficult. There is a further wild card here
in that a lot of the surprise in the wholesale trade inventory numbers
was in food products. There is some question about whether BEA might
decide that, if it did not show up in those numbers, the food was
still on the farm and maybe some adjustment should be made in farm
inventories. Nothing that we have been able to glean from discussions
with BEA or from their previous behavior would lead us to assign a
high probability of their making some ad hoc adjustment here, but it
is a possibility.
MS. MINEHAN. So you are still quite confident that the low
level of consumption recorded in the third quarter, despite changes in
inventories, is pretty much baked in the cake?
MR. PRELL. I think the numbers will probably hold up fairly
well. As I said, they may not be accurate numbers, but we have no
basis for gauging a bias one way or the other. We do not perceive
that the trend in the growth of consumption has moderated to the
degree that those third-quarter numbers might suggest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. My question actually was the same as Cathy's.
It was about the GDP estimate.
MR. PRELL.
answer!

If I'm asked again, I might give a different

11/13/96

MS. PHILLIPS. Well, actually I was going to put it slightly
differently. How confident are you about the 1.9 percent growth rate?
MR. PRELL. Not highly confident, given the statistical
uncertainties that I indicated. We can imagine a number a little
lower; we can imagine a number a little higher. You will recall that
one of the fundamental factors in our thinking about the third quarter
was that the labor input was quite ample, and the income side would
suggest there was room for considerably more growth. On the other
hand, when we looked at the first half of this year or the second
quarter, we did not always see these things tracking perfectly; there
was some averaging out. The basic trend of growth in the mid-two's
for this year seems fairly reasonable relative to the behavior of the
unemployment rate, to other measures of labor input, and to our
general sense that things had picked up and were running somewhat
above the long-term trend.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Mike?

MR. LINDSEY. When you estimate a consumption function, do
you divide the population into subsets?
MR. PRELL. We have some notional views about proportions of
the population that might be liquidity constrained or not liquidity
constrained. So, embedded in some models is a perspective on that.
But in preparing our forecast, we are not thinking of this on a
disaggregated basis.
MR. STOCKTON. We also try to take account of the distribution of income. For example, there is a much higher propensity to
consume out of transfer payments than there is out of labor income.
MR. PRELL. Transfer income has been relatively strong, and
to an extent that might lead one to have expected fairly firm
consumption relative to aggregate income.
MR. LINDSEY. It would seem that the potentially liquidityconstrained or debt-constrained population would be different from the
people who have had stock market wealth gains. I would think that the
key to sorting the two out is to try to disaggregate the trends. This
is just a suggestion for future research.
MR. STOCKTON. As you know, Governor Lindsey, there are not a
lot of disaggregated time series data on consumption and saving.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
would like to start the Committee's discussion?

If not, who

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economy
expanded briskly in the first half of 1996, and it remained on track
during the third quarter. Growth in total payroll employment slowed
only slightly between the second and third quarters, from 3.6 to 3.3
percent at an annual rate. The District's performance this year is
attributable largely to a strengthening in the State of California.
For example, growth in construction employment in that state has
accelerated substantially since the first quarter. The overall
expansion has been stronger in northern California than in other parts
of the state. The northern region has benefitted from low

11/13/96

unemployment and a substantial recovery in housing values, factors
that gradually are spreading to southern California. The Washington
State economy continues to benefit from stepped up production at
Boeing. Twelve-month gains in total employment in the state have
increased from 1 percent at the start of the year to 3.1 percent in
September. Increased demand for manufactured products related to
aircraft production also spilled over to Oregon and added to a thirdquarter surge there. The intermountain states--Arizona, Idaho,
Nevada, and Utah--continued to post large year-over-year employment
gains. About the only weak part of the District is Hawaii, which
showed a decline in jobs during the third quarter.
Turning to the national economy, data released since we met
in September caused us to lower our projections for near-term real GDP
and, to a lesser extent, inflation in 1997. We now expect real GDP
growth to fall below its 2 percent trend this quarter, in part because
inventory investment should drop off following its strong increase in
the third quarter. At the same time, inflation in the ECI and the
GDP-based price measures all came in below expectations. Over a
longer horizon, underlying inflation has shown a slight downward trend
according to most measures despite the low unemployment rate.
We have updated some earlier work that looked at conventional
inflation equations incorporating historical relations among
unemployment, inflation, and other variables. These equations overpredicted inflation by a wide margin in the third quarter, and this
noticeably intensified the more moderate pattern of overprediction
that we have seen for some time. As a result, we have lowered our
forecast for CPI inflation in 1997 to just under 3 percent, in effect
putting somewhat less weight on upward pressure from labor markets.
However, I still consider the risks for inflation to be on the up side
because it is quite possible that the historical relationship with
labor market conditions will begin to reassert itself. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, the Seventh District economy
continues to expand at a moderate pace. It appears that price
pressures may have eased somewhat.
Overall construction activity remains strong, with recent
slowing on the residential side being offset by a pickup in
nonresidential activity, both public and private. Retail sales
improved moderately in both September and October, and the sales gains
in the District generally have matched or slightly exceeded the
national averages. One of our directors characterized the recent
pickup as representing steady gains rather than indicating a new
trend. Sales of apparel and other soft goods have been strong, while
sales of big-ticket items such as appliances and, especially,
electronic goods have been soft. District retailers generally expect
a reasonably healthy holiday sales season, and the shorter sales
period this year is not expected to be a serious constraint. As we
had expected, auto and light truck sales recently have been running
slightly below a 15-million-unit annual pace. October sales were not
significantly affected by the various strikes against GM, but November
and possibly December sales could be. According to GM management,
downtime from their new model changeovers presents a significant
production challenge in the fourth quarter. The new GM-UAW contract

11/13/96

increased compensation costs by just under 5 percent per year and
followed a pattern that already had been set with Ford and Chrysler.
Manufacturing activity in the District generally remains
somewhat stronger than nationally, although conditions vary by
industry. Purchasing managers' surveys from around our District
indicated continued expansion in October at a pace that was somewhat
faster than for the nation as a whole. We are hearing about strength
in the farm equipment industry, while producers of heavy trucks and
paper are not reporting improvement. Growth in manufacturing
employment has slowed in District states, but the number of factory
jobs in September was the same as last year. This represents a better
performance than the rest of the nation.
For employment conditions generally, the news is still the
same. Labor markets remain tight in many parts of the District.
While we continue to have reports of upward pressure on wages in some
sectors, the ECI for the Midwest, like that for the nation, did not
indicate a significant acceleration in total compensation costs.
Confidential information we received from Manpower Incorporated
regarding their recent survey indicates that hiring plans for the
first quarter of 1997 are slightly more upbeat than normal. I would
caution everyone that this information will not be publicly released
until Monday, November 25.
On the price front, most firms continue to report that
competitive pressures make raising prices extremely difficult. In
fact, many of our contacts are quite adamant on this point. I get the
sense from people I have talked to recently that materials costs are
coming down rather than rising. Steel prices, for example, are down
and supplies have increased, in part because of imports. One sign of
the impact of imports is that at least two domestic steel companies
recently have filed anti-dumping charges under our trade laws.
Our latest reports on livestock and crop conditions generally
point to larger supplies ahead than were previously expected, and this
will result in less upward pressures on retail food prices in 1997
than were previously expected. Our latest quarterly survey of
agricultural banks indicates that District farmers are in very good
financial condition, and we see no signs of ag loan problems in our
District.
Turning to the national outlook, it seems clear that the long
awaited slowing in the growth of aggregate demand has arrived. We
have no quarrels with the broad outlines of the Greenbook's outlook
for 1997, but we expect that real growth and employment gains may be
slightly higher in 1997 than the Greenbook forecast. I think it is
fair to say that the risks to the outlook are more nearly balanced
than at our last meeting, but I believe that the upside risks remain
more serious. The inflation forecasts concern me. As the Greenbook
notes, the NAIRU may have fallen to 5.6 percent. Still, this is an
economy where resource utilization rates are high and slack is
limited. The outlook is for higher core inflation, as we discussed
before, when we adjust for the BLS's methodological changes to the
CPI. Obviously, there is a good deal of uncertainty about these
adjustments in the inflation forecasts, but I think it is important
that we avoid getting into the position of validating an incremental
upward creep in inflation.

11/13/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, New England remains on a solid
growth path. Job growth on average has been slower than for the
nation, but this is traditional for New England. The unemployment
rates for the region as a whole and for each state remain below that
for the nation. Employment in our region is still below its
prerecession level, but the slow, steady job growth that we have been
experiencing is expected to continue for the rest of the decade and to
bring employment back to the prerecession level by the end of 1998.
Just to touch on some of the bright spots: Manufacturing job
losses are continuing but at a slower rate. We see this especially in
the defense industry where downsizing is abating, and we are beginning
to see signs that defense-oriented firms are becoming successful in
nondefense lines of business. Real estate vacancy rates are down
everywhere, especially in Boston. A director on our New England
Advisory Council heads up the building trades in Boston, and he
reports that new buildings are actively on the drawing boards,
including six new hotels and a couple of new office complexes. When I
arrived in Boston five years ago, that was not expected to happen in
anyone's lifetime. Despite low rates of unemployment, anecdotal
reports of labor shortages, except for specific technical skills,
appear to have abated in the last couple of months. There is some
sense that the New England labor force may be growing. There is less
net outmigration and perhaps greater labor force participation by
previously discouraged workers, especially older workers. Wage
increases are expected to be in the area of 2 to 5 percent, probably
centering around 3 percent, but pressures on overall prices are
considered to be low. Business people firmly believe, along the lines
that Mike Prell reported for the nation, that they cannot raise
prices. Some are going to try, but overall the expectation is that
whatever happens on the wage side, businesses will somehow accommodate
to it within their overall cost structure and not raise prices.
Consumer sentiment and business sentiment are extremely
upbeat, even in such formerly depressed areas as Connecticut. We have
had people from Connecticut talking to us about business conditions
looking brighter. The stories in the newspapers are more optimistic,
and that is not because they just opened a new Indian-run casino in
Connecticut! I think the better sentiment has its roots in the
opening of a lot of small new businesses.
On the national scene, we do not have any essential
disagreement with the Greenbook. Certainly, the risks that growth
will get out of hand seem to have abated since our last meeting. The
slower growth in consumer spending in the third quarter, a slight
cooling of housing markets, and a bigger drag--bigger than we expected
anyway--from the trade deficit all point to a moderate fourth quarter,
even assuming a fairly good bounceback in consumer spending. The
risks to the forecast for growth also seem fairly balanced, at least
for the coming year, again as compared with our expectations at the
time of the last Greenbook. However, there are continued upside risks
to inflation. The Greenbook may be overly optimistic about the
unemployment rate. It could very well drift slightly downward, at
least in our view, and we do not have a whole lot of wiggle room here.
The NAIRU probably is lower than we expected earlier, either
permanently or cyclically, but it certainly is not centered around 5.2

11/13/96

-10-

percent. The Greenbook inflation trend is up, even though that gets
masked a bit by measurement adjustments and so forth. But if we were
able to make all of those adjustments going backward, we would still
expect to see a small uptick in the rate of inflation going forward.
The key question here is whether that expected upward tick in
inflation is acceptable, and if it is not, when we should move to
address it even in the presence of moderating economic growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, activity at the regional level
in our District, as elsewhere in the country, has decelerated pretty
much across the board. In particular, residential construction
recently has softened noticeably. Our most recent monthly surveys,
though, do suggest a bit of a rebound lately in both the service and
the manufacturing sectors. It is our sense that despite the
deceleration, these sectors are still relatively firm overall, with a
few exceptions like textiles and apparel. In addition, labor markets
in our region remain tight according to the information that we have,
and wage pressures are still evident in at least some local markets,
although here as elsewhere these conditions have produced only
scattered increases in prices at this point.
In general, I think it is fair to say that households and
businesses in our region remain reasonably confident that the
expansion is going to continue for the foreseeable future. One
manifestation of this is continued, quite marked strength in
commercial real estate along the lines of Cathy Minehan's comments.
Mike Moskow mentioned that as well. As we pointed out in our
Beigebook report, vacancy rates have fallen and rental rates have
risen in many parts of the District, and we see at least some new
construction activity. In Charlotte and northern Virginia
particularly, we see a lot of strength in the commercial real estate
sector.
Turning to the national picture, I think the third-quarter
GDP report and the recent monthly data are quite encouraging on
balance because they suggest that the economy is now moving back to a
more sustainable growth path. At a minimum, it seems clear that the
very rapid and obviously unsustainable growth rate in the second
quarter is not going to persist. Moreover, and for me this is
probably the single most encouraging development, the recent drop in
long-term interest rates suggests that inflation expectations have
diminished in a material way at least for now.
Finally, employment growth has moved back closer to the trend
growth in the labor force, and while labor markets remain tight, they
may not be tightening further at present. All in all, I think it is a
considerably improved and encouraging picture. As you know, I was not
at all confident that we would get this kind of outcome without some
additional restraint before now on our part. I am happy that things
have worked out this way, at least for the time being.
Looking ahead, as others already have noted, the risks of
error in the staff's projections are more balanced now than they were.
I did not think that there was any significant downside risk until
recently, but final demand especially for households was very weak in
the third quarter. I don't think we understand this weakness or the

11/13/96

-11-

related increase in the saving rate very clearly at this point. It
may just be noise, and that is my guess, but we cannot rule out the
possibility that something more is going on, and we need to be
sensitive to that possibility.
Having said all this, I do believe, like Mike Moskow, that
the balance of risks is still skewed to the up side on both growth and
inflation, if somewhat less dramatically than earlier. It is
certainly possible that we could experience a poor holiday selling
season and that consumer demand could remain weak going forward. But
this outcome seems unlikely to me given what we know about the solid
growth in jobs and incomes, continued high consumer confidence, and
the behavior of the stock market. Also, the overall level of activity
seems to remain high. According to all of the information that I see,
labor markets are still quite tight. The Greenbook, after all, is
still projecting a modest but steady increase in the ECI over the
projection period and also in the core CPI, especially abstracting
from the reweighting of the index. So, again, I think the risks
remain weighted to the up side. Also, even though the upside risk
seems to be diminishing somewhat, as I see it there is precious little
margin for error in that direction. We are still at a very high level
of activity, and if we see any significant increase in aggregate
demand in the near term, that could get us back into trouble in a
hurry. So, bottom line, we need to remain vigilant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Economic activity in the Philadelphia District
continues to expand, although the pace of growth has slackened some
since the summer. Manufacturing overall reflects this trend. Some
industries like rubber, plastics, chemicals, primary metals, and
machinery are relatively stronger than textiles and furniture.
Retailers are having a better year to date than last year, though
there has been some slowing so far this fall compared to the summer.
A number of retailers have told us that sales volumes hold up only
when prices are cut. Construction activity generally has edged down,
with nonresidential construction well under the levels of a year ago
and housing permits somewhat above. Labor markets remain mixed, with
some areas very tight and others reporting slack. In general,
employers report increased difficulty in finding qualified entry-level
workers. A major reason is that some minimal level of computer skills
is required for many entry-level jobs, especially for clerical
workers. There is also a shortage of truck drivers and of skilled
tradesmen in construction. In the job categories where shortages
exist, there are notable upward wage pressures. Generally, however,
wage increases are in the 3 to 4 percent range.
On the national front, the economy is performing according to
a script of more moderate, sustainable growth and subdued inflation.
The best-bet outlook is for more of the same, though something can
always go wrong. There are always uncertainties, and there is always
room for improvement. At the same time, the macro economy is
performing rather well, and monetary tinkering at this point would be
likely to do more harm than good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

11/13/96

-12-

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, many of us indicated at the last
FOMC meeting that we were still waiting for the forecasted and hopedfor slowdown in the economy, but as of that time there were only a few
scattered signs of a slowdown. I do not think that is the case any
longer. Indeed, while the Sixth District does not exactly mirror the
national economy, many of the same trends that we are seeing within
the District are now appearing in the national economy as well. Our
District economy continues to grow at a moderate pace, although I no
longer would suggest that it is leading the nation. Signs of a
slowdown are beginning to appear, particularly in residential
construction and manufacturing. Tourism, a mainstay for our District,
particularly in Georgia and Florida, continues to be extremely strong.
Retail sales exceed year-ago levels, and retailers we talk to are
optimistic about the upcoming holidays. Our real estate contacts
report that the single-family market has begun to slow, albeit from an
historically high level, as both sales and construction activity
flattened in October. At the same time, multifamily and commercial
construction continue strong. Loan demand remains steady, with
consumer loan demand described as flat and commercial as mixed. Banks
in our region tell us they are beginning to pay closer attention to
credit quality.
On the labor market front, we continue to get reports of
localized shortages, which are in fact becoming more and more common
across the District. At the same time, we are hearing of only
scattered wage pressures and, as Mike Moskow and Cathy Minehan
indicated for their Districts, there are almost no signs that this
tightness is being passed through to consumers in the form of higher
prices. We get few reports that there will be any direct impact from
the increase in the minimum wage, but some of our business contacts
indicate that certain wage contracts are indexed to the minimum wage
and hence we will be watchful on that front.
Our outlook for the District calls for moderate-to-strong
growth well into next year. We look for some signs of possible
slowing due to diminished demand. Although consumer confidence
remains strong, we see a slight drop in the willingness to buy bigticket items. And the regional decline in loan quality suggests the
possibility of tighter loan standards and weaker loan demand in the
future. Similarly, regional capital investment may slacken unless
manufacturers stop revising their capital expenditure plans downward.
On the national front, we see things about the same as
everyone else does. The reported drop in third-quarter GDP growth and
other more recent monthly data seem to be signalling the slackening
that we were looking for, especially in light of the evidence that
growth in consumer spending and business investment may be slowing.
Despite the evidence of some slowing in the expansion, we still expect
forward momentum to continue at a good level, with most of the
economy's fundamentals remaining essentially healthy.
We see three key question marks for the forecast, essentially
the same as those discussed in the Greenbook. The first concerns
consumer demand and specifically when it will pick up and by how much.
We think there are some upside risks here. As Al Broaddus just noted,
personal income has been up, savings have been up, debt burdens were
reduced slightly in October, and the run-up in the stock market has
given consumers' holdings of financial wealth an added boost. The

11/13/96

-13-

second question relates to inventories, which we have already talked
about. Looking at the data closely, we feel that a large part of the
increase in inventories was not a result of an unanticipated drop in
sales but rather stemmed in most cases from attempts to replenish
stocks. Inventory-sales ratios remain moderate to low by almost any
standard. Of course, the third factor is the labor markets. How long
can we continue to have the current job growth and unemployment
environment without the resulting tightness beginning to put upward
pressure on prices? We think we have been fortunate with developments
in this area for some while now, but it is not likely that reduced
increases in benefits can continue to offset wage increases
indefinitely. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The expansion of the Eleventh District economy
has slowed a little from its rapid pace earlier, but it is still
fairly strong. The strengths certainly outweigh the weaknesses. On
the up side, higher oil and gas prices are a positive for us at least,
boosting activity in the energy industry in the Southwest. The
Mexican economy is rebounding, adding to the demand for District goods
and services. Nonhousing construction activity is strong in the
District, particularly office buildings, warehouses, and industrial
space. Call centers are hiring all the people they can get, and there
are many reports of labor market tightness. On the down side, the
electronics industry is weaker than a year ago. We have seen about a
3 percent decline in electronics-related jobs as compared with 5
percent growth over the previous two years. Homebuilding has dropped
off a bit. Employment in motor vehicles manufacturing is down and
more layoffs are expected in coming months. On the whole, it is
fairly clear that growth remains strong in the District, though it is
moderating a little from its earlier pace.
Turning to the question of upward price pressures, the bottom
line, as other people also have indicated, is that we do not see much
evidence of such pressures yet. There has been a lot of evidence both
statistical and anecdotal that the labor market is tight in our part
of the country. On the other hand, there is little evidence that the
tightness is translating into upward pressures on prices. The labor
picture is interesting. I have heard a lot of stories recently and
have seen some of the problems that companies increasingly are
experiencing in their efforts to find enough help at the lower end of
the wage spectrum. We hear of restaurants offering signing bonuses
for new employees. People are going into 7-Elevens and getting a job
offer when they are not even looking for work. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
minimum wage? [Laughter]

Did they think you were worth the

MR. MCTEER. Well, I am not getting any respect as a result
[Laughter] My own evidence of the tightness in the
of that offer!
labor markets came just before the elections. For the first time in
my life, I was polled about my political views, and the interviewer
had trouble reading the questions to me. She never could pronounce
the word "conservative."
MS. MINEHAN.

She was from Texas!

-14-

11/13/96

MR. MCTEER.

I don't know where she was from.

SPEAKER(?).

Massachusetts!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Laughter]

President Stern.

MR. STERN. As far as the District economy is concerned,
there is little to report because the very healthy trends continue, as
has been the case for a long time. Labor markets remain very tight,
and I have no doubt that there are outright labor shortages that are
restraining activity and expansion in some parts of the District.
Anecdotes of wage pressure have increased and while we are hearing
more about that, the pressure does not appear to be showing up in any
of the broad measures of wages. I am not in a position to reconcile
the anecdotes in one direction and the data in the other. Part of the
explanation would appear to be a greater reliance on variable pay,
which seems to be both larger and going deeper into organizations than
we earlier thought. But the evidence in support of that explanation
still is very fragmentary at this point, and I would not put a lot of
emphasis on it. Whatever one might say about wages and wage
pressures, business people remain adamant, as a number of people have
already commented, that they cannot raise prices and that inflation is
not something they are confronted with or that they contemplate.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I would
characterize developments in recent months as generally pleasant
surprises. Inflation has turned out to be less of a problem than I
feared earlier, and demand does seem to be slowing along the lines
that we anticipated. I am not particularly worried about the thirdquarter slowdown in consumer spending. That story looks to me like
the dog that does not bark or did not bark. What I mean is that
retailers are prone to complain and in fact do complain almost no
matter how good things are. The fact that I do not hear them
complaining suggests to me that sales remain satisfactory.
I clearly do not understand some of the dynamics in the labor
market. If we work our way through the data, there are some signs of
an upward creep in the rate of wage increases. But given that we
probably have been underestimating the rate of growth of productivity,
it may be that cost pressures have been offset to this point. Having
said that, we know that businesses are relying increasingly on less
skilled, less experienced workers because they are the only ones
available to fill vacancies, and we may be at the point where we are
about to run through the good news as far as being able to offset
somewhat higher wages with productivity improvements. That is, we may
start to see real increases in labor costs and the pressures that
follow from that. I do not know how much to make of that at this
point because, as I said earlier, it seems to me that most of the
surprises in recent months have been pleasant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Kansas City
District continues to grow moderately and consistently. Our directors
and other business contacts generally report healthy economic
conditions throughout the District. Retail trade appears to be
holding up well across all seven District states. A recent survey of
District manufacturers conducted by our Bank found that moderate

11/13/96

-15-

expansion of production schedules is in place at this time. Despite
some generally favorable anecdotal reports, employment has leveled off
in recent months. It was unchanged in September and up just a little
in August. Improved conditions in our agricultural sector have raised
income levels somewhat, and we are seeing some drilling activity in
our energy sector as well. Overall consumer and wholesale prices now
appear to be rising slowly but consistently across our District.
Labor markets are indeed tight, and we are hearing more frequent
reports of wage pressures for our manufacturers as well as for our
retail and service industries.
For the national outlook, our projections are very similar to
those of the Board staff. Over the next several quarters, I look for
real GDP to advance at around the trend rate of 2 to 2-1/4 percent.
There remains, as others have mentioned, some uncertainty about
consumption, but we believe that the underlying fundamentals are good.
Looking at other sectors of the economy, it appears that we can expect
solid economic growth in the fourth quarter. For example, the
industrial sector continues to expand, and housing activity should
remain healthy, given the declines we have seen in long-term interest
rates. While we have a CPI inflation rate that is now reported to be
running around 3 percent, allowing for the methodological adjustments
being made to this measure, that still reflects an upward move in the
inflation rate. I think this has been noticeable over the last 18
months. As it has in the past, the rise in inflation continues to
concern me. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. Eighth District economic
conditions continue to be very good. Sales increases, employment
gains, and plant expansions are reported far more often than declines
and closures. Firms recently announcing plans for new facilities
include some in the poultry processing, paper products, and package
delivery businesses. Most firms report inventories at or slightly
below desired levels. Construction permits for new homes were up
recently in more than half of the District's 12 metropolitan areas.
Two District auto manufacturers, Chrysler and Ford, plan to produce
334,000 cars and light trucks in the fourth quarter, an increase of
15.2 percent from third-quarter levels. Current plans call for firstquarter 1997 production to exceed first-quarter 1996 production by
about 2.7 percent. Also, farm income is strong because of generally
high prices and good yields.
With respect to labor markets, unemployment in several Eighth
District states remains near 20-year lows. In Missouri, for example,
the September unemployment rate was 3.9 percent, well below the
national average and the state's unemployment rate one year ago.
District payroll employment growth on the other hand was 1-1/2 percent
at an annual rate from June through September, somewhat below the
national average of 2-1/2 percent. Given other developments, this may
reflect a shortage of qualified workers to fill positions rather than
weak labor demand relative to the nation. District labor markets are
tight.

The national jobs picture is similar. For 1996, the average
gain in nonfarm payroll employment has been about 209,000 per month or
2.1 percent at an annual rate, well above the Board staff's longer-run

-16-

11/13/96

trend in labor force growth of about 130,000 workers per month. The
national unemployment rate, as we all know, was 5.2 percent for
October. All in all, labor markets remain robust. There has been
some moderate wage pressure associated with these tight labor markets.
The Greenbook notes that the employment cost index increased at 2.9
percent in the third quarter, up from 2.6 percent in the third quarter
of 1995. Unit labor costs increased at a 4 percent annual rate in the
third quarter, about double the rate in the first half of the year.
Financial markets have concluded that the slowdown in real
GDP growth has reduced the urgency for immediate action by this
Committee. That may be correct, but the facts are that in each of the
last three years, we have managed to achieve fourth-quarter-to-fourthquarter CPI inflation rates a few tenths under 3 percent. This year,
on the other hand, CPI inflation will move higher to an estimated 3.2
percent. And forecasts for next year on a consistent basis are higher
still, as was mentioned earlier.
In short, we are in the process of violating an implicit
upper bound on acceptable inflation, which may cause some to conclude
that the Committee's tolerance for inflation is rising. Furthermore,
the current inflation rate is too high in my opinion to allow for
maximum efficiency in the U.S. economy. But because markets believe
we are focused solely on short-run developments in the real economy,
there is apparently no rationale for tightening unless inflation moves
up markedly, which of course we all know is too late once it occurs.
In my view, the Committee should develop a plan to move inflation
lower and publicize that plan through an announcement of multi-year
inflation targets. Lack of transparency in policymaking is preventing
the Committee from gaining full credibility and is causing market
participants to demand compensation for possible inflation surprises
in the future. While current long-term interest rates on U.S.
Treasury debt seem low, they could be lower still if market
participants were less worried about inflation making a comeback. A
clear statement of our objectives and actions consistent with those
objectives could help in this regard.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the economy of the
Second District advanced at a slow but steady pace in recent weeks.
Private payrolls rose at an annual rate of 1.2 percent in New York and
1 percent in New Jersey in September. Job growth kept pace with labor
force growth, and unemployment rates therefore were essentially
unchanged. Consumer spending was moderately strong. Retail sales
growth remained in its recent range of 4 to 5 percent. Sales in the
existing home market softened a bit but from near-record highs that
characterized recent months. Housing demand remained strong and price
increases were reportedly in the range of 5 to 6 percent. Builders
tell us that construction of single-family units declined sharply but
that construction of 2- to 4-family condominiums was robust. The
vacancy rates for prime commercial office space declined in most
metropolitan areas throughout the Second District, while rental rates
continued to firm throughout the dominant Manhattan market. The
consumer price index for the New York/northeastern New Jersey region
ticked up to 3.1 percent on a year-over-year basis. Leaving aside
monthly gyrations, the CPI in our area has averaged 2.8 percent over

-17-

11/13/96

the last two quarters.
of 2.9 percent.

That is about on a par with the national gain

On the national level, our forecast is rather consistent with
the views that have been expressed here, at least those of the
Greenbook and of the members who are generally sympathetic with that
forecast. The concern we have been spending a good deal of our time
looking into is whether the tightness that all of us perceive in labor
markets is something that is likely to plague us soon and, if so, how.
Most economic theory says that if compensation growth does accelerate,
it will be passed on to higher prices if labor's share of costs, labor
productivity, and the profit margin are all constant. But according
to the research that has been done throughout the country, the linkage
between the cost of labor and the price level varies from very weak to
reasonably strong. In fact, the research that was conducted recently
at the New York Fed suggests the strongest link. But generally
speaking, the research indicates that the link is not particularly
strong, and we have been looking for the reason why that might be so.
One possible explanation we have come up with in work that is still
very much in progress is that expenditure categories accounting for
about half the CPI do not indicate that changes in labor costs have a
significant direct effect on prices. That is because either the labor
costs represent a negligible fraction of total costs--for example, in
existing housing, food that is consumed at home, or in energy--or
because of the government's role in price setting as in medical care,
tobacco, alcoholic beverages, utilities, and public transportation.
That seems to us to leave the remaining half of the CPI as the place
to look for a stronger link between compensation and finished prices.
We find that labor costs matter in two areas, but a good deal
more in one of the two. We find the linkage quite weak in the area
involving the production of goods and the prices of the goods. I
think that is the area about which we hear so many anecdotes saying
that the labor market is very tight, but even if labor costs go up
businesses say they cannot pass them on to prices. The competitive
marketplace makes that very difficult. But there is another area,
namely, labor-intensive services that account for about 23 percent of
the CPI, where there is not so much discipline on pricing, at least
not any that is close to being comparable to that of the goods
producing area. So we have been looking at the linkage between that
portion of the ECI attributable to people who produce services and the
cost of services. There the linkage is quite clear. That is, if we
look back over almost any period of time we see that as costs go up in
that area, prices follow rather quickly. That is the area that we
think we have to concentrate on most. But even in that area, the
related portion of the ECI has not been moving up. Therefore, that
particular alarm bell, which we think is the first one that really
indicates approaching problems, is not yet ringing. We have not been
able to find any convincing reason to think that productivity
improvements have been absorbing increases in labor costs. We are all
aware, of course, that the productivity numbers are not very good, but
we do not think that that is an area where we can place a lot of
confidence, at least not yet.
The other area that we in New York and most of us around the
table have been talking about relates to whether the share of
corporate profits in national income has been producing something of a
buffer.

One would think that is true for the first two quarters of

11/13/96

-18-

this year. As the data keep coming in on the third quarter and we
start getting into the fourth quarter, we are rather inclined to
believe that that may be behind us. Corporate profitability is in
fact beginning to turn down a bit and, therefore, the notion that
increases in compensation will be absorbed by lowering the
profitability level is probably not a very good bet to make.
Our conclusion from all of this is that we understand better
why there has been better price performance than a lot of people
thought there would be but that the labor market still is tight. That
portion of it in the service area seems to be tight. Therefore, there
is still reason to be cautious. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Thank you. In the relatively long interval
since our last meeting,
gave us two reports from
an area we had not heard much about. He said it
appeared that the
had gotten itself in a bit of a
jam, but they were going to try to preserve as many jobs as they
could. [Laughter] Listening to directors on a recent conference call
reminded me of how important it is to listen very carefully. One of
them very forcefully stated that he had seen very strong evidence of
weakening demand for steel. He indicated that domestic demand was
flat, and he thought it would actually be down in 1997 compared with
1996. Imports would continue to be a problem, and the new capacity he
has been telling us about for the last couple of years was already
coming into production and capacity would increase further in 1997.
He said the new mills were the price leaders. The productivity of
these new mills was so much greater than that of the preexisting
capacity that he saw substantial downward pressure on prices and some
very difficult times ahead for the older mills.
Another report from
that I
found very interesting in terms of new developments came from a
company in Columbus, Ohio,
It is like a Mrs.
Fields but very diversified. The official from that firm said that
the fastest growing segments of her business are catalog orders, as
she calls them, that come in over 800 numbers and increasingly this
year over the Internet.
and I asked her what would happen if she came into the office
on a Friday morning and found a message from Osaka ordering pastries
for a Monday morning meeting. She said that her firm gets such orders
all the time because there are so many Japanese associated with Honda
and other firms in Ohio. They learn about the gift box that her firm
sells and their orders then start to come in over the Internet. When
I asked about the cost, she said that for a group of 15 people her
firm would arrange for delivery on that Friday afternoon. The package
would arrive in Osaka on Sunday, and it would be delivered on Monday
for about $100, including transportation. She said that was less than
they would pay to buy the pastries locally. I asked if she ever
thought of herself as being in the export business. She said, No, and
she didn't care. What difference did it make? She may be right about
that, too.
We also met in recent weeks with a lot of bankers in western
Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and all over Ohio. Especially with the
community bankers, the consistent story in meeting after meeting was

11/13/96

-19-

about the quality of consumer credit. One banker would get started on
that subject and then everybody would tell stories not only about
rising delinquencies and increasingly slow payments, but the
phenomenon that most worried them was that of people who had never
been late in making their payments unexpectedly walking into the bank
and declaring themselves bankrupt. Basically, these were stories
about the pyramiding of credit card debts through transfers of debt
balances from old cards to new cards until the borrowers ran out the
string and their incomes simply could no longer service the debts.
So, they declared bankruptcy. The bankers said that the charge-offs
could be very high for this quarter, but there was a difference of
opinion about the future. Some said that they thought they had
tightened up enough that this would be the worst quarter; others
believed that 1997 was going to be much worse. We met with the senior
credit officers of about a dozen of the larger banks, and they all
said that charge-offs would be much greater in 1997. They are very
concerned about the credit quality of their loans on the consumer
side, though increasingly they seem to be concerned about the
commercial side, too. They all believed that their own exposure to
commercial real estate in the form of shopping center stores--they
call them boxes--and hotels that they have financed is going to be a
problem in 1997.
I asked them about their earnings projections. They were all
budgeting for double-digit loan volume growth in 1997. I asked them
to square that with the nominal GDP growth of about 4 to 4-1/2
percent, and of course they said they were going to take it from their
competition. [Laughter] They all confessed concern about margins
next year and said that they simply would not be able to sustain their
current earnings levels without the loan volume they had built into
their budgets. So, 1997 is going to be an interesting year in terms
of bank earnings.
On the national economy, the Board staff has revised down its
third-quarter GDP numbers from those shown in the Greenbook. Based on
the latest GDP numbers and until we get new data, I assume that means
the productivity growth number was close to zero in the third quarter,
which defies belief. We can talk all we want about whether the
productivity number is bigger or smaller, but it is wrong. It is
simply inconceivable that there was no productivity growth at all in
the third quarter. In fact, the productivity numbers for this whole
year are just not believable.
What I am encouraged about is the Board's staff projection of
the nominal GDP trend. I was very concerned in March of this year
when the staff first made a substantial upward revision in its
projection of nominal GDP for this year and out into 1997. I was even
more concerned in August when that projection was notched up further,
but since then the upward adjustment has all been taken away. The
staff now has its lowest nominal income growth projections through
1997 since around 1995, including a growth rate of around 4 percent or
a little more as we finish the year, about the same as it appears to
have grown in the third quarter. I do not know precisely what the
growth of nominal GDP was for the third quarter; it was probably below
4 percent. The staff has raised its growth projection for the first
quarter of 1997, but that is strictly on the basis of an assumed
rebound in auto sales. If we take that rebound out of the projection,
nominal GDP growth is still flat at about 4 percent. So, out through

11/13/96

-20-

1998 the expansion of nominal GDP in this projection is still running
at a rate of around 4 or 4-1/4 percent. These numbers are well below
the central tendency of the nominal GDP forecasts that the Committee
members provided in July for the year 1997, and they are below our own
forecast in Cleveland, which was at the lower end of that central
tendency.
The question, then, is how can we get an acceleration of
inflation? It has to result from an acceleration in final demand, and
we are no longer seeing that. In fact, each successive revision of
the nominal spending forecast has been in a downward direction.
Conceivably, if one were to believe such a forecast, higher inflation
could result with such nominal GDP growth if real output were to drop
further to little or no growth. As a practical matter, I do not see
how the Board staff could be wrong on the low side of its nominal
spending forecast unless I am given different assumptions than I have
seen so far about money growth, which has continued to come in below
the earlier assumptions, or I am told it has something to do with
velocity. But such a velocity story would not be consistent with the
interest rates we are seeing. In fact, the story goes in the opposite
direction. The way I use MZM, as I have tried to describe before, is
as a contemporaneous monitoring device of what is happening to nominal
spending with a consistent set of assumptions about interest rates and
money growth. That tells me we are more likely to see weaker rather
than stronger final demand in the period ahead. I think that the
risks are growing on the down side, not on the up side. That view was
reinforced by these stories that bankers tell about their consumer
credit portfolios.
I have one last comment on labor-intensive services that Bill
McDonough was just talking about. I think there is a very interesting
issue in the linkage here that deserves some further research. If one
thinks about a self-employed person in business services, the price of
the service is, of course, going to be equal to the person's
compensation because output in this case is defined as the labor input
of one person. That cannot change. There is no productivity in the
calculation. So, any increase in compensation would be all inflation
simply by definition.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. The data available since the last meeting
confirmed that the economy has slowed to trend growth. They suggested
that an unfavorable mix between final sales and inventory investment
in the last quarter weighs heavily against a rebound to above-trend
growth in the period immediately ahead. The data also indicated that
the acceleration of wage and compensation costs that is under way is
somewhat more modest than previously anticipated. And despite the
stabilization of the unemployment rate at a level that may yet prove
to be below NAIRU, inflation remains remarkedly well contained. On
balance the data, if not precisely consistent with every aspect of
that forecast, at least matched our fondest hopes and rewarded our
patience.
The prevailing economic environment, however, is not without
risk going forward. The main challenge in my view lies in the
suspicion of many of us, precisely as set out in the staff forecast,
that trend growth at the prevailing unemployment rate will ultimately

11/13/96

-21-

prove to be inconsistent with stable inflation going forward.
Nevertheless, in the near term there may be more downside than upside
risk with respect to GDP growth, particularly given the absence so far
of any clear evidence that the collapse of final sales in the third
quarter has been reversed and given the restraint to production in the
period immediately ahead from the projected slowing in inventory
investment.
Over the more important intermediate-term horizon of the
staff forecast, on the other hand, favorable underlying fundamentals
do I think support expectations of growth near trend. Such growth
might be incompatible with stable inflation, given the current low
unemployment rate. Still, this outcome is far from preordained.
Given the current federal funds rate setting, growth could easily be
below trend, especially in the near term but even over the forecast
horizon. The unemployment rate could gradually increase to NAIRU
before the building wage pressures are passed through to higher
inflation. If this sounds too good to be true, one should note that
this is essentially the Blue Chip consensus forecast. The Blue Chip
panel projects 2 percent GDP growth over 1997, measured on a fourthquarter-to-fourth-quarter basis. While this is just below the 2.2
percent rate of the Greenbook forecast, it is enough to produce a
modest but sustained increase in the unemployment rate. The latter
reaches 5-1/2 percent by the end of 1997, a level almost identical to
the downward revised estimate of NAIRU in the staff forecast. As a
result, inflation stabilizes at 2-1/2 percent for the GDP deflator and
3 percent for the CPI. Even if the staff forecast proves to be
correct, a more likely prospect in my own mind, the projected
acceleration in labor costs over the forecast horizon is modest,
thereby containing the threat to our long-term price stability
objective over the time period required for a tightening of policy to
reverse the rise in inflation.
For the moment, a continuation of remarkably subdued price
inflation gives us the luxury of waiting for the data to clarify
whether growth will remain at or above trend and whether the
unemployment rate will begin to rise while we continue to monitor wage
pressures and benefit costs. We should not, however, be lulled into
believing on the basis of the most recent data on wages and
compensation that the acceleration in wages that we have been
monitoring and worrying about at recent meetings has abated. In
particular, I find the third-quarter employment cost report literally
too good to be true. Rather than taking at face value the
deceleration in wage costs from a 4.3 percent annual rate in the first
quarter to a 2-1/2 percent rate in the third quarter, I believe it is
prudent to focus on the gradual but unmistakable uptrend in the fourquarter growth rate to 3.3 percent in the third quarter from 2.8
percent a year ago. Part of the explanation for this surprising
pattern of deceleration in the quarterly wage data may be the
volatility of quarterly wage changes for sales workers associated with
their commissions. Leaving out sales workers, the uptrend in annual
wage increases is both more consistent and steeper; it rises from 2.7
percent a year ago to 3.4 percent in the year ended in September. For
the moment, the slower acceleration in benefit costs has damped the
effect on labor costs of the rebound in wage changes. In addition,
the effect of higher compensation costs on prices may be damped for a
time by declines in markups, especially in light of the widespread
expression by firms of the lack of pricing leverage. Nevertheless, if

11/13/96

-22-

benefit costs accelerate toward the rate of increase in wages, we will
move very quickly toward the staff forecast of an increase in
compensation per hour near 3-1/2 percent. At some point, firms will
exhaust their willingness to accept compression in their markups. We
may therefore be living on borrowed time, but given the slowdown in
growth and the recent pattern of price inflation, we still have time
to make sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. Once again we find ourselves in a very good
situation and one that is remarkably uniform, as the stories around
the table suggest. Tight labor markets, which have a potential for
making a considerable contribution to the long-run efficiency of this
economy, provide an opportunity for people of modest skills to
increase those skills and move up to jobs that provide moderate
increases in income. If the shortages of people with computer skills
result in more people obtaining computer skills, we will be a lot
better off going forward. If Bob McTeer's young interviewer learns to
pronounce "conservative," she may well get a better job, and all of
this is to the good.
At the same time, we have the slowing in the expansion that
we predicted and little evidence of rising inflation. The economy is
generating the kind of mixed signals that we really like to have,
although they make us a little uncomfortable as forecasters because it
is more difficult to tell what will happen next. I could build a
case, and I think we all could, for the expectation that the economy
will rebound more rapidly than we would like it to and that the
mystifyingly proper behavior of inflation, as several members have
suggested, may be only temporary. The consumer may come roaring back
during the holidays and beyond. I could also build a case for
excessive slowing, and some have suggested that. The consumer may
remain cautious in the face of rising debt, and the clearly overvalued stock market might head down, perhaps sharply. Much depends on
post-election political developments. If we get strong evidence,
which we might get fairly quickly, of a bipartisan will to continue
the deficit reduction process, that could reassure both consumers and
the financial markets and give us lower long-term rates as a solid
basis for the continuation of moderate growth. That would be the best
gift that the newly elected candidates in both the White House and the
Congress could deliver. But it will not be easy. It will be a lot
harder to make further progress on the deficit than it was in the last
several years.
In sum, the Greenbook forecast looks as good
The risks, as several people have pointed out, seem a
symmetrical now than at the time of the last meeting,
expect to be back in a month looking at very much the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

as any to me.
lot more
but I would
same problem.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since Thanksgiving is
almost upon us, it seems appropriate to count our blessings, which are
numerous. Economic performance with respect to both job creation and
inflation has been excellent, and developments during the intermeeting
period have enhanced the prospect that these favorable trends will
persist. In the first place, it now seems probable that spending

11/13/96

-23-

growth will moderate quickly enough to avoid placing additional
strains on the labor market. Second, inflation remains well
contained. In fact, the data on broad measures of inflation in Part
II of the Greenbook suggest that inflation performance has been better
than merely well contained since, as Bob Parry mentioned, every broad
measure of inflation other than the total CPI has been trending
downward since 1993.
With respect to inflationary pressures in the pipeline, the
third-quarter ECI report failed to confirm our collective fear that
labor market pressures would translate into an accelerating
compensation trend. I was quite pleased to see that with the passage
of yet an additional quarter in which compensation ran at such a
moderate pace, the staff has finally revised down their estimate of
NAIRU to 5.6 percent. I consider this a sensible response to roughly
two years of evidence that the dynamics of inflation have changed a
bit. Additional good news from an inflation perspective is that
prices of commodities and intermediate goods have turned down since
our last meeting. The outlook for food prices has improved, and even
the outlook for energy prices is more favorable. In contrast to
pressures in the labor market, pressures on capacity do not seem
intense at this point, and investment in plant and equipment is still
rapid enough in the staff forecast to mitigate capacity pressures even
further over the forecast period.
Finally, there are hints that firms may be stepping up the
less visible investments that they make in their workers to create
through training the skills they require in their workforce but find
in short supply in the labor market. I would agree with Governor
Rivlin's comments in this regard. In particular, I was struck by a
recent Business Week article that detailed myriad ways in which the
Marriott hotel chain and several other large corporations are working
with unskilled, disadvantaged workers to inculcate good work habits
and in particular to teach English as a second language to improve
basic literacy and create opportunities for eventual promotions into
more responsible positions. These investments are on the flip side of
the hysteresis process that is believed by many observers to have
raised NAIRUs in European countries; that occurred as young people
unable to find jobs experienced deterioration in their skills and lost
attachment to the world of work. So, I would agree with the view that
there are benefits as well as costs to tight labor markets.
In spite of all that is going right in the American economy,
I too remain concerned about the outlook. My first worry relates to
the Greenbook's assessment. I agree with the staff that we may well
be living on borrowed time and that inflation will eventually
accelerate if the unemployment rate remains at its current level, as
in the Greenbook forecast. Although I believe there is strong
evidence that NAIRU has declined below 6 percent, it seems difficult
to use the data in hand at this point to defend the proposition that
it is as low as 5.2 percent.
My second worry relates to the behavior of aggregate demand.
Here I have no quarrel with the staff's estimate of moderation in
growth to a shade above trend in 1997 and 1998, but I am concerned
about the risks. With drags on growth stemming from government
spending, residential spending, and trade, and with reduced impetus to
growth from investment spending, the behavior of consumption, as Mike

11/13/96

-24-

Prell emphasized, is critical to the outlook. The Greenbook assumes
that consumption will quickly rebound and then grow in line with
disposable income. As Mike noted, consumers have greater income and
wealth and their confidence is high, so it is perfectly reasonable to
assume that the third-quarter spending lull was temporary and a
statistical aberration. Indeed, I think one could easily justify a
much stronger consumption forecast than in the Greenbook, given the
enormous gains in stock market wealth and the huge increase in
household net worth that we have seen in spite of the buildup in
consumer debt. On the other hand, I am equally concerned about the
downside risk to consumption because at this stage a rebound in
consumption spending is a forecast and not yet a fact. During the
third quarter, it seems that three things occurred simultaneously:
consumer spending stalled, the growth of consumer credit plummeted,
and lending standards tightened. I do not know just what caused what,
but with household debt burdens--if one includes leasing payments as
Governor Lindsey likes to do--approaching all time highs and with
bankruptcies surging and consumer credit charge-offs running well
above expectations, it is not very surprising that lenders would
tighten standards. It seems perfectly possible to me that the
consequence could be weaker spending by liquidity-constrained
households than the Greenbook assumes. I also would agree that a
significant stock market correction, which cannot be ruled out, adds
downside risk.
Well, where does that leave me? It leaves me thinking that
it is certainly within the realm of possibilities that growth may slow
enough over the forecast period to bring the economy back toward
NAIRU under the Greenbook assumption concerning monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this
Committee is going to be facing some difficult issues in the years
ahead. As if we don't have enough to worry about, I want to throw one
other issue on the table and explain why I think it is more important
than what we have been talking about. Mr. Chairman, you were the one
who put me in this pickle. You had to go to another meeting, and so I
had to talk to a group after you walked around the table, shook all
their hands, went out the door, and there I was!
[Laughter]
Interestingly, it was a group of Dutch visitors, but there also were
Japanese in the audience. One of them said that 15 years ago when he
was stationed in New York the Dow was at 1,000 and now it is at 6,000.
He asked me how I explained that. Well, that is a sure way to get
oneself in trouble, so I did some quick, fancy math and explained how
6,000 was a perfectly reasonable number. Throw in nominal GDP growth
and profit share growth and, voila, we were pretty much there. In
fact, I got the Dow up to 6,600 [laughter], and then I stopped and
just breathed a sigh of relief. I had other things in the background
in case I did not make it!
But here is the problem. Let's take a shorter period, 1992
to 1996. The S&P index has gone up about 69 percent and corporate
profits have gone up 63 percent. That sounds pretty reasonable. The
catch here, of course, is that if the markets are at all forwardlooking, they are presumably buying the next five years' profits, not
the last five years' profits. It is not clear all mutual fund buyers
know that, but that is what they should be looking at. At the

11/13/96

-25-

beginning of an expansion when you are about to face five years of 13
percent growth in profits, you can put a higher evaluation on stock
prices. Implicitly, therefore, the fact that stock prices have risen
as fast as profits implies an expectation of another five years of 13
percent growth in profits. But that would be inconsistent with the
numbers in the Greenbook, and that gets to the root of our problem. I
think that because of our success people have now pushed the perceived
risk of a recession so low that they are putting valuations on
financial assets and--God forbid, they are erecting buildings in
Boston again--on real assets that pose a problem for the future. I
think Governor Meyer was exactly on target in quoting the Blue Chip as
an indicator of where people think we are heading. The consensus now
is that inflation is permanently under control and that we will have
continued moderate growth, probably permanently, though with some down
quarters and some up quarters. As a result of our great success here,
we have low and stable interest rates. I would suggest that our
recent well-intentioned silence may actually be leading to even more
of a sense of security, which may be good in the short run but is
probably not good in the long run. In addition, we have world peace.
The only remaining risk in the forecast is political risk, and the
market says that we have taken care of that by electing a divided
government.
So what is there to worry about? Well, I have a little list
and I am going to go over it in reverse order. One is the oil sector
which I think is probably riskier than is perceived in the Greenbook,
particularly when one looks at the situation in the House of Saud and
places like that. That is a low probability risk. Then we come to
the consumer debt slowdown. Here I think we really have a two- to
three-quarter story at most, unless either we or the banks mess it up,
and I do not promise that. Back when I first commented on consumer
debt at the beginning of 1995, I was looking at 1994 numbers. I
estimated that to get out of the consumer debt hole, the personal
saving rate had to rise by about 1-1/2 points from what it was then,
about 3.8 percent in 1994. We are up to almost 5 percent now; a
little more and we will be there. There is nothing really to worry
about. A couple more quarters of drag on consumption growth and we
will be fine. But I think there is the possibility that we as
regulators and the banks will make things worse, particularly if Jerry
Jordan's story is true about what to expect in 1997. I have learned
in this job that bankers are very predictable and regulators are very
predictable as a result. We have to be very, very careful in making
sure that we do not have a consumer recession that we create by
regulatory decree. But basically I do not think there is that much of
a risk if we leave well enough alone.
There is also a political risk. At our last FOMC meeting, I
said that if we got a narrow election result, which is what the
markets wanted, the result was going to be a lack of political
courage. The new Congressional leadership has signaled that they are
going to sit back and wait six months for the President to come up
with a budget. The President has signaled that he is going to support
a balanced budget amendment, which he is going to be stuck with
anyway. So, we have nobody taking action except to push through
something that will save us from ourselves. That sounds a lot like
what I hear in Europe, which is that Brussels is going to save the
politicians from themselves in each of the countries. I think that,
when the markets recognize that we are trying to postpone severe

11/13/96

-26-

fiscal problems by finding commissions or balanced budget amendments
to deal with them, there is a potential risk for the bond market and
for the economy in the years ahead.
The biggest risk relates to the current stock market
valuation based on 13 percent growth in profits. It comes back to
simple math. Nominal GDP growth in the last four quarters has been
4.2 percent. As Jerry Jordan pointed out, if we look at the money
growth numbers, there is absolutely no reason to expect such GDP
growth to accelerate. I admit that we do not know a lot about money
growth, but everything we do know suggests that nominal GDP growth is
not going to accelerate. How we are going to get 13 percent growth in
corporate profits, or 11 percent growth or anything like that, to
validate these levels of the stock market I am not sure. If we have a
problem there, either the market will stop rising or we will have to
decide whether we are going to make it stop by injecting a little risk
into the process. And, frankly, I think that call is going to be our
toughest decision in the years ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy
currently seems to be in a fairly wide holding pattern. The
anticipated second-half slowdown is under way, although we do not know
its extent. As always when we are trying to look forward, it is hard
to know whether we are going to circle for a while longer, come in for
another soft landing, crash land, or resume higher altitudes. At
least for the near term, it seems to me that the holding pattern is
the most likely scenario. The slowdown in the third quarter now
appears to have been more pronounced than was earlier thought, given
the recent inventory numbers. But low inventory levels should make
the fourth quarter of 1996 and early 1997 look a bit stronger, leaving
the outlook on balance for the second half of this year at the
proverbial sustainable level. Although we are beginning to hear some
arguments about weaker demand, I think the arguments that the economy
may be slipping into a recession are fairly weak. They depend on
continued weakness in consumer demand and housing, and associated
slowing in the manufacturing or industrial sector. It seems to me
that most of the recent economic indicators are pointing to a bit more
strength, or at least to a soft landing, and there may be some tail
winds for higher altitudes.
With respect to the spending situation, there will be some
propensity for consumers to spend as long as we continue to have a
strong labor market and people are making money. That view is
supported by some of the recent consumer confidence numbers that may
in turn be fueled by the wealth effects of the strong stock market.
The retail surveys are pointing to a reasonably strong holiday season.
It is even feasible that we could see some tail wind action from lower
interest rates; the housing market feasibly could get a modest boost.
Business fixed investment, including nonresidential construction, has
been holding up better than most forecasts. Financing is generally
available. At least for now, we are seeing continued internal
financing available as business profits have held up. Maybe, as
Governor Lindsey says, that will not continue. Even so, if profits
start to get pressured, the cost of external capital is low as a
result of low interest rates and the rise in stock prices. Banks are
continuing to provide financing. Foreign investment is another source

11/13/96

-27-

of strength. There is evidence that businesses are issuing new debt
and equity and utilizing increased bank financing. Maybe they are
putting all of it under a mattress, but productive activity is more
likely.
On the inflation front, we may also be in a holding pattern.
We are in the middle of a period of gathering the most current data,
and what we have, I think, is relatively encouraging--the core PPI
data that came out this morning, lower commodity prices, better-thanexpected crops, and a fairly benign third-quarter GDP deflator and
other PCE deflators. The recent ECI numbers were surprisingly benign.
There are some uncertainties in this scenario. Will consumer
debt, in fact, damp spending or will some of the labor market
uncertainties in the era of downsizing damp consumer enthusiasm? If
there is a stock market correction, it is hard to know how that is
going to play out. It depends obviously on how deep a correction we
have.
Fiscal policy has been a bit on the back burner at our last
couple of meetings. But with the elections over and Congress coming
back, we are starting to hear discussions of another budget deal.
Depending on how it is structured or how contentious the budget
negotiations get, this issue may throw some uncertainty into the
financial markets or cause some uncertainty among consumers.
Turning to productivity, the numbers do not provide much
support for increased or continued progress on inflation. Given
current wage pressures and low unemployment, we should either be
seeing lower profits or price increases or improved productivity. We
are not seeing any of those. So, I continue to be skeptical of the
productivity numbers, but we really do not know the full story.
In sum, I think that the picture that we painted at the
September meeting is playing out much as expected. The slowdown is
confirmed. And while there are risks, I think that on balance the
best guess going forward is continued growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to say
first of all that comments around the table at these meetings are
always insightful and very interesting, but I have found that to be
particularly true this morning and I greatly appreciate it. It also
would appear that the discussion is moving along rather smartly today;
we may get coffee at a more reasonable hour than we sometimes do! By
my calculation, I am the clean-up hitter and I have very little to add
to what has been said.
Let me just summarize very briefly. I share the strong
general concern around the table that the tight labor markets and the
attendant rise in wages could very well lead to price increases. That
still could very well happen, but we see very little evidence of such
a development so far, and we will just have to watch that very
closely. The one big thing that is new this time, as we had hoped and
expected, is that we now have confirmation that the expansion has
slowed. Looking ahead, our attention obviously must shift to whether
the expansion is in line for a reacceleration with the dangers that

-28-

11/13/96

would be attendant to that, whether it will rock along near trend,
plus or minus a bit, or whether indeed the economy may be in the early
stages of a somewhat more serious slowdown. The point has been made,
and I share it, that as time goes on and events unfold, the risks are
becoming more symmetric. We cannot tell yet, and I am not prepared to
adopt a symmetric point of view at this juncture, but it may be that
we will be thinking quite soon of returning to a symmetric directive.
For now, it would certainly appear that the remarkable economic
performance that we have seen for some time is continuing. We should
watch it closely and continue to let it run. Thank you.
MR. LINDSEY. There is a question at this time regarding the
availability of coffee.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is there or not.
[Laughter]

We will adjourn for coffee, whether it
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. D. LINDSEY.
Appendix.]

Mr. Lindsey.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you very much.

[Statement--see
Any questions for

David?
MR. JORDAN. I had a question all ready, David, about trying
to square the Bluebook with the Greenbook, but your last remarks about
the aggregates go in the same direction. That's because you anticipate M2 growth of 4 percent for the year, and that means there will
have been essentially no increase or a very small increase in M2
velocity this year. As I noted earlier, the Greenbook has a nominal
GDP growth forecast of 4-1/4 percent or so. I track nominal GDP on a
four-quarter moving-average and an eight-quarter moving-average basis,
and that, of course, produces a growth pattern that has been trending
down over the last several years. Now, if I run that trend out
through the end of 1998 using the Greenbook's forecast of essentially
4 to 4-1/4 percent nominal GDP growth, such growth must accelerate
beyond the Greenbook horizon to validate the staff statements about
inflation and a policy stance involving a 5-1/4 percent funds rate.
The staff forecast is getting close to the point where the CPI is
growing at the same rate as nominal GDP. That does not compute. That
means we have to have nominal GDP growth accelerating beyond the
forecast horizon, and I do not see the mechanism by which a sustained
5-1/4 percent funds rate produces the needed increase in the growth of
aggregate demand.
MR. D. LINDSEY. I will turn to Mike Prell for answers to
some of your questions about the forecast. As I look at the nominal
GDP numbers on a four-quarter basis starting this year, I don't see
much change in the annual growth rates, which go from 4.7 percent this
year to 4.5 percent in 1997 and 4.4 percent in 1998--actually a little
deceleration. I do think, though, that the question of the CPI versus
the broader measures of prices is something I should probably pass on
to my R&S colleagues.

11/13/96

-29-

MR. PRELL. Thank you. [Laughter]
Let me just say once
again that our forecast is not based on the monetary aggregates.
Rather, we derive what we would expect in terms of monetary aggregate
growth through our assessment of likely patterns of money demand
consistent with the interest rates and economic activity we are
forecasting. That is a different framework than I think you are
suggesting for thinking about the outlook for nominal GDP. As we look
ahead, we see an economy that is operating above potential and a
gradual acceleration of inflation. In such an economy, the growth of
real output tends to erode gradually over time. We anticipate some
gradual deceleration in real output growth from 1996 to 1997 and 1998.
I think there is a coherence to this, and nominal GDP is just a
summation of these forces as we see the picture. I do not have a
particular view about 1999, but certainly we are coming out of 1998 in
no better position with respect to the alleviation of inflationary
pressures in the labor markets. So, we would anticipate at this point
an extrapolation of that gradual acceleration of inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for David? If
not, let me get started. As far as I can see, the outlook is very
little changed from what it was at the time of the last meeting. The
outlook may have shifted toward slightly slower growth, but only at
the margin and within the expected range of statistical error.
The data are difficult to read, but labor markets
unquestionably are still quite tight. My suspicion is that our
measures of labor costs may be biased downward in the third quarter.
This is my impression for reasons other than those that have been
raised around the table.
First, I don't think we have enough data to verify this
hypothesis on a national level, but it clearly shows up at a micro
level in the sense that, when we have a very tight labor market, some
of the wage increases take the form of promotions. Consequently, we
get a grade updrift that does not show up fully in the wage structure,
which is essentially what the ECI represents. Compensation data do
suggest that some of the grade drift may be in addition to the real
drift toward truly higher skilled workers.
There is also a question about the average hourly earnings
for October, which as we know came in at zero. But I think the staff
has also demonstrated quite credibly that the industry-by-industry
correlation between average hourly earnings and average hours is
significant. This implies that there is an overtime component in
these data. There was a significant decline in average weekly hours
in October, and adjusting for that would raise the October average
hourly earnings number by something like .2 percent. That is not a
big change, but I think the data are giving us a more benign look at
the wage structure than probably exists.
There also is the issue on the other side as to whether the
acceleration in entry-level jobs suggested by anecdotal reports is
being offset by an increase in the number of people leaving the labor
force, largely through retirement. I am not sure whether the wage
rates of retirees are rising, but because the wage rates of these
older workers are higher than average, the ratio does not have to
rise. The rate of retirements just has to be high enough to overcome
the general aging of the remainder of the workforce to allow us

11/13/96

-30-

readily to reconcile higher entry-level wages with a still sluggish
structure of wages overall.
Another issue is the variable pay question that was raised
earlier by Gary Stern. The surveys are beginning to show that for a
proportion of the workforce, which is still relatively small, wages
are significantly related to profitability or other company results.
This means that the issue applies to a much broader group than sales
workers. It is an important issue because to the extent that we have
big wage increases as a consequence of, or tied to, profitability,
such increases are not necessarily inflationary. That is true because
as costs go up in relation to prices, profit margins are squeezed and
those wages automatically start to adjust down. So, while it may be
true that the wages of commission sales workers have been slipping
relative to the average, which is the reason why the numbers for nonsales workers have gone up somewhat more, that may be partially offset
by the higher wages of the increasing proportion of workers who have
their salaries tied more closely to profitability.
What I see as the bottom line of all this is that the wage
structure is extraordinarily dynamic and not easy to read. The only
thing we know for sure--or more precisely for which our information is
fairly accurate--is total wages and salaries, and probably average
hourly wages and salaries as well if one is prepared to argue that the
data on hours worked are not all that bad. But any effort to isolate
in that structure such things as misplaced merit increases or compa
ratios and that kind of thing, all of which are important to an
understanding of where the wage increases are stemming from, is really
difficult. Therefore, I think we have to be quite careful. We also
have to be careful about our productivity data, not only for the
reasons that I have been mentioning in previous meetings relative to
the bias in price indexes and the like, but also because there are
significant changes in the quality of the hours worked that we do not
adjust for. Our deficient understanding of the true structure of
costs, benefits, and the like should create a degree of humbleness on
our part that we have not yet achieved. [Laughter]
I merely suggest
that we have to work harder.
The evidence that there is a significant shortfall in
measured wages from the predictions of our wage-NAIRU econometric
relationships is pretty clear. It is also clear from the reports all
of you are getting that wage increases, no matter how we measure them,
are falling short of those estimated from our equations. They are
falling short in a way that largely mirrors the rise in operating
profit margins. It is difficult to get an exact relationship, but it
is rather obvious that we can explain a very significant part of this
wage/price inflation nexus by a clear downshift in the tradeoff
between wage gains and job security or some other factor for which job
security stands as a proxy. This, as we have discussed over the last
two years, is clearly a transitory phenomenon. Nonetheless, the
evidence suggests that the third-quarter operating profit margins are
holding up. They may be revised down when we have more complete data
for the quarter, but they clearly will not be down by very much, and
they surely will not be down by anywhere near what is implied by
holding the statistical discrepancy of the GDP accounts constant.
The importance of all of this is that if we are still seeing
evidence that the broader indexes of price inflation are easing, the

11/13/96

-31-

rate of inflation is falling or at worst stabilizing, and profit
margins are holding up, then the productivity/wage relationship
suggests that whatever is happening is not happening very fast. And,
as I argued at the last meeting, irrespective of how badly we underestimate what productivity may or may not be doing, it is still the
case that if wages begin to accelerate relative to whatever the growth
of productivity may be, then we will begin to see wage/price
pressures, which we very strongly wish to avoid. Nonetheless, I think
we have been very fortunate in that there is no credible evidence that
such a process is in train.
If we reduce the size of the add-factors in our various
equations that relate wage change to unemployment or any measure of
labor tightness, we will get an acceleration of inflation; that is
what the algebra requires. But we do not know that we have turned the
corner. As far as I can see, it is not self-evident that we have addfactors that have stabilized and are closing. They are not. If we
wanted to become real deflationists, we could argue that we are
halfway through the process and we have not seen anything yet. I do
not believe that myself, but it is not outside the purview of our
evaluation. The Greenbook requires a certain add-factor forecast that
presupposes the current transitional phase is in the process of coming
to an end. I think the process is coming to an end, but I do not wish
to bet the ranch that that is in fact the case. So, however one
evaluates this, it is clear that whatever is occurring is not
occurring rapidly.
When we look at the inflationary pressures that are currently
built into the economy as a result of the tight level of labor
utilization, the question is really one of whether the economy will
ease off before a process of inflationary pressures emerges or whether
there has been some longer-term change in the structure that, as some
people in the business community argue, has essentially killed the
inflation expectations bugaboo. I think there is no evidence of such
a change. There is, however, some question as to whether in fact this
expansion can slow sufficiently to take pressures off the labor
market, ease everything up, and make the issue of inflationary
pressures moot. It is much too early to say that that will happen.
My own judgment is that the evidence is very mixed and highly unlikely
to be in that direction in the short run.
It is nonetheless the case that less final demand is being
generated now by a net increase in the stock of motor vehicles or the
stock of plant and equipment. That is the saturation argument. One
should remember that the net increase in property accounts plus the
net increase in the stock of consumer durables--that is, after
depreciation--is the private capital account component of GDP. We can
compare it with GDP to get a judgment as to the extent that the
element of saturation is adding to or subtracting from GDP. It is the
issue that I raised when I said there were two types of inventories:
the stock of capital and business inventories. The growth in the
stock of capital moderated in the third quarter, as best we can judge,
putting downward pressure on GDP and on final demand.
I think the regular inventory data are interesting,
especially in the context of their being historically low by any
measure. But the level of inventories is not relevant in the short
run for the GDP forecast. It is the rate of change that is relevant,

11/13/96

-32-

and a change clearly can occur at any level irrespective of where the
inventory-sales ratios may be. While I think there is some reasonable
argument to be made that a goodly part of the inventory accumulation
we are seeing is voluntary--in the sense that all the surveys we
monitor do not point to particular problems--we do have to account for
the fact that the underlying prices of commodities and materials have
taken a big turn to the south. Steel scrap prices have fallen off a
ledge. I think the reason in part is competition from imports. It
may also be increased capacity. As I am sure Messrs. Jordan and
Moskow are both picking up in
order books
into the first quarter of next year are coming in below expectations.
If that continues, it may reflect some weakening in the consumption of
domestic steel or it may be that imports are really becoming an issue
that is going to be something for the steel industry to be concerned
about. In addition, aluminum prices are under significant downward
pressure. They obviously are more subject to international pressures
than steel prices in the United States, certainly more so than steel
scrap prices. Copper is weak. All the industrial prices are getting
soft. These are not the types of numbers we usually see when there is
a big voluntary inventory surge. So, the inventory issue is by no
means clear.
I think all of you have argued quite correctly that the
retail market--and personal consumption expenditures more broadly--is
the key to the outlook for economic activity. I did have somebody on
the Board's staff look at the historical relationships and try to rework the consumer credit data to put them back into gross extensions
minus repayments, equalling the change in consumer credit, as we in
fact used to do. We have some unpublished information that probably
gives us a leg up on it. It shows, as you might well imagine, a very
sharp decline in gross extensions. When we get, as hopefully we will
shortly, the ratios of gross extensions to retail sales for certain
groups, we will have a better view as to whether there is anything to
the argument that particular groups are being liquidity constrained.
I am not saying this information will tell us a great deal, but it may
add something to our understanding of this puzzling third quarter. We
have been through a lot of periods in which consumer expenditures have
slowed and then picked up again. Unless the business cycle is dead,
however, there will be a point at which that pickup will not occur.
The question is when, and perhaps these consumer credit numbers will
tell us something in this regard. I have been concerned about the
level of consumer debt, as you know, since the beginning of the year.
I have taken over from Governor Lindsey, who has thrown me a lateral,
and I am running with it for a while anyway. I gave him the worry
This division of labor is
about the stock market. [Laughter]
probably worthwhile.
It is too soon to tell what is happening to Christmas sales,
but remember that we do not get much of the fourth-quarter personal
consumption expenditures from the October data. The real action is in
November and December, and the monthly seasonals are not one-third,
one-third, one-third. They clearly are biased significantly toward
the November data, which we do not have.
I think one of the more interesting unanswered questions gets
down to the housing industry. As Mike Prell pointed out, it is
weakening but there are two fascinating trends. One is home sales,
which as you know have gone straight up. The other is single-family

11/13/96

-33-

permits net of cancellations, which are essentially single-family
housing starts plus the change in the permits backlog, and that number
has gone straight down. It is at its lowest level in more than a
year. If we look at a chart, the sales figures go up like that and
the net permits figures go down, with the starts in the middle. If we
reconcile them statistically, what we find is that not only does the
permits backlog drop very sharply but so does the inventory of new
homes. The changes in those two inventories essentially account for
the different trends in sales and permits. This raises an interesting
issue. Have the homebuilders decided that the markets are weakening,
which is what is reflected in their reports to the National
Association of Homebuilders, and are they therefore trying to reduce
their advance commitments and inventories by pushing the excess supply
out into the market? That would not be inconsistent with the
relatively soft prices of new home sales. Or is the demand for new
homes really much stronger than they have committed to and consumers
are pulling out what the builders have been putting into the pipeline
much faster than they expected so that they will be forced very
shortly to pick up their permits activity and their starts activity?
My guess is that the odds are still in the direction of the first
scenario. But unless October home sales are down, which I think is
very likely, we have a very interesting dilemma about what is going on
in this market. And since this is such a big cyclical component in
the current, immediate context, it along with personal consumption
expenditures will be a key player in determining where this economy is
going.
For the moment, I would say from a policy point of view that
these developments leave us just about where we have been recently. I
think it would be premature to pull back on the asymmetry. As long as
the labor markets remain as tight as they are, inflation can turn up
on a dime. Were we to go back to symmetry and then suddenly have to
tighten, I think that would put us in an awkward position. So I think
we ought to stay where we are, at least through the December meeting.
I would recommend "B" asymmetric. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

I favor "B" asymmetric, Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, formulating policy under present
circumstances obviously requires finding the right balance between
likely future outcomes in the economy and recent developments. Labor
market conditions, as you have indicated, appear to be on the tight
side. Even if the natural rate of unemployment has decreased a bit,
that tightness would suggest a moderate uptrend for inflation in the
future. And as I said earlier, we could see a substantial rise in
inflation if the normal historical relationship between unemployment
and inflation were to reassert itself. These considerations make it
likely that we will need to tighten policy in the future. However,
recent inflationary developments have been surprisingly favorable, and
economic growth slowed in the third quarter and may slow further this
quarter. These developments suggest that it might be prudent to wait
a while to see how things unfold before tightening policy. On
balance, therefore, I would prefer to leave the federal funds rate
unchanged for the time being, and I support your recommendation for
alternative "B" and asymmetric language.

-34-

11/13/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, it is obvious from the
discussion around the table today, the latest economic data, and I
think particularly the behavior of bond rates that the risk of a
pronounced near-term increase in inflation pressures has diminished.
So, I no longer think that we need a 50 basis point increase in the
federal funds rate. But I still think it is more likely than not that
somewhat greater restraint is going to be needed at some point in the
relatively near future if we are going to contain inflation over the
longer haul. Beyond this, the Greenbook's projections for the core
CPI over the next couple of years suggest that at best we are going to
hold the line on inflation, and that is only with the help of the
reweighting of the index. The projections do not show any further
progress toward our basic longer-term price stability goal. And if
that were the actual outcome over the next couple of years, the
credibility of our longer-term strategy could be reduced, at least to
some degree.
For all these reasons, Mr. Chairman, I would still favor a
1/4 point increase in the funds rate today. Any tightening now
obviously would surprise the markets. I recognize that that could
have near-term consequences, but I think it could well help us over
the longer run. In particular, I worry about the possibility of a
scenario developing next year where we finally begin to see some
discernible upward drift in the inflation rate at a time when the
unemployment rate may be moving up to a more sustainable, longer-term
level. In that circumstance, I think it would be quite difficult to
make a move toward restraint. I feel a modest move now could help
keep us out of that trap.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. When people use the word "inflation," I always
translate that as something having to do with the purchasing power of
the dollar. I can't get away from that notion. So, if people say
inflation is going to be higher, I ask what is it that is going to
cause the purchasing power of the dollar to erode at a faster rate in
the future than it has in the past. I wind up thinking in terms of an
excess demand kind of framework and so on. I do not believe that we
are in an environment where the purchasing power of the dollar will be
eroding at a faster rate for the next year or two. If I thought that,
I would of course conclude that we have to adjust policy. I have not
seen the evidence for that, and I still do not see the mechanism that
is going to produce greater inflation from this point. In these
circumstances, if we had not already adopted asymmetry at the last two
meetings, I certainly would not want to go asymmetric toward restraint
at this time. I wish we were not already there, but since we are, I
can see the wisdom of not moving to symmetry and running the risk of
having to return to asymmetry. So, I will support asymmetry toward
tightening but only because we used it in the directives for the
previous two meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. I support "B" asymmetric, but like President
Jordan I do not feel nearly as "asymmetric" as I did at the time of
the last meeting, and if we were not already there, I think moving to

-35-

11/13/96

it would be questionable. But since we are and we have a winning
formula, let's stick with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Central bankers worry a lot. That is a
requirement for the job. But difficult as it is for us, I believe we
ought to take good news when it comes. Therefore, I think staying
where we are with an asymmetric directive is more than desirable at
this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I do not want to talk about
symmetry, so I am going to advocate a modest increase in the funds
rate. I would be where Al Broaddus came out, a 25 basis point
increase. My view is basically that CPI inflation has been trending
up, that 3 percent inflation is too high, and that the risks are in
the direction of higher inflation, at least if it is measured on a
consistent basis. We should lean against this, and we should do so in
the context of making clear our long-term intentions. I also think
that we should not lull ourselves into thinking that we can in fact
predict short-term developments in the real economy and count on these
developments to do our job for us, at least on a temporary basis. I
also agree with what Al Broaddus said about some of the risks down the
road. Another risk is one that Governor Lindsey pointed to; it
relates to evidence of some speculative excesses in financial markets.
By moving now we might be able to avoid a bigger accident in those
markets later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Things have changed, at least from my
perspective, since the last meeting. I see a bit more balance in the
factors bearing on the prospects for growth going forward. At the
last meeting, I saw all the risks on the side of faster economic
expansion, but I now see some counterbalancing developments. Factors
that in my view inject some negative prospects into the growth picture
include consumer debt, the trade deficit, and some cooling in housing
markets. There are still many sources of strength in the economy, and
I tend to feel as do Al Broaddus and Tom Melzer that there are
considerable risks on the inflation side. But I think the perhaps
temporary abatement in economic growth and the injection of some
negative aspects to the growth outlook have given us a little
breathing room. However, I want to associate myself to some extent
with what Governor Lindsey has said and what Tom Melzer just said.
The financial markets are acting as if interest rates only go in one
direction, and with that attitude there are undoubtedly bets being
made that are unwise now and will grow to be more unwise as time goes
by. We are risking a major asset price bubble unless some sense of
caution, some sense of reality is injected into these financial
markets at some point, and I think that injection needs to be made
relatively soon. All of that said, I could go with a 25 basis point
increase at this point, but I can also support your recommendation,
Mr. Chairman. We have some breathing room, but I think we need to
retain an asymmetric directive. So, I would agree with you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

-36-

11/13/96

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
an unchanged and asymmetrical directive. In fact, I think the
asymmetrical directive that we have had in place, and would retain,
sends a very important signal of this Committee's intention not to let
inflation creep higher. I only hope that we are prepared to move if
in fact the upside risks that we have talked about materialize.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation for
"B" asymmetric. I think it is important, echoing what some other
people have said here, that we not lull ourselves into a sense of
complacency. If we believe the Greenbook forecast, the core CPI,
abstracting from improvements in methodology by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics will move up during this forecast period. That clearly is
not acceptable. However, we recognize that there is a lot of
uncertainty in the data, and we have not seen signs of compensation
increases or of price increases in the latest data. The key in terms
of the strength of the economy, as you point out Mr. Chairman, is the
level of consumer spending going forward. So, at this point I support
the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I commented earlier,
recent developments have been favorable, and I believe there is
something to Ed Boehne's observation that we ought to take the good
news when we can get it. However, it still seems to me that the
principal risk that we face is that of more inflation than we have
forecast. I laid out my basic concerns having to do with taut labor
markets, and we may be at the point where we are starting to run out
of good news on productivity, if we can in fact accurately measure it
or observe it. But having said all that, I do think that the risk of
a meaningful acceleration of inflation has in fact diminished. It
looks to me as if expectations of future inflation also have
diminished among market participants, judging by what has been
happening in the bond market. If that is right, then for a given
nominal short-term interest rate, a given funds rate, the real shortterm interest rate is at least a bit higher today than it was earlier.
In sum, I believe that at least for now the risk of an
acceleration of inflation has been addressed, hopefully adequately, by
higher real short-term interest rates, and I am prepared to support
your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I continue to have two concerns.
One is that the risks of inflation remain on the up side, as depicted
in the projections that both the Greenbook and our staff have laid
out. In that kind of atmosphere and related attitudes going forward,
I am concerned about signs of a potential financial bubble. Having
said that, what you have defined is an environment involving a fair
amount of uncertainty about activity in the real economy, where that
may be going, and some uncertainty in the outlook for inflation. So,
I would be inclined to move now, but I could accept your
recommendation of "B" asymmetric.

11/13/96

-37-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
no change, and I can vote for your recommendation to stay with
asymmetry toward tightening. It would be embarrassing to go to a
symmetric directive and then rapidly have to go back to asymmetry. On
the other hand, if the economy weakens further and more sharply than
we expect, it could also be embarrassing to go into a downturn with a
tilt toward tightening. So, like Governor Rivlin, I do not feel
nearly as "asymmetric" as I did at the last two or three meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, and
I also support the sentiments regarding symmetry expressed by Governor
Rivlin and President McTeer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Mr.Chairman, I support your recommendation of
"B" asymmetric. We should not be changing course now, particularly
when we are in the middle of getting more current inflation data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I
think that an asymmetric directive is warranted for all of the reasons
enunciated in the Greenbook. I believe the inflation risk definitely
remains asymmetric. I also share Governor Lindsey's and President
Minehan's concern about euphoria in asset markets. On balance,
though, it seems to me that the incremental data since our last
meeting point toward more moderate growth than last time as well as a
better inflation performance. I would consider it perfectly possible
for demand to end up moderating more than the Greenbook assumes,
eliminating the excess pressure in the labor market and any need for
additional monetary tightening. So, for now I am certainly
comfortable with more watchful waiting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I
think it is important when we think about symmetry and asymmetry that
we not focus too much on conditions in the current quarter or even the
next quarter. When we have unemployment of 5.2 percent, we can
tolerate a substantial short-term weakening of the economy and still
want to be poised on the asymmetric side toward tightening. It would
take, for example, two to three quarters of growth in the 1-1/2 to 2
percent range just to get the unemployment rate moving back toward
5-1/2 percent, which arguably means no more acceleration in pressures
on resources and inflation. So, I think that being asymmetric is
exactly the right thing to do, and frankly I think we are going to be
there for quite a while because I do not see any signs that we are
going to be removing inflation pressures in the economy very quickly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Finally, Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
no change in policy. Indeed, given that the recent data suggest that

-38-

11/13/96

the risks have become more balanced, I am more comfortable supporting
a proposal of unchanged policy than I was at the last meeting. I
still think the major risk is that inflation will begin to rise over
the next year. An asymmetric directive reminds us of the importance
of remaining vigilant in the face of this risk, and I therefore
support your proposal to retain the current policy posture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
which encompasses that?

Thank you.

Would you read the directive

MR. BERNARD. I will be reading from page 12 in the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
moderate growth in M2 and relatively strong expansion in M3 over
coming months."
Call the roll.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough

Yes
Yes

President Boehne
President Jordan

Yes
Yes

Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey

Yes
Yes

President McTeer
Governor Meyer

Yes
Yes

Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin
President Stern
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all.
I would just remind you
We adjourn for lunch.
that the next meeting is on December 17.
END OF MEETING

