Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 21, 1996
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 21, 1996 starting at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Boehne
Jordan
Kelley
Lindsey
McTeer
Phillips
Stern
Yellen

Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, Moskow, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig and Melzer, and Ms. Minehan,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lang, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,
Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

-2-

Mr. Rives, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Mr. Beebe, Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald,
Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, and Hunter, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Atlanta, Richmond, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Altig, Mses. Chen and Rosenbaum, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland,
New York, and Atlanta respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
May 21, 1996
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. First, I would
like to acknowledge the fact that this is the first meeting for First
Vice President LeGrand Rives of the St. Louis Bank, Senior Vice
President Robert Eisenbeis of the Atlanta Bank, and Pauline Chen of
the New York Desk. I would like to welcome all of you and request
that the rest of us approve the minutes of the March 26 meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

So move.

Without objection.

Thank you.

Peter Fisher.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?
If not, would
somebody like to move ratification of the Domestic Desk operations?
MR. LINDSEY.

Move approval.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I will call on
Messrs. Prell and Truman at what has to be the earliest possible time
that this has occurred.
MR. TRUMAN.
8:00 in the morning.

Except when the Committee started the meeting at

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the works!
MR. TRUMAN.
see Appendix.]
MR. PRELL.

You always throw a monkey wrench into

People have said that.

[Laughter]

[Statement--

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. PARRY. Mike, the core rate of inflation in the forecast
increases 1/2 percentage point between the first quarter of this year
and the fourth quarter of next year. If one were to assume an
unchanged policy and to extrapolate that out into 1998, what do you
think would happen to core inflation in 1998?
MR. PRELL.
In 1998, economic growth would remain essentially
around trend and the unemployment rate around 5-1/2 percent. Our
judgment is that the core inflation rate is tending to rise gradually
and perhaps it would continue to do so in 1998. We do not think that
we are far beyond the NAIRU, and that would mean a very gradual trend
in the direction of more inflation.
MR. PARRY.
1996 and 1997.

You have a fairly large increase forecast for

5/21/96

MR. PRELL. There are some exacerbating factors, as I
emphasized in my briefing, and those are areas where the uncertainties
are substantial. But as we looked at the probability distribution in
light of developments since the last Greenbook, we felt that we ought
to assign a higher expected value to the levels of grain and food
prices down the line. That is the most important exacerbating factor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the timeframe that you assume
exists between the increase in grain prices and its effects on
poultry, hog, and cattle prices? I will assume that it is in that
order of lead times.
MR. PRELL. We noted in the Greenbook that we
that we can pin that down with any certainty. I think
seeing this transmission process affecting the poultry
producers are cutting back on their production levels,
to see a price pass-through there fairly promptly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

do not feel
we are already
area where
and we expect

Can't you tell from the futures prices?

We have looked at the futures prices and--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don't they tell you what average lead
times are or can be assumed to be?
MR. STOCKTON. Mr. Chairman, our forecast shows an
expectation of higher poultry prices showing through to the retail
level more fully by the summer. By late fall or early winter, we
would expect to see the higher hog prices show up as increased pork
prices in grocery stores. Higher cattle prices would show up early
next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you can make an assumption.

That is what I was going to say--that

MR. PRELL. We are making assumptions, but there are no
guarantees. Certainly, it is our perception that things have started
to turn in the cattle area. Whereas, a couple of months ago, we saw
the risks that herds would be cut back, the anecdotal evidence
suggests that this process is now under way. So, we feel more certain
that there will be that pressure several months down the road.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

Mr. LINDSEY. Mike, my first question is, do we have any
evidence yet on how households have financed higher gasoline prices?
The increases per month amount to about $10 per car or $20 per
household. Is that coming out of savings or out of other consumption?
MR. PRELL. I guess our assumption is that it would probably
come out of savings to some degree in the short run. Over time, we
would expect people to reallocate their spending and to absorb that
elsewhere. But in the very short run, there probably would be some
inelasticity. It would not be a one-for-one substitution for other
expenditures.
MR. LINDSEY. The move in oil prices in the futures market
suggests that the market has changed its expectations toward higher

-3-

5/21/96

prices going quite a ways out. If you just look at the inventory
balances held by the majors, which are now at record lows, why do you
think we are going to see a decline in oil prices?
MR. PRELL. There is still an anticipation in the market that
oil prices will decline. What happened yesterday, though, is that
prices in near-term contracts jumped dramatically after their initial
drop. The market reports talked about the closing out of near-term
contracts, some short covering, and so on. As we read most of the
commentary, though, there is still the expectation that the net effect
of the Iraqi oil flow will be to push oil prices down a couple dollars
per barrel below what they otherwise would have been. It is
recognized that in the near term there is going to be some tendency to
rebuild stocks, and that may mean that we are not going to get all of
this increased supply benefit passing through to retail energy prices
very promptly.
MR. LINDSEY.
assumption?

What is the average price in your underlying

MR. TRUMAN. We are forecasting a decline in oil import
prices to $17 per barrel and in WTI spot prices to around $19.50 per
barrel; that is down a couple of dollars from current levels. Our
forecast did not assume an Iraqi oil decision at this time, but it did
assume that we would get essentially the same amount of oil in 1997,
so our forecast had the increased supply occurring 6 months later. We
actually have the oil price somewhat higher than the futures prices as
of last week, so in some sense all that has happened is an adjustment
in the timing. Other than the short-term factors that Mike was
referring to, the one argument that you might point to on the further
out picture is that one might be led to conclude that this is "it"
rather than an assumption that Iraq will be allowed to export much
more in the near term. So, the prospect of full Iraqi production
coming on stream in the next year or two has gone down. That is the
only story that I could pick up on that.
MR. LINDSEY. You are saying that Iraqi oil exports won't
exceed 700,000 barrels per day in this period?
MR. TRUMAN. That's right. The probability that it will be
2 million barrels has gone down even as the probability of 700,000
barrels has gone up.
MR. PRELL. In terms of our CPI forecast, if we assume that
the price of oil declines a little faster, the contour of the forecast
changes in that we have a little less inflation this year than next
year. But at this point, we need to monitor what is happening in the
markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mike, I want to go back to grain prices. One
trend of which we are aware is that the percentage of processed food
costs that stem from their grain content has come down--quite
markedly, actually, over the last twenty years. I was wondering
whether the econometric models that we use take that into account and
also what the sensitivity of food prices is to changes in grain prices

5/21/96

as we look ahead to this period when the grain price increases are
expected to pass through to consumers?
MR. PRELL. We are well aware of the calculations that show
how the grain in a loaf of bread accounts for just a few cents of its
cost. There has been an increase in packaging and distribution costs
so that there is less sensitivity to changes in grain prices than in
the past. The big kicker here is the meat price story, and there
again we are less certain about the timing. There have been changes
in the production processes, as we have seen dramatically illustrated
in the poultry and pork industries. So, one does have to be a little
cautious in following past patterns here, but we think that ultimately
this grain price increase is creating a lot of pressure on margins and
will lead to reduced supply. That is where the big kicker will come
over the forecast period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Isn't that inflationary effect related
only to feed grain prices? The amount of wheat that is used for feed
grains is very small, and as we know breakfast cereal prices went down
as the price of wheat went up.
MR. PRELL. Perhaps. I think we need to see what happens
with cereal coupons and all of that business.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Except for its impact on the export
markets, wheat has essentially become disassociated from the rest of
the economy, whereas corn is a major input into the food chain-actually, corn, soybeans, and soybean meal. Wheat used to be a key
factor twenty or thirty years ago, but it isn't any more.
MR. PRELL. That underscores again that, while we know
something about a good chunk of this year's wheat crop, we know very
little about the corn and soybean crop outlook. We are making a bet,
and the markets are making a bet. We are pretty much in line with the
markets, but there is going to be a lot of volatility and we are not
going to know the outcome for another four or five months. I think
one's optimism on this score has to be tempered by the fact that
inventories are quite low and demand growth seems to be robust enough
that one year of good harvests probably will not relieve the pressures
entirely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's probably good for the farm incomes
of our wheat growers when they produce a crop, but it isn't good for
manufacturers of combines! President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you. Mike, one of the themes that came
through in the Greenbook, and you alluded to it briefly today, is the
deterioration in inflationary expectations. You seem to think that
inflationary expectations are going to rise, and I would like you to
elaborate a little on that. It seems to me that one could tell a
story that a lot of what is happening here stems from one-time supply
shocks, and it is not obvious to me how that translates into
inflationary expectations. So, I would like to know a little more
about your thinking. Do you have some sort of COLA mechanism in mind
or exactly what?
MR. PRELL. I think that's important whether it's a formal
COLA--and COLAs are much less important in the economy today than they

5/21/96

once were--or an informal process, in the sense that employers are
conscious of what is happening to the cost of living and have some
sort of behavioral norms for adjusting wages in light of changes in
the cost of living. In any event, there would seem to be a tendency
for one-time shocks to be built into wage increases as they engender a
certain elevation of expectations about ongoing price increases. I
think there is little basis for thinking that people will look at this
price increase as a one-time shock, that workers will absorb that
increase, pass the income willingly on to the farmers, and we won't
have any resulting elevation of wage increases with resulting cost
pressures. To date we don't have a lot of evidence to support this
hypothesis, but if one looks at the Michigan survey for early May,
coming as it does on the heels of the April survey, the one-year, mean
inflation expectations measure has gone up fairly substantially and it
seems quite likely that it has been affected by the gasoline price
increase. We think that increase will be reversed fairly quickly, but
as we move out into the second half of 1996, we are going to have, in
our forecast at least, food prices increasing more rapidly and we
would anticipate that the consumer will be quite sensitive to that
change.
MR. STERN.

So it is a sort of preservation of real wages

MR. PRELL.

That's the most direct driving force.

story?

MR. STERN. I gather that you think it's consistent with
historical experience; we have had these kinds of shocks before.
MR. PRELL.

As best one can judge, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow, I'm sorry, I
interrupted you. Did you have a follow-up?
MR. MOSKOW. I just wanted to make sure that the econometric
model did take into consideration the reduction in the percentage of
processed food costs that is accounted for by grain costs.
MR. STOCKTON. The model estimated with data from 20 years
ago showed a 30 percent farm value in the CPI for food prices. That
value is about 17 percent now, so we have made some allowance in the
model's coefficients for the decline in the weight of farm grain
prices.
MR. MOSKOW.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mike, turning from this supply shock to the
underlying demand, you did mention a number of factors that you put
into your projections that acted to damp demand. I was struck by how
stable unemployment stays through 1997, granted that you are
projecting growth that is a little higher than in 1995. Could you
talk a little more about the unemployment and labor market side?
MR. PRELL. I take it that you are suggesting that we take as
given the projected output path and look beyond that. The year 1995

5/21/96

is still something of a mystery. We had essentially stable unemployment in the face of very low GDP growth. One possibility is that GDP
growth was mismeasured. One hint that we have, and have mentioned
previously, is that looking at the addition from the income side one
would conclude that GDP should have grown about a percentage point
faster. That would help to reconcile this behavior. I don't want to
push that too far. We don't know where the truth is in that regard,
but it is a possibility. Another point is that these relationships
are not super tight in the short run. There is considerable variability in the Okun's law relationship. This means that what happened
last year could be viewed as just a random event or we could have some
continued disturbance as we go forward. Last year, we had very weak
growth in the labor force. We also had very small increases in
household employment. These tend to correlate, but perhaps it is
arguable that somehow or other we will get some rebound in the growth
of the labor force and unemployment will tick up a bit and average out
in line with the experience in earlier years. But there is nothing to
suggest that we ought to think about it that way, and going forward,
we have the labor force tending to grow slowly with a flat labor force
participation rate. That is one uncertainty that we discussed
previously, but basically we have a normal alignment of output growth
and unemployment movements in our forecast.
MS. MINEHAN. Maybe it's just the tone of the Greenbook, but
given the feel of the underlying strength of demand in the Greenbook I
was surprised to see this stability.
MR. PRELL. I think that brings you back then to the question
of whether demand really will slacken as quickly and as much as we
have in the forecast. I indicated that a number of assumptions about
the behavior of various sectors underlie that forecast. These really
have not changed in our view. Our basic view has been that we don't
see underlying forces in monetary policy, fiscal policy, the dollar,
and so on that ought to be expected to produce persistently more rapid
or slower growth than potential as we move out. In the very short
run, we can see a flattening of motor vehicle production. The
arithmetic relating to that helps us to reduce growth very quickly in
our forecast from a more rapid pace in the second quarter to a
moderate pace in the third quarter. We don't see ongoing, doubledigit growth in business fixed investment as plausible, but we
recognize some upside risk on the computer side. On the consumer
side, we could now be seeing the wealth effects that were not
perceptible earlier, and if that continued in some significant
magnitude our consumption forecast might have an upside risk. In
housing, the anecdotal indicators and recent survey evidence do not
suggest that we are getting the kind of weakening in starts that we
have in our forecast, but we are anticipating that there will be a
significant drop, maybe fairly quickly. So, we can see these upside
risks. Perhaps there are risks on the downside as well, but I take
your point, and I think that I communicated the view that the risk
seems at least as great on the upside at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we should emphasize what you
said, Mike, only if the relationship between the unemployment rate and
the potential rate of operations of the economy as a whole were very
tight. The data show that that is not the case. That's because the
measurement problems that we have in all these statistics are fairly
large and even if we had an exact or very tight relationship the data

5/21/96

are going to be wrong. So, we have to try to average through the fog,
and I think the latter is a little more dense than it used to be.
MR. PRELL. We recognize that, because we have a new current
population survey that has been in place for only a short time, the
short-run movements are very difficult to assess. The seasonal
factors could have changed, and we don't have enough evidence on what
they are doing. So, we need to take these numbers with a grain of
salt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. You mentioned that GDP on the income side was
almost a full percent higher. Where do you suppose the big surprise
comes from?
MR. PRELL. Well, I can't say that there is a surprise that I
can point to. I suppose that relative to our forecast one thing that
happened last year was that we got a lot of growth in profits. We
don't see that as out of line with corporate profit reports, but,
certainly, as things evolved last year that was one factor that was a
surprise. Basically, we have had a significant swing in statistical
discrepancies, and where that gets reduced, whether it's on the
product side or the income side, one can't know. Historically, I
think you find it somewhere in-between and a little more toward the
income side on average.
MR. LINDSEY. I was thinking about the report on the Treasury
balances that was mentioned earlier and why those balances are higher.
Back in the old days, I would have said that the reason is the
realization of capital gains because that doesn't show up on the
income side. So you are saying that there is something else.
MR. PRELL. That is something that might be noted about our
forecast. In essence, disposable income is currently being reduced by
the capital gains taxes that we think are probably a significant
factor in the heavy tax revenues, and yet that does not show up in
income.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What it may suggest is that
manufacturers appear to keep their books internally consistent on the
income and the product sides. When we look at services, however, what
we see are very considerable anomalies: a fairly small increase in
productivity and reasonably slow nominal output growth, but a
significant increase in profitability and therefore implicitly an
appreciable rise in margins. The notion that has evolved here is
that, somehow or other, either significant nominal GDP is missing from
the nonmanufacturing area or, because of the productivity data, price
levels are exaggerated, as indeed they almost surely are. One sees,
for example, that over a protracted period the price of medical
services in the CPI has gone up much faster than average hourly
earnings and I suspect, though I haven't seen the data, much faster
than the ECI for medical services. This suggests that real income has
fallen dramatically in that area. I shouldn't say that; it's not real
income which suggests that; it's the relationship between productivity
and price or some wage-price that does not seem to be squaring at all.
There seems to be a major anomaly in the structure of the GDP which
for the first time may be on the income side. Perhaps with additional

5/21/96

-8-

data five years from now we will have a more accurate appraisal of
what has been going on. Ted just nodded this way! [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
perfectly; he does it with a nod.

Mr. Truman expresses his opinion

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I can measure his approval rating in the
arc of his nod! [Laughter] Any further questions?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. This may be related to the line of
thunderstorms coming from the west and everyone wanting to get out of
here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you had said that at the beginning, I
would not have filibustered as much as I did. Who would like to start
the Committee's discussion? President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, our monthly indicators model
suggests that economic growth in the current quarter should be close
to that in the first. We believe that this relatively high growth
rate is temporary because it reflects the building of inventories by
business firms. Thus, we see the economy slowing toward its long-run
growth trend of 2 percent in the second half of the year, assuming
that interest rates remain near current levels. We expect 2 percent
growth in 1997 as well, which is just slightly below the Greenbook
forecast.
Such a forecast is not as attractive as it might appear at
first glance. The problem is that with the economy operating around
full employment, it will be difficult to make any progress in getting
the inflation rate down. In fact, our structural model suggests that
there will be a small amount of upward pressure on inflation over this
period, and of course that is what the Greenbook says as well. I find
this forecast alarming and would like to be in a situation where the
inflation rate is projected to come down gradually.
Moreover, it seems to me that the downside risks we were
worried about earlier in the year have dissipated and that the risks
are largely on the upside now. Economic growth could easily come in
above our forecast. For instance, our structural model predicts a
slowdown in the second half of the year, in part because of the recent
rise in long-term interest rates. However, given that the market's
expectation of future economic activity is embedded in long rates, it
may be more appropriate to treat the recent rise in rates as an
indication of a future robust economy. Since we are already operating
at a high level of resource utilization, growth above trend even for a
few quarters could present an upside inflation risk.
Turning to the region, economic expansion in the Twelfth
District is continuing at the solid pace that was established in 1995,
which remains more rapid than that for the rest of the nation.
California is making a significant contribution to District expansion.
While current employment statistics indicate that annualized job
growth in California during the first four months of 1996 was below
the 1995 pace, the recent statistics are likely to be revised upward.
Other recent indicators such as a declining unemployment rate,
substantial gains in state tax revenues, and reduced outmigration
suggest greater underlying strength in the state economy.

5/21/96

After a relatively slow 1995, the Washington State economy
expanded sharply in February and March, with noticeable job gains in
all major sectors. Rapid expansion continues in Nevada, Utah, Oregon,
and Arizona, with Arizona accelerating since November after slowing in
the middle of 1995. Alaska and Hawaii remain somewhat weak, however.
Expansion in District employment continues to be particularly
strong in the construction, services, and trade sectors. The growth
of construction and real estate loans has been strong in the District,
and planned construction remains high in several states. Growth in
the District's boom states is still being spurred by expansion in
manufacturing employment, and with a shift to higher-paid jobs,
average manufacturing wages have risen substantially in several
states. Consistent with the recent slowdown in the semiconductor
industry, employment growth in the District computer and electronics
sector slowed in the first quarter. However, our industry contacts
believe that the semiconductor industry is experiencing only a
temporary glut and that the computer industry will undergo rapid
expansion in the remainder of 1996, although at a somewhat less robust
pace than in 1995. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, the available information on the
Seventh District economy is consistent with moderate growth in the
region. In general, manufacturing is still our strongest-performing
sector with growth somewhat faster than the national average. Housing
and retail sales have continued to perform reasonably well despite
higher mortgage interest rates and inclement weather. Labor markets
remain tight with few signs of significant upward pressure on wage
rates. Our purchasing managers' surveys around the District all
signal expanding output in April. Durable goods producers generally
are less concerned than they were earlier in 1996, although they still
expect growth to slow in the second half of this year. The Big Three
automakers have raised their 1996 light vehicle sales forecasts
slightly. They also have raised their second-quarter production
schedules, mostly to build inventories but also to support slightly
stronger-than-expected sales arising from the incentives that they
have in place. Gross orders for heavy duty trucks in March were
strong enough so that some producers have delayed their decisions on
major cutbacks to "build plans" that had been expected in the first
quarter. The cutbacks have now been delayed until the scheduled
summer plant closings. Several other industries reported doing better
than they expected earlier this year including producers of machine
tools, appliances, and small construction equipment. Retailers
generally indicate that sales in the District rose moderately in April
and early May, although inclement weather this spring slowed sales of
some seasonal items, such as lawn and garden merchandise and motor
boats. Housing activity still appears to be fairly strong in most
parts of our District. Sales of new and existing homes increased in
March, housing starts and permits were up again in April, and recent
surveys showed Midwest home builders to be the most optimistic of any
in the nation in both April and May. District respondents to the
senior loan officer survey reported strong increases in mortgage loan
demand over the past three months.
Labor markets remain tight throughout the District. In fact,
economic growth in parts of the District, such as Indiana, is

5/21/96

-10-

reportedly being restrained currently by labor shortages. The
unemployment rate in District states is more than a full percentage
point below the national average. In March, total payrolls increased
slightly more rapidly in the District than in the rest of the nation
despite the relatively larger drop in manufacturing employment related
to the GM strike. These workers, of course, are back on the payroll
now. Despite the tight labor markets, we still have few reports of
mounting wage pressures. In fact, over the past year, total
employment costs increased less in the Midwest than nationally. Job
security concerns are identified as the key issue that will be
emphasized in the upcoming labor negotiations. In the steel industry,
however, management is now offering a wage increase of about 5 percent
over the next three years, while labor unions are asking about 7-1/2
percent. Either increase would be the most significant that these
unions have had in 10 years but would still average under 2-1/2
percent annually. The current labor contract has a no-strike clause
with binding arbitration so that the negotiations will be settled
without a strike. I spoke with a CEO of one steel company. He said
that he could clearly offset such wage increases with productivity
gains.
Turning to the agricultural sector, the major story for us
has been the surge in grain prices that others have mentioned. These
higher prices have led to some scaling back in livestock and poultry
production. With respect to the spring planting season, which is so
important, cool temperatures and wet conditions slowed progress
considerably in Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin, with Illinois close
to average and Iowa well ahead of normal. It is still too early for
us to know how much food prices will rise. That will depend largely
on whether the harvest eases or exacerbates the critically tight grain
supplies. On the other hand, the higher grain prices have accelerated
the uptrend in land values and have strengthened the balance sheets of
many farmers in our District.
More generally, however, most reports still seem to point to
little upward pressure on prices. Contacts indicate that price
increases remain in check both on the input side and the output side.
Auto industry suppliers report significant pressures to cut prices,
and long-term purchase contracts for steel are now renegotiated with
smaller price increases. However, price components in both the
Chicago and Detroit purchasing managers surveys did move from signaling a decline in prices of parts in March to an increase in April.
Turning to the national picture, we are in general agreement
with the Greenbook. The outlook is for growth at or above potential
for the remainder of this year. The key issue, of course, is the
outlook for inflation. The Greenbook projects that energy and food
price increases are likely to push the CPI up a little faster than we
would like. At the same time, the extent to which the underlying rate
of inflation is inching up is still unclear. Certainly, the risks of
higher inflation are greater today than at the time of our last
meeting, and this is a matter of concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. On balance, the Eleventh District economy has
been experiencing moderate growth and the near-term prospects look
reasonably good. Employment growth in the first quarter was about the

5/21/96

-11-

same as nationally, but growth accelerated throughout the quarter.
Real estate and construction have tended to be among the strongest
segments of the District economy. Single-family construction is doing
particularly well, with levels of starts and new permits in a few of
our cities reaching levels not seen in about a decade. Although this
is still the exception, leasing activity in a few of our hotter
commercial and office markets is being limited by a shortage of supply
for the first time in about 15 years. Manufacturing activity remains
strong overall, corrugated box demand is on the rise, and we have
seen shortages and rationing of cement. Even in the semiconductor
industry, where inventory has been growing and prices that had been
falling are now flattening, the bad news is that output growth will
slow dramatically from the rates of the last few years. The good news
is that the semiconductor demand is likely to grow by only 10 percent
in the year ahead. The oil price hike was temporary, and oil prices
are now back to more sustainable levels. Whatever boost the Dallas
District gained from higher energy prices is behind us, and the
industry is back on a long-term downtrend.
While I have just emphasized areas of strength, there are two
negatives that are worth mentioning. First, the impact of drought
conditions in much of our District has spread from hearing complaints
from ranchers to hearing complaints also from farmers. Beef cattle
prices are at a 20-year low. Grain prices are high, but District
farmers have lost much of their crop and cotton producers are getting
hurt as well. Our agricultural bankers are reporting rising debt
loads and delinquent payments. The second cloud on the horizon is the
prospect of an increase in the minimum wage to $5.15. The data from
the establishment survey of wage and salary employment indicate that
nearly one-fourth of Eleventh District employment consists of workers
earning less than the proposed minimum wage, compared to about onesixth in the nation as a whole. Using the household survey narrows
the gap considerably. Either way, the Eleventh District states would
bear a disproportionate burden of the negative employment impact of
higher minimum wages.
On the national economy, I am encouraged by the signs of
strength, although the uptick in inflationary pressures, while having
a number of transitory components, has worsened the inflation outlook.
On the other hand, bond and foreign exchange markets have already
tightened and will be countering inflationary pressures as we go
forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in New
England are quite favorable, though many of our business contacts
describe the situation as continuing to be highly competitive and
tough. Employment grew at a rate of about 1-1/2 percent last year and
in the first quarter of 1996, slightly less than the pace for the
nation but consistent with New England's long-term experience. The
regional unemployment rate was 4.7 percent in April, with New
Hampshire and Vermont enjoying rates below 4 percent. We do not think
that this is an indicator that wages are about to take off in the
First District, however, since in growth periods New England typically
has an unemployment rate below the nation's. Our contacts with
regional businesses are generally reassuring on this score. Wage
increases of 2 to 3 percent are the norm, although a few companies are

-12-

5/21/96

going to be more generous. Anecdotally, we continue to hear stories
of severe labor shortages, mostly for software specialists. At the
Bank, we have been trying to hire data communications people, for
example. It is not just a question of money. These specialists would
rather work for a consultant, or even as temporary employees, to get
flexibility and to ensure that their skills stay on the cutting edge.
Materials and vendor prices are flat, and retailers are holding the
line on customer prices. A few manufacturers have succeeded, however,
in raising their prices by modest amounts.
The retail situation in New England is very competitive,
making it difficult to discern underlying economic trends. Upscale
stores are doing well, but discounters are struggling. Their sales
are down from a year ago. Among manufacturers, revenues are
continuing to grow at a fairly good rate. Business is especially good
for manufacturers of capital goods, particularly those producing
traditional products such as industrial machinery and equipment used
in construction and high-tech companies producing computer networking
and microelectronics products. Concern was expressed about signs of
slowing in the semiconductor business, as others have mentioned,
although the correction is expected to be temporary. In addition,
several of our manufacturing contacts think their inventories are a
bit on the high side despite generally good sales. Retail contacts in
contrast believe that they have their inventories under control.
Loan growth in the First District continues to be slower than
for the nation as a whole, and our banking contacts report that the
competition to make loans is fierce. Banks indicate that they are not
lowering standards so much as they are relaxing terms--for example, by
not requiring personal guarantees. I question whether terms and
standards really overlap and how one can distinguish between the two.
I think this is an issue for some of the lending officer reports that
we get.
On the national scene, I remain convinced that the risks have
tilted substantially to the up side. As the Greenbook points out
rather forcefully, sources of economic weakness and potential
restraints on the fairly solid pattern of current economic growth seem
few. On the other hand, threats to the rather benign run of price
data that we have experienced seem significant. I believe these may
stem more from inherent demand than from supply shocks in food and
energy. Those shocks could be short-lived and flow through only to a
moderate extent to the general price level. However, the impetus from
tight labor markets, continued income growth, consumer durable
spending, business investment, housing, and the stock market rally
could be considerable. The issue for me now is not the direction of
the next move but when we make it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, the Southeast has continued to grow
moderately this spring, led by strong and broad-based activity in two
of our states, Georgia and Florida, where over half of our District's
income is generated. Employment growth in the District has been at a
rate of almost 3 percent so far in 1996, nearly double the national
average. But, of course, we were spared the bad weather and the GM
strike that affected other parts of the country earlier in the year.
The fastest income growth has been in Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee.

5/21/96

-13-

With this good income growth has come excellent, although somewhat
uneven, consumer spending. There has been particularly noticeable
strength in home-related goods like furniture, appliances, and
carpets, and noticeably weak apparel sales. Housing activity has
remained generally good for longer than we expected. In fact, there
are reports of shortages in inventories of single-family houses in
Nashville and Birmingham. Multifamily building is still growing at a
rapid pace. Construction of commercial buildings apparently has
accelerated throughout the District, but we don't see worrisome
speculative kinds of building in that sector of the construction
industry.
Manufacturing activity in our region has picked up some in
the last few months, but the outlook has softened a bit despite
increased orders for production. Wage and salary pressures remain
about unchanged. Recently, employers have been more concerned about
possible wage pressures, but at the same time we see or hear no
substantial evidence that actual labor costs are accelerating. In
fact, I have just completed a round of meetings with small groups of
business leaders in various cities in our District. One story that I
believe got told by someone in each meeting, with expressions of
agreement from other people at the meetings in almost every case, was
how difficult it is to push through price increases in contrast to
their past experience. Someone described the situation at one of
those meetings last week as one where almost every customer was acting
like Wal-Mart or Home Depot in saying to their suppliers, here is what
I will pay; don't tell me about prices.
Finally, there is some good news from our Louisiana oil
patch, which has been through some really tough times over the last
few years. Drilling activity has picked up moderately. The
improvement is not so much in response to recent world price increases
but rather is attributable to some new technology for threedimensional seismic testing, which makes it easier to pick the places
to drill, and to deeper drilling capabilities than were available in
the past.
With regard to the national outlook, while I would not
dismiss the role that special events have played so far in 1996, I
would continue to argue that it is important to focus on those
influences that will prevail beyond the next few months. In doing
that, our outlook is not much changed since late 1995. We are now
forecasting GDP growth of about 2-1/4 percent. We anticipate that the
somewhat stronger-than-expected growth in the first half of the year
will be damped in the coming months by the higher long-term interest
rates that we have already seen, a slowdown in housing and related
spending, some deterioration in consumer balance sheets, and the
persisting uneasiness among workers that people have talked about for
a long time.
We now expect the CPI to average about 3 percent for the
year. That is about 1/4 percentage point above our forecast of a few
months ago and reflects all that we now know about oil and grain
prices. We expect the impact of higher oil and food prices to be
moderate in the near term and to dissipate by later next year. In
particular, the oil price increase was comparatively modest and should
be reversed rather quickly. I think it is very unlikely that the
price changes that we have seen will become embedded in expectations

-14-

5/21/96

and general price-setting behavior without some decision on our part
to accommodate it. If I am confident of anything this morning, it is
that we will not do that.
Our forecast of economic growth into next year differs at the
margin from that in the Greenbook, but the differences are not
substantial. Those differences are somewhat greater near the end of
the forecast horizon where we see a bit slower growth and the
inflation rate coming down somewhat more quickly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District economy
continues to grow at a strong pace with most indicators pointing to
little change since our last meeting. Recent employment reports show
that the number of jobs in the District grew again in March and that
employment in all seven of our states is growing at rates above the
national average. Manufacturing and retail trade remain principal
sources of strength in our region. Our survey of factories throughout
the region indicates a recent rebound in production schedules and
optimism about the next six months. In addition, building activity is
running above a year ago and our directors report continued strength
in commercial construction. The recent runup in oil prices and a more
favorable outlook have boosted energy activity in the District.
Drilling activity, for example, has shown steady increases over the
last three to four months, and energy employment actually rose in
March, the first increase in recent memory.
While economic activity is generally solid in our District,
the agricultural sector remains weak, and the District's very
important cattle industry is mired in a deep slump. The liquidation
of cattle herds appears to have begun. One of our large packers said
that their average slaughter rates are up 12 to 14 percent a month
over three months ago. Although our wheat crop is now expected to
come in at about half its normal size, the rains that we have received
point to a more favorable outlook for other crops, corn for example.
Price pressures are still stable, but I do want to share some
anecdotal information. I am aware that the plural of "anecdote" is
not "data!" With regard to the labor markets, our discussions suggest
that highly skilled workers are getting some fairly good wage
increases. That would include Boeing-type employment in Wichita.
Those increases are having a ripple effect and are causing some gains
down to the bottom end of the pay scale--such as increases to $6.00 an
hour for entry-level clerks. In the crafts area, business agents for
workers in our area tell us that they have not seen such strong demand
for their workers since the late 1960s and that their ability to
negotiate favorable wage settlements has improved dramatically. So,
we are seeing some increasing anecdotal evidence that suggests rising
wage pressures going forward.
On the national level, our forecast is in line with that of
the Greenbook. In the very near term, we continue to see growth at a
rate above that of the first quarter. With the long-term interest
rate increases that have occurred, we anticipate that the rate of
expansion will fall back toward the economy's long-term growth
potential later in the year. With regard to inflation, I am less

5/21/96

-15-

optimistic than the Greenbook and increasingly concerned about the
upside risk of greater inflation. While current inflation does
reflect the effects of supply shocks, I, like others around the table,
believe that the economy is operating fundamentally at a level where
the unemployment rate is around its potential and capacity utilization
around its potential. Accordingly, I see the upside risks of
inflation as noticeably higher, and we should take that into account.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in
the Philadelphia region is showing signs of improvement across a wide
range of sectors including manufacturing, retailing, and construction.
Growth is uneven across the District, however, and overall the region
lags the rest of the country. I would still categorize the overall
growth rate as probably modest. Some areas in the District have low
unemployment rates while others still have quite high levels of
unemployment. Wage pressures, while firming in a few areas, generally
are not accelerating. General price inflation also is still subdued,
but some commodities like metals, fuels, agricultural commodities, and
textiles show some firming tendencies.
The national economy appears to me to be in reasonably good
shape. I think the downside risk of late last year and early this
year has subsided. While we see clear signs of firming in the
national economy, I really do not see a high probability of a breakout on the up side. The outlook for moderate growth is therefore well
founded in my judgment. Developments on the inflation front clearly
need to be watched going forward. The economy does seem to be
somewhat less inflation-prone than in recent decades, witness the
experience since 1994 where we have had an unemployment rate of 5-1/2
percent and the inflation rate has stayed more or less constant. To
what extent and for how long this favorable experience will last we
don't know, so we have to be cautious about what we say concerning the
future. We are, however, better positioned now than we were in 1994
to deal with inflationary pressures, should they arise. Then, we had
a clearly stimulative monetary policy and a considerable distance to
go just to get to a neutral policy stance. Today, we certainly are
closer to a restrictive policy stance, should we need to get there, so
we have more time to engage in watchful waiting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the District
level, the overall picture has not changed a lot since our last
meeting. Our regional economy is still growing at a moderate to
moderate-plus pace, and I would say that growth is occurring pretty
uniformly throughout the District. Also, increasingly we see signs
that the level of activity is high in relation to capacity levels. In
particular, several of our directors and other business contacts have
told us about shortages of skilled labor. We were getting some
reports like this earlier in the year, but they are continuous now,
especially with respect to skilled construction labor. In that
regard, we see considerable strength in both residential and
commercial construction across much of the District, notably in
commercial construction along the lines of Bob McTeer's comments. I
think a lot of the excess commercial space including office space,
which was so apparent earlier in the expansion especially in the

5/21/96

-16-

northern part of our region, has now been absorbed. Vacancy rates in
Richmond, for example, are very low in a variety of categories of
commercial space. The same seems to be true in at least some parts of
the Washington metropolitan area for the first time in a long time.
We are getting some reports of speculative construction, which we have
not heard for a long time. One other regional report that might be
worth noting is that corporate recruiting at the three major
universities in North Carolina--UNC, Duke, and North Carolina State-was up about 20 percent this year. I guess this is consistent with
the view that economic activity in our region is reasonably firm.
At the national level, let me first tell Mike Prell that I
like the change in the format of the Greenbook. I think it was a good
product before and the changes make it an even better one. But the
content of this month's reported projection worries me a good bit.
The Greenbook paints a picture--and I think a generally accurate
picture--of an economy that is in a mature stage of a business
expansion and growing at a firm pace in the neighborhood of capacity
levels with all of the inflationary risk that that entails. Let me
make just a couple of comments on this. First, it seems clear as a
number of people have already suggested that aggregate final demand is
considerably stronger currently than one might have anticipated a few
months ago. The first-quarter GDP report was very revealing. It
showed remarkable strength across the board, and I think that was
really the key feature. Second, the numbers Cathy Minehan, Bob Parry,
and a number of other people have already mentioned permit a very
strong case to be made now that the risks in the outlook have shifted
decidedly to the upside for both real growth and inflation. The
Greenbook is now projecting 3-1/2 percent real GDP growth in the
current quarter. About a percentage point of that, as I understand
it, would be in productivity growth and about 2-1/2 percent in an
increase in hours worked, which is well above a sustainable
noninflationary pace. Moreover, the stronger projected growth in GDP
this quarter is predicated primarily on stronger inventory investment.
The projection for growth in final demand actually shows a
deceleration from the first quarter. If that does not happen, the
current quarter could turn out to be very robust, with the implication
of increasing tightness in an already tight labor market situation.
In addition, there are the current problems that have already been
mentioned with respect to prospective energy and food prices and the
possibility of an increase in the minimum wage.
I think any one of these problems could be managed, but when
they are all put together, that raises some real questions about the
outlook. The Greenbook scenario to a large extent is counting on the
runup in long-term interest rates to moderate the growth in final
demand as we move into the second half of the year. The basis for
this, as I understand it, is that real long-term rates are being
driven up by the cyclical strength in the economy. By pushing real
long rates up, market forces can in that way be counted on to contain
demand and bring it back to trend. What worries me is that the
discussion in the Greenbook gives the impression, maybe not
intentionally, that all of this can happen without an increase in
short-term rates. But as the first chart in the Bluebook makes clear,
the backup in long-term rates seems at this stage to be due to a rise
in 1-year forward rates concentrated maybe 1 to 3 years out. In other
words, it looks like a significant part of the increase in long-term
rates has been driven by the expectation in markets that the Fed is

-17-

5/21/96

going to raise short rates by at least a moderate amount either late
this year or maybe early next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Isn't that more the result of a shift
away from the expectation that they are going lower?
MR. BROADDUS.

Certainly, it is partly that, but if you look

at the-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you look at the actual pattern of
forward rates, going from overnight out to a couple of years, what
happens is that if the long-term rate moves the way you said, the
other rates move back up. According to the analysis in the Bluebook,
it is difficult to determine whether the term structure at this stage
is reflecting anything more than liquidity demand. So, isn't what is
involved fundamentally an upward shift in the yield curve as distinct
from a shift up in yields?
MR. BROADDUS. Well, I think both elements probably are
involved. If you look at the first chart in the Bluebook, the middle
panel there, I am trying to draw an inference from that. What it
suggests to me at least is that expectations for short rates may be
pretty flat through, say, the third quarter, but after that, if one
looks at Treasury yield curves, I think they are showing an
expectation of a tightening of policy late this year-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. I am just saying
that it is very difficult to differentiate the extent of the rise from
what we think we know about the liquidity premium. It is probably
right that it is slightly more than the latter, but the major shift
has to be coming up from the bottom.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, I would certainly agree that it is
always difficult to read the term structure and draw precise
inferences from it. We tried to look at this pretty carefully, and as
I look at the entire structure, it seems to suggest that general
expectations--and I think this has been confirmed in some of the
documentation--are that we are going to hold policy pretty steady at
least through the third quarter and move after that. The only point I
am trying to make is that the behavior of long rates--and in the
overall scenario long rates are a major factor in containing demand in
the future--may be more closely related to policy expectations than to
fundamental economic conditions.
If that is the case, then it follows
that we can't be sure whether the increase in bond rates that has
occurred will necessarily contain demand and inflationary pressures to
the degree that we want.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is an interesting hypothesis, but I
think you would have a tough time debating it.
MR. BROADDUS.
I have a tough time in all debates, but I
would still be willing to debate this!
[Laughter]
In any case, I
think it raises some questions about whether holding short-term rates
relatively constant over the remainder of the year is going to get us
where we need to go, or whether we need to consider something
stronger.

-18-

5/21/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is definite but that conclusion can
arise independently of the yield curve! Let me say, parenthetically,
that Don Kohn said to me the other day that these meetings were
getting duller and duller and I was worried that he might fall asleep,
so I tried to liven things up a bit. [Laughter]
can!

MR. BROADDUS.
[Laughter]

I will try to help keep him awake as much as I

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The pace of economic activity in
the Eighth District appears to have increased modestly since our last
meeting. For the three months ended in March, District labor markets
remained tight. The average unemployment rate is below 5 percent, and
it has been that low for a large part of the last year and a half.
Strike activity, which had been quiescent, is again a factor that may
impact costs at several large District manufacturing firms. On
Sunday, a machinists' union at one of St. Louis's largest employers
authorized a strike that will affect about 7,000 workers directly.
The contract bargaining strategy in the auto industry is yet to be
determined, but negotiations will be getting under way later this
year. The two largest automotive producers in the District plan to
boost second-quarter production by nearly 5 percent above their firstquarter levels. Second-quarter production is about 1 percentage point
more than had been planned at the time of our March meeting.
Residential construction activity in the first quarter was at
a relatively high level. By contrast, construction contracts point to
some prospective weakness in the nonresidential sector, a pattern that
despite strong overall capital spending is also observed in the
national statistics. Loan growth at 11 large District banks has been
off somewhat in recent months from the torrid pace of a year earlier.
This year such loan growth has been dominated by real estate loans.
Lenders are still very actively seeking borrowers in every category,
including consumer borrowers despite some concerns about their
creditworthiness. According to the senior loan officer survey,
consumer loan delinquencies have picked up somewhat more than had been
expected over the last six months. Nonetheless, the rate spread
between securities backed by credit cards and comparable maturity
Treasuries has remained very low.
The national economic outlook has changed dramatically since
January, as we all know, with a rebound in real output growth and
inflation. Imports also have increased substantially, a possible sign
of excess growth in domestic demand. One can't dismiss the increase
in inflation simply because it reflects mainly higher prices for food
and energy. I think the Greenbook and comments from Mike Prell
support that assessment as well. Low levels of agricultural stocks
and rising demand for petroleum do not suggest an early reversal of
such price pressures. Furthermore, the broad monetary aggregates have
been growing above target rates and sweep-adjusted Ml growth has been
strong. By pegging the funds rate at 5-1/4 percent in the face of
rising market interest rates--here we are back in the same debate, I
guess--we may effectively be validating these price increases. The
danger is that if price increases are validated by monetary policy,
they can become embedded in expectations, particularly in a tight
labor market situation. On that front, the Greenbook reports that

-19-

5/21/96

wages and salaries shot up at a 4.6 percent annual rate in the first
quarter, the largest increase in 5 years. The increase in 1995 was
2.8 percent. Furthermore, according to the Michigan survey--and Mike
mentioned this as well--households have raised their inflation
expectations for the next 12 months from 4 percent in December to
4-1/2 percent in April to 5 percent in May. Looking over the next 5
to 10 years, average expected inflation in this survey is up from 4.1
percent in April to 4.8 percent in May. These forecasts can be wrong,
but in any event the public perceives that inflation risks have
increased about a full percentage point this year. That matches the
increase in long rates since January. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you. In the Ninth District, while there
was some pause in growth earlier, activity has once again picked up.
Most of the news has been on the positive side, and I would say that
the regional economy is now advancing more strongly than I, certainly,
expected just a few months ago. To give you a flavor of some of this,
housing activity is strong and as best I can judge will remain so.
There is a lot of activity in major metropolitan areas and housing
shortages in some parts of the District. Manufacturing activity is
strong and improving; state tax revenues have been running above
expectations; and energy exploration activity has picked up. Perhaps
the one obvious sign of difficulty is in agriculture where some
livestock producers are having severe problems and where grain
producers say they may or may not harvest a crop. Our problem is not
drought; it is too much ice and too much moisture. Farmers have been
getting out into the fields late, among other problems.
As far as wage increases and price pressures are concerned, I
would say there has been no pronounced change, but there are scattered
indications that labor is getting a little more aggressive and wage
increases in some instances are turning out to be a little higher than
we were hearing earlier. On the price side, the anecdotal news does
not indicate any pronounced change, but I sense that, if anything,
there is perhaps a little more inflationary pressure than was the case
just a few months ago.
With respect to the national economy, I certainly agree that
there are increased risks of more inflation than I expected earlier.
We are going to get more inflation than I anticipated. It is
difficult for me to assess the degree and duration of these risks. It
was not very many months ago that the concerns were focused more on
the down side, appropriately in my view. That was the case in late
1995 and early this year. Those concerns have obviously diminished,
and diminished rather quickly. I can imagine that some of the upside
concerns prevailing at the moment could diminish quickly as well, but
my sense is that it would take a favorable combination of events for
that to happen as quickly as it did earlier on the down side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. This is the first time that I have been the
first of the governors to comment. This is amazing; maybe I'll master
the timing of this process eventually!

5/21/96

-20-

I have been staying with the story of moderate growth for a
number of meetings, and I am beginning to bore even myself. But I do
think there is now a bit more certainty to such a forecast than there
was earlier. A lot of the uncertainties that we saw in the fall have
dissipated. Until I heard Mr. Melzer, I thought we were past the
major strike activity problem, but maybe more strikes will be
generated in the Midwest. By and large, however, some of the major
strikes are behind us, and certainly the possibility of a Treasury
default that was a prime concern for this group is now behind us. The
question of government shutdowns and the issue of budget deals appear
to be a bit more quiescent now. We did not get a long-term balanced
budget agreement, but it does appear that progress is being made on a
year-by-year basis in terms of holding expenditures down and
addressing the near-term budget deficit. The winter weather
disruptions are behind us and we are free to worry about summer
drought, planting conditions, and heat problems.
The recent statistics display considerably more strength.
The labor market is still showing reasonable job growth, and the 5.4
percent unemployment rate is impressive. People are working and they
will continue to spend. Housing has remained amazingly strong because
the fundamentals remain strong. Business capital spending has been a
major factor in the continuing expansion and seems to be growing
further in the context of an apparent commitment to capital
expenditures to reduce operating costs. Computer expenditures appear
to go on and on, and I do not see an end in sight, especially in light
of the new opportunities stemming from the Internet. But I think the
outlook for expenditures on plant expansion is much more questionable.
There are some factors favoring the sustainability of this
expansion. Inventories are in much better balance now than at the end
of 1995. The financial markets are continuing to support
opportunities for additional investment. In spite of the backup in
interest rates, the term structure is still reasonably low. The stock
market is surprisingly strong, perhaps a bit on the rich side now, but
it is still providing a cheap source of equity capital. Bank credit
is still available. Balance sheets are healthier. As I mentioned, we
have made some progress on the federal deficit. The question now, I
believe, is what kinds of things can throw the economy off this
sustainable growth path? In my view, unless we resume concentrating
on deficit reduction and start to address some of the longer-term
deficit problems--entitlements in particular--this issue is going to
come back to haunt us and we will have higher inflation expectations
and higher interest rates. We always have to question where we are
with respect to aggregate demand. It has been stronger than we had
expected, but there are some signs that suggest we should at least
question the continuation of growth at the current rate.
On the inflation front--and this is where I want to end my
comments--it is possible that the increases in energy and grain prices
can be temporary. But if they are sustained, they will get built into
other price structures and into the wage structure. We are getting
differing anecdotal stories concerning wage pressures, but we are now
seeing indications of some firming of wages in the statistics. An
increase in the minimum wage, if there is one, would exacerbate the
situation. I continue to be bothered by our concentration on the CPI
as the appropriate measure of cost-of-living increases. I appreciated
the inclusion of the GDP chain-weighted price index in the Greenbook,

5/21/96

-21-

but it also has problems. Manufacturers report that they can't make
price increases stick, and yet we are seeing some price increases.
Weighing all of these differing reports and anecdotal stories, I think
the inflation risk has increased and we need to be focusing on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe we may just
now be entering a very tricky and important period. The Greenbook
shows a very near-term deceleration in GDP growth to a 2 percent
annual rate. Despite that, the staff foresees, as do many others
here, an inflationary creep even without a minimum wage bill. If we
get that bill, I think the rise in inflation might come sooner and
become stronger. In my view, we have been riding the crest of a
really remarkable period. Growth has been satisfactory. We have had
an unemployment rate of around 5-1/2 percent, which of course is seen
as being at or below the NAIRU, for well over six quarters now. GDP
is at or near potential. In spite of that, inflation has remained
quiescent. We certainly do not have the price level stability that we
want to achieve, but inflation nevertheless has been flat and
relatively low. So far, no significant trend is visible in the
statistics. The Greenbook and other forecasters project some change
in this starting very soon--in the third quarter--and going forward
through the forecast period and beyond. We are all very jealous of
the progress that we have made; we certainly want more; and we
probably would see a persistent rise in inflation, even if it were a
slow rise, as very dangerous. The question is whether it will happen
and if so, when.
If we look at GDP growth in recent quarters and the Greenbook
forecast for the upcoming quarters and include the 3.5 percent growth
rate projected by the staff for the current quarter, we find that the
average for this quarter and the previous three quarters is a growth
rate of 2.5 percent. However, GDP growth has been accelerating over
the last three quarters. If one looks at this quarter and the next
three as projected in the Greenbook, they average a little more than
2.4 percent but display a slowing trend. That is the projection. The
big downshift in GDP growth is expected to come in the period
immediately ahead, in the third quarter, after which such growth is
projected to flatten and stay around 2 percent. It seems to me that
this outlook is quite credible, quite likely. It seems to be centered
on sectors like housing, capital investment, net exports, and
government expenditures. We have seen long rates rise; we have seen
the dollar rise; we have seen the deficit go down, so this outlook is
quite plausible. If we get that pattern, it seems to me that it is
also plausible that inflation might continue being dormant. We may
even find that the economy's potential is a bit higher, closer to the
2.4 percent or 2.5 percent growth that we have been experiencing and
expect to experience on average. With such growth rates, inflation
might remain benign, and that would be an extremely positive
development. On the other hand, if the economy continues to be
stronger than expected, as we have seen recently, and if it stays this
strong much longer, we certainly could face a highly increasing
likelihood of greater and perhaps somewhat more virulent inflation
than is projected in the Greenbook.

-22-

5/21/96

I will close where I began. I think that we are possibly at
a very important watershed. There are some very important months
immediately ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. I would like to comment on two issues central to
the national economic outlook: first, the possibility that aggregate
demand growth will exceed trend over the forecast period, pushing the
economy well beyond potential; and, second, the prospect that core
inflation will begin to drift upward even if the economy continues to
operate with current margins of slack. On the first issue, the
Greenbook portrays an economy poised for growth near trend by the
In my assessment of the outlook, the risk of
second half of 1996.
sustained demand growth exceeding the growth of potential is not
absent. Frankly, I was surprised by the strength of both consumption
and investment spending in the first quarter. Nevertheless, I still
consider the Greenbook projection of moderate near-trend growth over
the forecast horizon to be sensible and most probable. With the
inventory adjustment process seemingly nearing completion, at least by
the end of this quarter, I find it hard to identify any fundamental
factor or imbalance--other than the dangerously lofty level of stock
prices--that I consider likely to spur either unsustainably rapid
growth or alternatively to pose a significant risk of recession. The
stock market factor, it seems to me, could cut either way; it poses
both kinds of risk. Why do I feel that way? For the same reasons the
Greenbook emphasized. Pent-up demand for consumer durables seems to
be spent. If we can continue to rely on what is one of the most
trustworthy relations in macroeconomics, namely the accelerator, it
seems probable to me that the growth of investment spending will slow.
The combination of moderate growth in our key trading partners,
coupled with a dollar that has appreciated about 4 percent just this
year--the dollar's movement is working as a stabilizer, as Ted Truman
emphasized--should contain impetus originating in the external sector.
In addition to the appreciation of the dollar, of course, the
most potent force countering any spending shock that may have occurred
is the large swing in financial conditions. Now, it is arguable that
some portion of the roughly 80 basis point increase in long-term
interest rates since late January reflects higher inflationary
expectations. But my own reading of survey measures of inflation
expectations suggests that most of the movement represents an increase
in real rates. I think such an increase is perfectly consistent with
the perception that demand is stronger than previously thought, that
the shock to demand is not transitory, and that the Fed indeed will
need to pursue tighter policies than had been anticipated earlier to
keep inflation in check. It seems to me that given the usual lags,
this interest rate swing should begin to exercise a restraining
influence by the second half of the year. A rule of thumb I sometimes
use is that a one basis point increase in the long rate cuts $0.6
billion off aggregate demand, which means that, say, a 70 basis point
increase in real rates would chop $42 billion or 0.6 percent off GDP.
This is sufficient to counter a rather sizable and permanent upward IS
shock. So, I see the interest rate fluctuations that have occurred as
serving as an important stabilizer. Under present conditions, it
seems to me that the rebound in long-term rates is an appropriate
antidote to increased upside risk. However--and here I certainly

5/21/96

-23-

agree with the comment that the Chairman interjected in response to Al
Broaddus's statement--it seems to me that the 6 percent long bond
yield that we had in January was premised on the assumption that we
would have several further cuts in the fed funds rate. I also would
agree that the present level of roughly 7 percent in the long bond
rate appears to be consistent with a funds rate that is expected to
remain about where it is or, with some probability, to increase
slightly during the remainder of the year.
I also want to spend a minute, if I may, commenting on the
outlook for core inflation because I think the Greenbook inflation
forecast is a little too pessimistic. Clearly, we have an economy
operating at a level where we need to be nervous about rising
inflation, even abstracting from supply side shocks. We can't dismiss
the possibility that compensation growth will drift upward, raising
core inflation and in turn inflationary expectations. This is a major
risk. Obviously, we need to be vigilant in scrutinizing the data for
signs of rising wages and salaries. We should be concerned if a
pattern of faster wage and salary growth materializes, if that
translates into faster compensation growth, and if in turn the faster
compensation growth translates into more rapid core inflation. But
the sentence I just uttered contained three "ifs."
First, we need to see a pattern of faster wage and salary
growth. As a number of you pointed out, we have seen one disturbingly
large reading on wages and salaries in the most recent employment cost
index survey. But the upward movement there was mysteriously rapid
for sales workers and one reading does not a trend make. The second
"if" in my sentence concerned whether an increase in wage and salary
growth will translate into faster compensation growth, and that is a
big "if." At this point, the 12-month change in total compensation
growth in the ECI has remained virtually unchanged at around 3 percent
for five quarters. I would just remind you that standard economic
theory suggests that both firms and workers going to the bargaining
table ought to be concerned with and ought to be bargaining over total
compensation, not wages and salaries alone. Assuming that both firms
and workers recognize the tradeoff they face between benefits and
take-home pay, slower benefits growth should be reflected in faster
wage and salary growth. So, on its own, faster wage and salary growth
is not cause for alarm. Now, I do not want to push this hypothesis
too far because, although this is a reasonable possibility, it
certainly is not the only possibility. I am simply urging caution and
am warning against automatically assuming that the growth in these two
components of compensation is unconnected and that they lead their own
lives.
My final "if" concerned the relationship between faster
compensation growth and product price inflation and whether we should
automatically assume that the translation there will be one-for-one.
The counter argument is that for the last several years product price
increases have outstripped increases in unit labor costs and that has
resulted in widening markups, unusually strong earnings growth, and a
rise in the profit share. In that sense, core inflation is on the
high side now, given compensation growth and productivity trends. The
staff documented this situation and highlighted its implications in
the January Chart Show. Widening profit margins are a development
that should not be expected to continue indefinitely. Eventually,
those margins are bound to stabilize or even to decline a bit. That

-24-

5/21/96

could occur in a number of ways: with a decline in the inflation rate
coupled with stable compensation growth or with an increase in the
pace of compensation growth and stable inflation. I think the first
possibility implies some downside risk to the inflation outlook, and I
do not see that in the Greenbook forecast. The second possibility is
that compensation growth is indeed poised to rise somewhat, bringing a
halt to the continuing widening of profit margins. That could occur
without any translation into higher core inflation. These are a bunch
of "ifs." They are all imponderables and they are open questions that
will only be answered with the benefit of hindsight.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The broad
economic indicators suggest that the economy in the Second District
grew at a moderate pace in recent weeks, which is an improvement. In
March, payroll employment advanced at an annual rate of 2.2 percent in
New York and 3.3 percent in our part of New Jersey. Vacancy rates for
prime commercial office space continued to inch down in Manhattan and
northern New Jersey, reflecting the improvement in office leasings.
Contract awards for nonresidential construction, primarily additions
to and alterations of commercial space, rose sharply in New York
compared to year-ago levels. The gain in New York was offset slightly
by a 1 percent decline in New Jersey. In April, retail sales tax
collections rose robustly in New York and moderately in New Jersey on
a 12-month basis, implying moderate to strong gains in retail sales.
Similar 12-month gains were reported in April personal income tax
collections. Inflation moderated. The April consumer price index for
the New York/northeastern New Jersey region rose just 2.9 percent on a
12-month basis, following gains of 3 to 3-1/2 percent during the
previous 4 months.
On the national level, our forecast is rather close to the
Greenbook's. The differences are that we show less growth in 1997,
and we are below the Board staff in our estimate of the CPI increase
for 1996. On a Q4/Q4 basis, we have the CPI at 3 percent this year
compared with the Greenbook's 3.4 percent. However, we agree on 3.2
percent in 1997.
Our Bank's forecasting record over recent years has been
quite good, except that we were slow to recognize the wage restraint
that is the main reason for continuing good inflation numbers. We,
like all of you, are not certain how long that can or will continue.
But I could have said that a year ago, and the restraint has in fact
continued. People running businesses still seem to be reluctant to
raise prices. When we talk to business people, they sound very
alarmist about their industry or about the country or the world in
general, but I find that they know very little about those subjects.
All I am really interested in is what they are planning to do with
their own businesses. When we ask them that question, we are told
about very severe price restraint--the inability to pass on rising
costs--and the need to rationalize their businesses. So, I do not see
great risks of the real economy growing above trend. In fact, we have
strong growth in the first half of this year, especially in the
current quarter, and then growth drops slightly below trend in the
second half of the year and in 1997. So, I see the risks as balanced
by-and-large. Despite all that, my anxiety level regarding price
trends has begun to gnaw. However, I consider the present stance of

5/21/96

-25-

monetary policy to be just about right or so close to it that, to
borrow a phrase from Ed Boehne, "watchful waiting" is appropriate. In
fact, when he mentioned that, I remembered back about four decades to
my days as an officer of the deck on a Navy ship where the possibility
of a storm encouraged one to increase the state of alert. On the
other hand, increasing the state of alert did not in turn increase the
probability of the storm. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.

It might have stirred up a storm!

MR. JORDAN. The most noticeable change since the last
meeting has been orange construction-site barrels sprouting all over
the Great Lakes region. Infrastructure construction is in full swing.
It was explained to me recently that Cleveland in particular has been
benefiting greatly from such construction. That is because, while
Atlanta has the Olympics, we have a Bicentennial Year with a former
mayor who is now governor and wants to be Vice President. That does
wonders for suburban infrastructure spending! The irony of prosperity
is that everything is closed for renovation and repairs.
[Laughter]
What apparently are not going to be sprouting in the region are crops.
In the last couple of weeks we have heard a lot of statements that are
alarming. They are in sharp contrast with what we were being told in
March and April by bankers and individuals directly active in farming
--farmers, equipment suppliers, seed suppliers--that high grain prices
caused by the drought in other areas would make this the best year for
the agricultural economy in memory for farmers in our region. Now
that our farmers have already sold in the futures markets the crops
that they have not been able to plant, people think it will be the
worst year for the agricultural economy in memory. I do not know how
pervasive the problem is, but I was told that as of last Friday, only
6 percent of the corn crop was planted in Ohio. Farmers say that if
they do not have the corn planted by mid-May, they will switch to
beans or some other crops. I am not certain how reliable that
deadline is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is already May 21!

MR. JORDAN. Well, people are saying that there will be no
corn harvest in our area, but I am not so sure about that. Others are
telling us that the Amish do not have any problem; their horses are
not slowed down by the rain. The stories also are very negative
regarding the nationwide wheat and corn crops, and that carries over
to chickens, hogs, and ultimately beef. I am not sure what to make of
it all. Our bankers say that they are worried; they have a lot of
farmers who were just too enthusiastic about selling crops for forward
delivery, and that will result in a financial problem later this
summer.
I recently participated in a round of meetings with about 40
people on our joint boards of directors and our small business and
bank advisory councils. One of the questions I asked them was whether
they were more or less optimistic about the economy than they had been
at the beginning of the year. Except for one software company, they
were consistently more optimistic even though the almost universal
belief was that there will be an extensive General Motors strike. The
auto supply companies and others are saying that GM has no alternative
but to endure a lengthy strike if that is needed to adjust their badly

-26-

5/21/96

misaligned cost structure to everyone else's. With regard to the
software industry, there has been an increasingly strident claim that
its growth is a bubble, that there is a severe downside risk
associated with overpaying for these firms, and that one of these days
we will see a very sharp correction in that industry.
Let me comment on some of the discussions we have heard on
national issues. What the income side is telling us about the
national income accounts in the economy is an important issue. It may
explain why sometimes when we listen to the regional reports based on
anecdotal information, they sound like we have achieved the Lake "Woebegone" economy where everybody is performing above average. An
example is the anecdotes that we hear about productivity. When we ask
them, people consistently tell us that their productivity improvements
are substantially higher than those in the national statistics. We
have to be cautious about how we interpret those reports and how much
confidence we can have in them.
The exchange earlier today, which Governor Yellen also
referred to, between the Chairman and Al Broaddus involves an issue
that we all ought to settle in our own minds. Early this year it was
said that interest rates had dropped as much as they had on the
expectation that the expansion not only was going to be weaker than
had been anticipated earlier, but that the economy might even be
moving toward a borderline recession. The subsequent runup in
interest rates occurred because the economy turned out to be stronger
than people thought it was going to be. But the runup in interest
rates also implied that the expansion eventually would slow, which
presumably would mean that interest rates would come down, which means
the economy will then strengthen. As to what that says about policy,
it is pretty clear that at the beginning of the year and at least
until early February, intermediate-term rates out to 10 years at least
were based on an expectation of further reductions in short-term
interest rates. My own conclusion is that today's rates, about 6.60
percent on the 10-year maturity, are consistent with an unchanged
level of the funds rate. They are not based on the expectation that
the funds rate will go up but rather on a reversal of the prior
expectation that it will go down. I think everybody should try to
settle that issue in their own mind.
With regard to the economic outlook for the nation, surveys
such as those on consumer sentiment or the Blue Chip don't do much for
me. Early this year we saw a lot of stories about the severe winter
weather--record snowfalls, low temperatures, and all the evidence that
we are going into a new Ice Age. Last week we heard evidence that we
are in a period of global warming! I hope our judgments about the
economy are more soundly based than those stories about the weather.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I have not been here since the last meeting for
all intents and purposes, so I don't really have anything to say about
the U.S. economy. But I find this discussion very informative and
useful. Where I have been, I must say, makes me appreciate coming
home. It is very depressing to live and work in Washington because it
makes one begin to think there must be something wrong with America.
But when I go abroad I realize that this is the way it works

5/21/96

-27-

everywhere; there is something wrong with the world.
feel relatively better.

So, at least I

For the first time in years I agree completely with Ted
Truman on Japan, and I think that means, Ted, that we are both wrong!
In Japan, I was very much struck by the fact that the recovery is
under way. They are going to have a solid recovery this year. Solid
growth probably will not be sustainable next year but is likely to
slow somewhat. Some of their larger banks have begun tackling their
banking problems. What was most encouraging in Japan was the end of
denial. I thought they were very candid about what their problems
were. That candor was reflected also in a question that they always
asked me about our stock market. I was thinking very much about what
just came up in Jerry's comments about the bubble in the software
industry. If you watch the OTC, not the Dow, you begin to appreciate
that a bubble might very well be forming. On one day last week when
the OTC was recovering, all of the top 10 issues were up at least 9
points. There are IPOs that do not trade at 20 times earnings; they
trade at 20 times sales. My suggestion for such a company would be to
sell, put the money in 10-year notes, and it would be better off that
way. This is the silly season. To be sure, our stock prices are not
at Japanese levels, but who knows how much longer it will take. They
are getting closer. In Japan, it was nice to have candid questions.
Bill McDonough and I were in Basle last week, and I was in
France and Italy and Switzerland the week before. I think there has
been a decline in candor and an increase in the sense of denial. It
really is stunning to me how everyone who even thinks about the issue
will say: You are right; what we are doing is not economically
sensible, but it is politically necessary. If they follow that kind
of policymaking long enough, I don't see how they are going to come
out of it. They are going to be announcing more deficit reduction
measures, mostly on the spending side. The French are going to be
following up the cuts in spending they have already made with further
cuts just to look credible. I think they will hit 3 percent of GDP.
When you have the kind of marginal propensity to tax that those
economies have, which is 50 percent or more, and you begin to have
spending contractions, it is very hard to lower the deficit because
the inevitability of G and Y and T make the math very, very difficult.
They are chasing themselves down. There is also a remarkable sense of
denial or willingness to deny the problems

This seems like a very
implausible basis on which to run a democratic society for very long.
I think it is a good example of the state of denial in France and
Germany.
I do not share Ted's view that we are going to have a weak
euro. I believe we probably are going to have a strong euro because I
think the only thing that they will be valuing after convergence is

-28-

5/21/96

credibility. I do think that they are going to have some credibility
problems.
In my view that means their policy will have to be tighter
than tight to begin with. I think the path of convergence is going to
lead to a downward spiral in Europe, and after they get there they are
still going to be continuing with that sort of policy. So, I came
away from Europe very, very depressed, from Japan mildly encouraged,
but, gee, it is great to be in America!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Coffee is available.

Shall we break?

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Mr. Kohn.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is the question whether we respond to
that forecast horizon issue now or at a later time?
MR. KOHN. Whenever.
It would be nice to have a little
discussion at this meeting. Whether you want to do it after you have
discussed the near-term policy choices-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do that? Why don't we
complete the near-term policy discussion and then come back to that
issue and conceivably continue to discuss it during the lunch period
if that turns out to be necessary.
MR. KOHN.

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Don? Clear as always.
I think this is indeed a watershed period, as Governor Kelley
mentioned. As I listened to the members' comments relating the
current situation to the Greenbook forecast and the staff briefings, I
came to a few conclusions that I hope characterize the substance of
what we have been discussing. My impression is that if I fully
believed the outlook in the Greenbook and indeed expected it to
materialize as projected, I would feel that we ought to be tightening
policy sooner rather than later. The basic reason is that I find the
federal funds rate assumption in the Greenbook inconsistent with the
staff outlook. So, the key question that I envisage is essentially
whether the internal construction of the forecast as postulated by the
Greenbook is consistent with the world that I believe is evolving and
to which we must adjust.
Let me say, first, that I think the Greenbook is projecting
relatively modest growth in real economic activity and that the risks
to that projection are probably on the up side.
I say that because
the staff is projecting a fairly dramatic slowing in the growth of
final demand, and one can scarcely conclude that the projected
inventory investment is other than subdued. We have seen rather
telling instances in the past when business firms have liquidated
inventories to the point of some tightness. As they endeavored to
restore some inventory balances, lead times immediately began to
stretch out on deliveries and desired safety stocks started to expand.
The result has been a fairly substantial acceleration in inventory
investment that has fed back to the income side and created an

5/21/96

-29-

economic growth rate that is substantially greater than that in the
Greenbook forecast. Implicit in this Greenbook forecast of real GDP
is a degree--I could say a new form--of inventory response in the
economy that certainly is much more subdued than that experienced in
1994. In a certain sense, it is also a good deal more subdued than
one would anticipate on the basis of historic cyclical patterns over
much of the post World War II period and far more clearly before then.
The crucial issue at this stage is the evaluation of the real
side of the economy. The real side is being bolstered, as best anyone
can judge at this stage, by the wealth effect. Not that many months
ago, everyone was sitting around, here and elsewhere, and wondering
what elements in the GDP were going to strengthen and sustain the
recovery. We could not find it in residential construction. We could
not find it in capital investment. The consumer was dead. The
government had gone out of business. And clearly the export side was
not doing anything. We are now sitting here and wondering what is
going to moderate this expansion. The change has occurred in only a
few months and no one can tell me that the world changes that rapidly.
What is happening, and one sees it best by looking at the S&P 500
which has been going straight up in the charts, is probably the result
of a wealth effect. That effect is lagged sometimes; it is
indeterminate. It is very difficult to judge, but one gets the sense
that this is where some of the effect is probably stemming from.
Obviously, in the capital goods area we are getting some evidence of
lower capital costs. We are getting related evidence of increased
margins. And it's hard to buy that anything other than the wealth
effect is driving the consumer.
That gets us down to the question of how long all this will
go on. The stock market as best I can judge is high; it's not that
there is a bubble in there; I am not sure we would know a bubble if we
saw it, at least in advance. But one surely can't argue that the
underpinnings of the level of stock prices are all extremely positive.
It's hard to believe that if any series of adverse developments were
to occur, the market would not come down rather substantially and
reverse the wealth effect. That probably would damp economic activity
quite substantially. But at this stage I don't think we can make a
reasonable judgment because we don't know, frankly, how the inventory
situation is going to evolve.

We don't know how the accelerator issue

that Governor Yellen has raised is going to affect the capital goods
markets. At this stage the physical side of the economy is as close
to balance as one can imagine. Yet, to quote Mike Prell, "the smoking
gun" is missing. We are seeing a very pronounced set of pressures
that are superimposed on the pricing structure. Every time I get out
in the business sector I get reports, as a number of you also have
indicated you were getting, that no one can raise prices; at least
that is the way our business contacts put it. And, indeed, if we look
at the basic structure of industrial prices, the PPI, and the CPI, we
just do not find any significant evidence of cumulative pressures. We
have seen very little in the data that measure capacity strain. We
have seen very little in the way of increased delays in deliveries
since that very significant measure of pressures came down. Overtime
is not building. What we are seeing is a significant increase in the
rate of capacity expansion of close to 4 percent at an annual rate as
previous major investment projects are brought on line and push up
capacity.

5/21/96

-30-

The key to this outlook, as I see it, is not an evaluation of
the physical side of the economy that appears in the Greenbook because
I suspect that starting at midyear economic growth may well be on the
low side of recent experience. The crucial question is the linkage to
inflation. At this stage it is very difficult to take the existing
structure of the NAIRUs, capacity limits, and the usual potential
analysis that we do and square it in any measurable way with what we
sense from anecdotal reports. I am not saying that one cannot go out
and find pressures on entry-level and skilled wages, because we are
getting wage increases of 3 percent. If we were not getting any of
those pieces of anecdotal evidence, the number would be zero. There
are wage increases going on and what we are not sure about is the
outlook for unit labor costs. It's not clear to what extent we are
getting the usual, conventional pressures.
I go back to the issue that I raised about a year ago, namely
that we seem to have created a level of job insecurity that has
overwhelmed the pressures to increase wages. As I made the argument
back then, the state of technology is creating a degree or sense of
job obsolescence and fear that apparently--I use the word "apparently"
because we really don't know and won't know until we look at this in
retrospect--has induced a tremendous shift away from increased wages
and toward more job security. To be sure, the extraordinarily small
number of strikes in 1995, a half-century low, is not going to be
repeated in 1996, especially if workers at General Motors go back on
strike. Even so, we are still seeing a very subdued pattern of union
labor contract settlements, granted that unions are an increasingly
smaller part of the private-sector workforce. We have not yet seen
the "smoking gun."
I think it is important for us to see some of this
evidence before we can be sure that the translation from real growth
into inflation is following the historical patterns as closely as is
implicit in the Greenbook. The Greenbook may well be right and,
indeed, to argue that it is not is potentially dangerous. We can lull
ourselves into thinking that nirvana is here: Inflation has died; it
has been buried; we don't need to worry about it; and we can go on our
merry way. That is a recipe for disaster. Nonetheless, something
different is happening that we do not fully understand, and I think
it's important for us to make certain that we not see the "smoking
gun." The trouble, unfortunately, is that in monetary policy the
"smoking gun" means "we already shot the guy" and essentially that
inflation is still running. But there is something not happening out
there. We are not getting the usual pricing pressures; we do not see
firms able to move prices up at these rates of operation and at these
unemployment rates. Something is going on that we do not yet fully
understand.
How one translates that into policy requires us to recognize
an important factor, which Ed Boehne mentioned--namely that, unlike
1993 when our policy was very consciously stimulative to try to undo
the credit crunch, real funds rates are not all that low at this
stage. It is not easy to determine what price expectation variables
we should apply to overnight rates, but of the 75 basis point decline
in the nominal funds rate that we have engineered, I suspect that less
than half of it represents a decline in the real funds rate. Indeed,
depending on which measures we use, it can be significantly less than
that. It is true, as Don mentioned, that the real funds rate is in
the lower part of the range for the period 1979 to date, but we
obviously are well above the average rate over a much longer period of

5/21/96

-31-

time. Were that not the case, I think we would probably have to make
some very key decisions very soon and do so before we have the
evidence on how this watershed issue is turning out. I must say that
I agree with Ed Boehne that the existing rate structure is reasonably
high--probably somewhere near average, maybe slightly restrictive,
maybe slightly easy; I don't think anyone really knows. We can afford
to wait and indeed we should wait for a short while. We probably will
have to make a judgment by July. It is conceivable that if the
inventory accumulation moves faster than the Greenbook presupposes, we
would have to move sooner. But my general view at this stage, and I
raise it as a recommendation, is alternative "B," that is, to do
nothing at this stage. I would prefer a symmetric directive, but that
is a debatable issue and one can have differing views on this. Vice
Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I would like to
concentrate on the part of your presentation relating to what we don't
know. It is clear that we don't fully understand what appear to be
some new relationships in the economy affecting the connection between
the real economy and the inflation rate. And because I think that the
present stance of monetary policy is close to being correct, if not
absolutely so, I feel that we have the luxury of waiting until our
next meeting in early July and I believe we should wait. However, we
should be careful not to assume--and your remarks did not assume,
indeed quite to the contrary--that today's decision to wait until the
next meeting has any implication that we will reach the same
conclusion at that meeting. The next meeting will be a new ballgame.
In my view, all we are discussing is whether to do something today or
wait until the July meeting to consider what we should do. I very
much believe that we should wait.
As regards symmetry and asymmetry, if the incoming data
suggest that it would be appropriate for us to move before the next
meeting, those data will be sufficiently dramatic that I am sure you
would wish to have a conference call. But I don't see the need for an
asymmetric directive because I think the probability that you would be
highly likely or even fairly likely to take action between now and the
next meeting is quite low. If we were to adopt an asymmetric
directive at this meeting, then not move to implement it over the next
6 or 7 weeks and decide for good and sufficient reasons at the July
meeting that a change in policy was not appropriate, I think that the
minutes of this meeting to be released on the Friday following the
July meeting would give a very strange and difficult to interpret
message. I do not believe such a message would be in our best
interest. So, I very much believe that we should take alternative
"B," and I feel perhaps considerably more strongly than you do, Mr.
Chairman, that symmetry is appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I was not very successful when I
talked about this insurance policy concept before, but I am going to
venture into that territory one more time and then probably leave it
at that. In my view, we in effect took out an insurance policy in
January. In retrospect we did not need it, and I think now is the
time to cancel and avoid the premium. In my view, inflation and
inflation expectations have increased. I think the stance of policy
is neutral at best and, more likely, somewhat stimulative.

-32-

5/21/96

Accordingly, with such a policy stance, I think it is unlikely that we
can contain inflation at the level where it has been over the last
several years. In other words, we are likely to lose ground. We
certainly are very unlikely to make any progress toward price
stability. The risk of waiting is that the premium on this insurance
policy is not a fixed premium. It will go up. If it turns out that
monetary policy is perceived by markets to be out of position in the
face of what is happening in the economy and particularly with respect
to inflation, it is going to cost a lot more to reverse it later
rather than sooner.
My preference would be somewhere between "B" and "C."
I
would increase the funds rate by 25 basis points and probably
accompany that with an increase in the discount rate, although that is
a separate matter, obviously.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, as it turns out I want to talk
about insurance policies as well. I believe that it would be wise to
tighten policy at this time. We cut the rate in January because an
apparent moderation in growth was reducing inflationary pressures and
because we wanted insurance against the risk that the economy might
weaken further. Since then, the growth picture of the economy has
brightened considerably. Growth in the first half of the year now
appears to be exceeding the trend rate. Since the need to guard
against a slow economy has evaporated, it makes sense to undo the
January reduction in the funds rate. Indeed, it seems to me that the
risk we now need to insure against is an increase in inflation. This
view is supported by the forecasts of both our staff at the San
Francisco Fed and the Greenbook. At a minimum, it is safe to say that
there is little reason to expect inflation to show a downward
trajectory at current levels of interest rates.
In my view, these two considerations support a 50 basis point
increase in the funds rate. However, given that an increase in the
rate would represent a change in the direction of policy and would be
a big surprise to the market, it would seem prudent to me to go for a
25 basis point increase at this meeting. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. I agree strongly with Tom Melzer and Bob Parry
and I am sure that will not surprise anybody. I guess my views on
policy at this stage are predicated on a couple of things, Mr.
Chairman. First, the long-term goal is price stability. The staff is
now projecting an increase in the inflation rate next year. I think
it is a credible forecast and it means that inflation is moving in the
wrong direction. Second, I know there are risks on both sides of this
forecast; there always are. But it seems to me that what we heard
around the table this morning suggests that the risk definitely has
shifted, in my view at least, to the up side given the strength in
demand, price shocks in the energy and food sectors, and a possible
increase in the minimum wage.
Despite the apparent divergence in our views about interest
rates earlier in the meeting, I think we would agree, and I think most
observers would agree, that the markets are not expecting a very

-33-

5/21/96

pronounced tightening of monetary policy, at least in the near-term
I find that a little
future--over the next two or three months.
intriguing because, given all that is going on and the clear change in
the tone of the economy, one might expect market participants to
anticipate somewhat more aggressive policy moves. There may be
several reasons for this. One explanation might be that market
participants are expecting us to be somewhat more hesitant in this
period of the political cycle. Partly because of this, and given the
underlying inflation risks and the upside risks in the outlook for
economic growth that I and others mentioned earlier, I think we should
raise the funds rate today. I would prefer or recommend a 1/4 point
increase. Even though it is a change in the direction of policy, it
seems unlikely to me that an increase that modest would do any
significant damage to real economic activity, although there would be
some real cost. I think the increased credibility flowing from such
an action would hold down inflationary expectations and maybe reduce
the amount of the increase we would have to engineer later in the
cycle to contain inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer that we tighten
now. I think we have consistently underestimated the strength of the
economy over the last several months and earlier, going back to last
fall. We are looking for the economy to continue to be strong. We
are no longer talking about capping inflation. We are talking about
seeing it creep up, or move up, and that is the wrong direction
because we want positive economic growth over the longer term. In my
view, we may be compromising the sustainability of the expansion if we
allow inflation to get much higher than what we are now projecting.
At a minimum, we should have an asymmetric directive toward tightness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I am going to continue the revolt of the
As I indicated before, I think we clearly have
nonvoters!
[Laughter]
moved from a period of balanced risks to risks on the up side. The
risks of increasing rates of inflation seem significant both from
supply shocks and from demand factors.
It may be that rising longterm interest rates will act to damp activity sufficiently, but the
ebullience of the stock market and the continuing strength of such
indicators as housing and consumer spending suggest that credit and
funding are both available and not overly costly.
In my view, the
issue now is how forward-looking monetary policy should be.
I have
argued, and I continue to believe, that the costs of being wrong on
the up side and letting inflation get out of hand are greater than
being wrong on the down side. We need to act before we see the
"whites of the eyes" of inflation, as you have argued, Mr. Chairman.
I am also worried now that moving later in the year might be more
difficult for a number of reasons, and that moving later than that
might require a more significant move than we would otherwise need.
So, for me the questions are how much to do and when to do it.
In
that regard, I want to piggyback on the insurance argument. We did 25
basis points in January. We thought things were quite slow at that
point. Hindsight now shows that they were not as slow as we thought.
I would reverse the insurance policy. I would move the funds rate up
25 basis points, and I would do it now. At a minimum, I agree with
President Hoenig that the directive should be asymmetric.

-34-

5/21/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. As I think about the economy and how it is likely
to perform from here, my suspicion is that housing still has some
momentum that will carry it beyond the next quarter or two. That
would also be my judgment about capital spending. As far as the
consumer is concerned, I do not doubt the significance of the wealth
effect, but we have had sustained gains in employment as well. So, I
don't think that what is going on in that sector is entirely a wealth
effect. That leads me not to be terribly concerned about the outlook
for the real economy. It looks satisfactory, or maybe even better
than satisfactory, to me going forward. Is this going to translate
into the kind of inflation performance that is forecast in the
Greenbook or something even worse? You have pointed out, Mr.
Chairman, that we do not fully understand what is going on there,
whether it is job insecurity or other things. I agree with that. I
think it may only be with the benefit of some considerable hindsight
that we will understand that fully.
From another perspective, if I look at real interest rates
and the real federal funds rate and ask myself whether monetary policy
is too stimulative or too restrictive or too whatever right now, my
judgment is that it is not very far from where it ought to be. I do
not have a strong conviction as to which direction it may be off.
When I couple that consideration with what I believe about the real
economy and what I think I know and do not know about inflation, that
tells me that anything we do ought to be quite cautious. I just do
not have the sense that I know enough with enough confidence right now
to come out strongly on one side or the other. So, for this meeting I
am prepared to stand pat. But I must say that I am getting
increasingly concerned about the inflation situation. While we can
always explain it away with special factors--grain prices or energy
prices or whatever--it is always true that if we take out the most
rapidly rising components we get something that we like better. I
think we have to be very careful about pursuing that very far.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

Symmetric or asymmetric?

I prefer symmetry on philosophical grounds.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I think that if people outside this room who pay
close attention to these matters saw the Greenbook inflation forecast
for this year and next year and heard some of the comments and
concerns that people around this table have expressed about the
inflation outlook, we would be sending a very bad message by not
taking action today. So, fortunately, outsiders don't see or hear
those things.
[Laughter]
If the minutes of this meeting, which will
come out right after the next meeting, and comments that people make
in the meantime convey the idea that we see a worsening of inflation
and are not doing anything, I think that would provide a bad message.
If that is what happens, then I am going to regret that we did not
take action. If I believed the Greenbook inflation forecast, I would
have to say that we should tighten monetary policy. I would not want
my views in that case to be taken as acceptance of the kind of
inflation prospects that we are being presented with. I think that
outlook is totally unacceptable. I didn't view the reduction in the

5/21/96

-35-

federal funds rate on January 31 as an insurance policy against the
downside risks in the real economy. The way I thought about it was
that, on the basis of the information we were getting, the equilibrium
real funds rate appeared to have moved down from what I felt was an
appropriate level, and to avoid a de facto tightening of policy, the
nominal funds rate needed to come down from the 5-1/2 percent level
where it had been since November 1995. I think Don Kohn is correct in
his assessment that more recent developments have reversed that
decline in the real funds rate, and had I anticipated those
developments, I would not have supported the 1/4 point reduction on
January 31. But I also am not persuaded that this strength in the
economy is likely to be enduring enough that we need to move the funds
rate back up to where it was before January 31. So, I support a nochange, symmetric directive, though with considerable concern about
how it will be interpreted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Several issues have been talked about around the
table, and in the end people have to make their own judgments. With
regard to the issue about the economy and the structure of the
economy, most of the models, which I think the Greenbook reflects,
clearly indicate that we should have had accelerating inflation over
the last couple of years and are likely to have accelerating inflation
going forward. But the actual experience in the last couple of years
has not been particularly consistent with forecasts based on those
models. So, our dilemma really is one of being open-minded to the
possibility that there are some structural changes going on versus
getting caught up in wishful thinking because tightening policy is
always more difficult than easing. It is easy to fall into the trap
of finding excuses for not tightening, but my sense is that there is
enough evidence over the last year or so to cause us to be more openminded about the prospect that the economy may indeed be less prone to
inflation. I think there is something to that hypothesis, but we have
to be very careful about getting carried away with it.
On the stance of policy, if the federal funds rate were a
couple of percentage points lower or even a percentage point lower, I
would be more persuaded that now is the time to act. But I don't know
whether current policy is a little restrictive or a little
stimulative. My sense is that it is probably broadly neutral and
therefore that we are fairly close to wherever we need to go. Based
on those reasons, not out of any overwhelming conviction that I am
right but after trying to weigh the evidence and making judgments that
are a matter of both logic and intuition, I come down on the side of
no change at this meeting, alternative B.
On the issue of symmetry or no symmetry, I could support
either. I don't have strong feelings. On balance, I prefer symmetry
mainly because I can't imagine that you, Mr. Chairman, would make a
decision to move toward tightening in this particular environment
without a consultation with the Committee. Therefore, I think the
operational value of asymmetry in these circumstances is essentially
worthless. Looking ahead, since we do have a lag on releasing the
minutes, I think asymmetry could convey the wrong impression of where
we are when the minutes are made public six weeks from now. I would
prefer to keep our policy options very open, debate policy again in
July, and make a judgment then without having the added issue of an

-36-

5/21/96

asymmetrical directive at this meeting exert any influence on that
decision. So, I come out with "B," symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would like to concur with what several
of you said regarding a telephone consultation. If events in the
intermeeting period differ significantly from what we now expect, then
certainly we ought to be talking on the telephone to see what, if
anything, we want to do then. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as I said a little earlier, I
think we are approaching but are not quite yet at a watershed, and as
a consequence I don't have a view at this point concerning what way
the water is going to flow when it flows. Clearly, there has been a
shifting of the risks to the up side. On the other hand, it is a
clearly plausible prospect that we will get a distinct slowing in the
expansion rather soon. If we do get that slowing, it seems to me that
the history of the past two or three years has to give us some pause
about just how "baked in the cake" an inflationary rise may be. It
could well turn out that if we get a distinct slowing, we will
continue to see a pattern of stable inflation. At any rate, it
doesn't seem to me that time is of the essence at this point. I think
"watchful waiting" makes good sense. I prefer symmetry for precisely
the reasons that Ed Boehne just stated, and I won't repeat them. But
I must say that, for all of this, I am sitting very lightly in the
chair about this business, and I would not object to asymmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Long-term rates are up substantially and the
dollar is up a little, so we already have had some tightening in a
sense. Don and, I believe, Al Broaddus said that a tightening of the
fed funds target right now is unlikely to affect long-term rates the
way such a tightening did in early 1994. I agree with that, but we
didn't expect the impact in 1994 either. Also, there is a big
difference between the present 5-1/4 percent funds rate target and the
3 percent target that existed then. Our policy stance is not so
clearly easy now in my opinion. Also, it would bother me somewhat to
base a tightening move on output and employment growth developments.
Inflation is up overall, but its rise has been mainly in measures that
include energy and not in core inflation. I think inflation is what
we ought to be looking at more than the real sector. I agree with
your proposal for no change with a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
"B," symmetric. My preferred policy as this stage is cautious
inaction. I guess that's called "watchful waiting." As I indicated
in my earlier comments, the current level of long-bond rates and the
stronger dollar seem sufficient to me at this stage to contain the
evident upside risk to spending. This level of long rates does seem
consistent in my view with the maintenance of the funds rate at its
present level, at least for the time being. The market certainly
perceives some chance that the funds rate will need to rise this
summer and next fall, and so do I because I think the risks have
shifted. But the market is not demanding or even expecting such a
move today. Market participants would be surprised, and I think it
could provoke an excessive adjustment in long-term yields.

5/21/96

-37-

I certainly understand the reasons for wanting to move in
advance of an increase in inflation. I agree with that reasoning, and
I definitely do not object to the reasoning that is incorporated in
the Greenbook about the inflationary process. But I share some of the
doubts that the Chairman has expressed so well, and also Presidents
Boehne and Stern. We do not understand fully what is going on in the
labor market as evidenced by the errors in our earlier inflation
forecasts, and I would like to wait and get a little more information.
If the current Greenbook forecast is accurate, we will soon see clear
evidence of an increase in compensation growth and an uptick in core
inflation. When we see that, I think we definitely will need to
respond. The staff's financial indicators package now routinely
depicts the recommendations of Taylor's rule. This is a rule of thumb
that I regularly consult as a very rough guide to reasonable policy.
I don't mean to say that I think one should follow this rule
religiously, but according to that rule--and a number of you have made
this point--policy is roughly appropriately positioned at this time.
It seems appropriate given current inflation and resource utilization.
But the chart also indicates that it will be appropriate to tighten if
the Greenbook forecast materializes, and I accept that conclusion.
With respect to the symmetry issue, I prefer symmetry for the
reasons that have been explained by Vice Chairman McDonough and
President Boehne.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
risks
rates
if we
think

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. "B," symmetric. Although I believe that the
have moved toward higher inflation, I do think that long-term
are exerting some restraint. I would go with symmetry because
were to make a change, it would be a change in direction, and I
a phone call would be appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I listened very
carefully to your argument regarding the downward pressure that is now
being put on prices. The model that crept into my head was what I
will call the secular versus the cyclical factors. There are some
secular changes occurring in the economy such as a decline in
unionization and the spread of different kinds of retailing. These
changes have put downward pressure on the capacity of the economy to
increase prices. I have to believe that the secular trend is probably
not a permanent one, and the question that we are facing is when it
will come to an end. I agree with the Greenbook and with the majority
of the people at the table that cyclical pressures are pointing toward
more inflation. The question is whether the secular trend will keep
the cyclical pressures from adding to inflation.
I have just one data point, not enough to base a decision on,
and that is some information
where I shop a lot!
Actually, this information does not come from my shopping experience,
but from the company itself. Over the last two years or so, they have
been cutting prices on the average of 2 to 3 percent a year. That is
partly an effort to gain market share and partly, I believe, the
result of new developments in retailing. That policy has now changed.
They have stopped cutting prices and are now starting to increase
them, albeit very modestly. While this is only one data point, it

-38-

5/21/96

does suggest to me that the secular factors are probably coming to an
end. We have benefited from them for a long time.
The second issue is about events. I can't imagine any
forthcoming economic event that is going to change anybody's point of
view. What future statistic is going to cause us to move? There
isn't one. So, I am not expecting the need for a telephone
conference, and I don't think anyone else does either because there
just is no number that would change something fundamental in this
period. The reason is that we are not in an emergency kind of
situation. When we tightened policy in 1994, I defended the move even
though the natural rate was below the unemployment rate. The reason
was that if we had waited for inflation to get embedded into wage
rates, it would already have been too late and we would have needed a
recession at that point to get the inflation out of wage rates. So, I
don't think we should be driven by events. If we actually are looking
for a reason in the ECI or in wage rates, it will be too late when we
see it. It is my hunch that nobody here knows anyone who is expecting
to cut some salary. The betting has to be that the salary is going to
go up.
Having said all that, I have one hunch and one
observation, and that is not enough for me to support an increase in
rates today. But given that we are not driven by events, I am not
sure that that is the basis on which we should decide symmetry versus
asymmetry. As I listened to the comments around the table, I detected
a strong undercurrent of unease. So, I am in concert with Jerry
Jordan's observation that perhaps symmetric is not the way to go. We
should take note of what is happening, and even though I favor
symmetry procedurally, I would prefer "B," asymmetric at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. It's a very close call, Mr. Chairman. I was in
the group that did not favor a reduction in January, but I don't
necessarily conclude that that means we should reverse that move
today. I think the risks are clearly on the up side for output
relative to potential. We all have expressed concerns about the
inflation outlook. That outlook boils down in my judgment to two
things: One is food prices and the other is wages and unit labor
costs. On the food-price side, I think the outlook is uncertain. It
is not clear how much of the increases in grain prices will be moving
forward into food prices. I thought the analysis in the Greenbook was
particularly helpful in showing that if food prices do increase, they
will seep into the overall price level. As I think back, my
experience in the 1970s is that increases in food prices tend to have
a much greater impact on the overall price level than people expect.
It just seemed then that everything started to go wrong and kept going
wrong. If food prices do increase, I suspect that we will relive that
experience and have more of a problem than people expect. That
conclusion is not based on any econometric model; it's just based on
my personal instincts. In fact, our econometric model at the Chicago
Bank is slightly more optimistic than the Greenbook on the inflation
outlook.
I think developments on the wage and unit labor cost side
will be extremely important for policy. It would be helpful to have
more information there, but I am not sure we ever have enough

-39-

5/21/96

information. Something obviously different is going on. I think
there are some faint indications that wages may be rising more
rapidly, but as you said, Mr. Chairman, we clearly do not have enough
evidence to reach a firm conclusion.
On balance, I come down in favor
of no change, but I would prefer an asymmetrical directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
alternative B, and for the reasons that Ed Boehne articulated I, too,
would prefer a symmetrical directive. Being last or near last to
speak, I won't repeat all the arguments that already have been made.
One of the things that got a good bit of discussion in the earlier
go-around was the run-up in oil and grain prices, their impact on the
CPI, and how much weight to give to that. On that point, I have had
to remind myself over the last couple of months about an important
feature of the CPI--namely that, as a fixed weight index, it tends to
overstate inflation when we get the kind of relative price changes
that we have seen recently. Since a fixed weight index does not
capture short-run substitution effects--and someone talked about that
briefly during the earlier go-around--such an index does tend to show
prices going up quickly. We know that what really happens is that
some substitution effect will hold down the increase, although
sometimes with a lag. On that point, I would therefore give somewhat
less weight than do some others to the run-up in both oil and gas
prices.
In preparation for this meeting we talked some about what we
can learn from the yield curve, a subject that also came up this
morning. There are a lot of interesting questions there, but I still
am not persuaded that the steepening in the yield curve that we have
seen recently provides sufficient evidence that an unchanged funds
rate constitutes an accommodative shift in our policy. In sum, I
would prefer to stand pat, observe developments very carefully over
the period ahead, and be ready to move at our next meeting or before
if we begin to see some of the inflationary pressures that people
around the table have noted could happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. You were the last speaker.
The consensus of voting members is clearly "B," symmetric, and our
secretary will read the appropriate directive.
MR. BERNARD. The draft wording for the operational paragraph
is on page 13 of the Bluebook: "In the implementation of policy for
the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan

Yes

5/21/96

-40-

Vice Chairman McDonough
President Boehne
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Phillips
President Stern
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will now return to Don Kohn's query.
Do you just want to give a short summary so people can respond to it?
MR. KOHN. I was thinking about the upcoming July meeting and
recalling the Committee's discussion in February about paying a little
more attention to its long-run objectives, in particular its inflation
objectives. Taking into account speeches such as the one that Vice
Chairman McDonough made on this subject, it struck me that it might be
useful for the Committee members to discuss where they expected to be
in 2-1/2 or 3 years in terms of those objectives. That would be in
addition to the usual discussion leading to the selection of monetary
aggregate ranges that the Committee is still required to establish
under the law. The discussion might surface some of the pros and cons
of this longer-run look at policy. So my proposal, Mr. Chairman, was
that Committee members, in addition to the usual 1996-1997 forecasts
that they would turn in for inclusion in the Humphrey-Hawkins report
and that you would discuss in your testimony, also submit 1998
forecasts of real growth and inflation. The purpose would not be to
publish those additional forecasts, but rather to help structure the
Committee's discussion. The other point I tried to make is that, if
the Committee members decided to go ahead with this, it would seem to
me that the 1998 forecasts would incorporate what the individual
members thought ought to occur. They would be more in the nature of
goals necessarily than forecasts and would be based on the monetary
policy that the members as individuals would pursue if they did not
have to take account of their colleagues around the table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I just amend that slightly?
you also would want the 1997 forecast on the same basis.

I think

MR. KOHN. Well, the members have to submit 1996 and 1997
forecasts in July 1996.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I am trying to get at is that I
don't think we want a 1998 number unless it reflects a desired outcome
achieved through an appropriate policy. If you have a 1998 number
that is the result of your individual policy, it also would be useful
to have a forecast of 1996, 1997, 1998 on the same basis. That would
highlight the difference between the way we normally have been doing
these projections and what your policy would produce.
MR. KOHN. That has always been an
that I think has produced some confusion in
Committee has discussed an extension of its
asked for your 1996 and 1997 forecasts, you
assumptions about monetary policy.

ambiguous issue and one
the past when the
projections. When you are
are asked to make your own

5/21/96

-41-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They are assumptions of what the members
think monetary policy will be, not what they would like it to be.
MR. KOHN. No, we have asked the members to base their
projections on what they think an optimal policy should be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you differentiate between the
current projection and the new one?
MR. KOHN. When you are projecting 1996 and 1997, obviously
much of what is going to happen, even if you were to run your optimal
monetary policy, has already been "baked in the cake," given the
ongoing trends in the economy. It seems to me that by the time you
get to 1998, you have had enough time to adjust your individual
monetary policies to look at 1998 as a goal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's clear enough.

MR. PRELL. I find the distinction a little awkward myself,
having dealt with these numbers. What I have always found strange was
that no one changed the numbers after the discussion at the meeting,
which may have given people a clearer impression of what the Committee
was up to. But the numbers stood as they were, presumably as numbers
that were based on your optimal policy prescription. To divorce that
from what is possible in your minds would seem pretty strained to me.
So, I take this as a matter of emphasis to remind you that, especially
for forecasts that extend further out in time, you should be thinking
about what you want to achieve and not just producing some forecast
based on current conditions, which is what some people have done.
MR. PARRY. But how are the numbers characterized in the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony? My recollection is that they are
characterized as what the FOMC expects to happen.
MR. KOHN.

Pretty much.

MR. PRELL. We indicate that they are consistent with the
monetary ranges that the Committee selected and so on. So, they
presumably are based on some policy plan. That is what the HumphreyHawkins Act calls for.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Don, when you use the word "forecast," you
immediately put me off because it is inconsistent with saying "goals
and objectives." In principle, of course, I think we ought to provide
numbers to indicate what we are trying to achieve in 1998 and beyond
in order to maintain the purchasing power of the dollar. It is simply
inconsistent to have the Congressional Budget Office or the
Administration publish inflation assumptions through the year 2002 on
which to base a budget without any information as to whether or not
those assumptions are acceptable to us in terms of the way we gear our
policies. If the numbers that go into that process do not come from
us, they should at least be influenced by us. I would like to put out
numbers on inflation goals that we intend to achieve. However, as we
have seen in these discussions before, if the number is to be 3
percent inflation for 1998, I don't want to publish it. I have a real
problem with agreeing to publish a number if it is one that is going

-42-

5/21/96

to reflect somebody's best guess as to what the dynamics of this
Committee and interactions from some models will produce rather than a
clear and attainable goal for reducing inflation.
My second problem, though not a new one, is the framework.
If we supply a number for inflation, my own number would be 2 percent
for 1998, and then the staff puts together a matrix that indicates how
many people would have to be thrown out of work and how much output
would have to be sacrificed to get to 2 percent inflation in that
year, I am not going to want to publish that either. Perhaps the
staff could at least humor those of us with analytical frameworks that
differ from the gap or the NAIRU approach by including a
reasonableness check. It would say that to achieve a goal for
inflation--I will use 2 percent in 1998 as an illustration--one would
need a specified growth in productivity over the interval to 1998.
The staff also would indicate what counterpart reduction in the
natural rate of unemployment would occur and provide some idea of the
rate of sustained economic growth that would be consistent with
reaching the inflation goal without reference to the notion of a
Phillips curve tradeoff or sacrifice of output. Then, I and perhaps
others could look at that analysis and decide whether it was a
reasonable approximation of what was going on in the economy in terms
of faster growth in productivity, the result of all of the investments
taking place, and faster growth in capacity than allowed for in the
staff model. I could decide whether I was willing to base policy on
it. At least I would have a range in which to work.
MR. PRELL. President Jordan, I figured that that was what
your GDP forecast would embody. Are you asking the staff to take each
of the members' forecasts and rationalize them in terms of
productivity?
MR. JORDAN.

Not each one.

MR. PRELL. Each of you would have a different model and
different relationships.
MR. JORDAN. No, but you could do it in terms of a range. We
are not talking about a GDP forecast. The question is how much would
productivity and capacity have to increase over and above what you
have in your assumption to be consistent with moving toward 2 percent
inflation--whatever unemployment rate falls out of that, perhaps a
NAIRU of 4-1/2 percent or whatever, I don't know what the number is
going to be--without sacrificing output and without creating a gap. I
know your framework says that given where we are, an objective of 2
percent inflation requires us to raise the unemployment rate above the
NAIRU and to reduce output below potential to create a gap. I don't
want to do that.
MR. KOHN. Two points, President Jordan. First, I think I
tried to emphasize in my earlier comments that your 1998 forecasts or
goals would not be published for at least five years, unless you
decided otherwise. Secondly, I think it might be useful if you chose
to submit written notes to explain how you arrived at a particular
configuration of GDP and inflation. The staff would then be more than
happy to try to present a fuller explanation of where the goals came
from.

-43-

5/21/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the storm is really moving in.
Maybe it would be wise for us to continue this meeting after lunch.
We will still be in the meeting until we finish this agenda item. Let
us take a temporary break so that everyone can get lunch. Then, when
everyone is back, we will continue our discussion.
[Lunch break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I was amused when Don brought
this topic up because I was going to suggest something like this, as I
and others have done in the past. It is a good suggestion in that it
represents a starting point for a dialogue about an issue that we need
to talk about as a Committee. I would view it just as a starting
point. Ultimately, I think we ought to aim for a longer-run goal with
respect to inflation, maybe five years out or something like that, and
we ought to communicate that goal to the public. I would not expect
us to get to that point in this first discussion, but I regard it as
very constructive to begin the discussion. Jerry Jordan touched on
the reasons why it is so important. In my opinion, one of the most
significant aspects is that, in circumstances like the present, we
have inflation expectations that are quite volatile. It seems to me
that if people were interpreting incoming data against the backdrop of
a central bank that had established some longer-term goal for bringing
inflation under control, inflation expectations might be less
sensitive to the incoming data. If ultimately we got to the point of
communicating a reasonable goal with respect to inflation over the
long term--I don't mean necessarily as a result of the discussion we
might have at the July meeting--I think that would increase our
credibility, assuming we acted in the appropriate fashion to deliver
on that goal. In my view we are to some extent paying the price right
now for not having such a goal. The opportunistic approach we are
taking in the fight against inflation to achieve our ultimate
objective of price stability is having an adverse effect on our
credibility. That is reflected in expectations of higher inflation
and interest rates. People are not certain where we are headed, and
they are worried right now that the next change could be more
inflation, not less. In any event, I applaud Don for putting the idea
on the table. I would support his proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I share Don's
ultimate goal, but I do not think that his recommendation is a helpful
way to get there. I believe that the appropriate goal of monetary
policy is price stability and price stability only. I further believe
that at some stage we have to define price stability and that the best
way for people to understand it would be for us to connect it with a
number. In order to have any notion that that number is something
other than what we think we are likely to achieve, given what is going
on in the economy at the moment, we have to push it out at least three
years. And therefore our number for the second year out is an uneasy
compromise between what we think is really going to happen in relation
to today and what we are seeking to achieve. So, two years is too
short a period to be useful in achieving an objective, and therefore I
think it would be counterproductive to establish such an objective. I
would much prefer that we have an unfettered debate in July. I am

-44-

5/21/96

very much in favor of a debate on the issue of where we think we ought
to be going, but I would not complicate that debate with a big row
over who has 1998 right or wrong. I think that would obfuscate the
real issue, which is whether we should agree on price stability as the
goal and how we should define price stability. So, I am in agreement
with where I think you want to go eventually, Don, but I think your
specific recommendation is counterproductive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are you suggesting 1996 and 1997 and

2000?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. No, I would say that, if we wanted
to do this and we had had the debate beforehand, we would say the rest
of 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I am trying to say is that if you
are looking for an extended period what you want to do is to eliminate
part of the projection.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
wanted to do it that way.

Yes, correct.

So it could be 1996, 1997, 1999 if you

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

That's right, exactly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know how you get from your last
forecast to your ultimate goal, but it's left a blank because that is
where the most difficult transition questions are, and at this point
it would obscure the ultimate goal to fill in that blank.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. You made what I was thinking
infinitely more clear. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I did?

[Laughter]

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I will repeat a little of what
Bill just said. We have a goal for inflation and maybe we should
define more clearly what we mean by price stability in the long term.
Our discussion so far today has shown the difficulty of putting that
in 1998 terms. We would spend a lot of time discussing whether we
have a forecast or goal and not a lot of time on whether it is
consistent with price stability. We would be right back where we are
anyway. So, if we go with the proposal, I think it will create more
confusion over time than it will provide clarity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I think I am an opportunist. I am proud of
being an opportunist, but the thing I don't know is when the
opportunity is going to present itself. We are not going to induce a
recession, but we know the business cycle is going to produce one.
When it does, then inflation will come down. I don't know if that
will occur one or two business cycles from now. Perhaps the year 2000
is a good year for a goal; perhaps "ultimate" is another desirable
goal; but I would not use 1998.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

-45-

5/21/96

MS. YELLEN. I agree with Governor Lindsey. I think this is
a discussion that we definitely need to have to clarify what we mean
by price stability and what strategy we have in mind to get there.
I
am also concerned, especially given my interest in an opportunistic
strategy, that it would be awfully hard to fill in the boxes relating
to what I would expect in 1998.
If we extended the horizon out a
little longer to, say, the year 2000, I would find it easier to fill
in the boxes and participate in our discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to associate myself
with Governor Lindsey and Governor Yellen as an opportunist. I think
there are a couple of other problems with this exercise. When we are
looking ahead in terms of an expected result, that is a forecast. We
come out with a point estimate forecast for that period in time. I
think setting a goal is a different exercise. For one thing, people
set goals differently. One of the pleasures of my job is that I get
to discuss goals with all 12 Reserve Banks. They all have a different
definition of how to set goals, and I don't know why that should not
be true here. Some people believe in setting a goal that involves a
lot of stretch, making it literally unachievable, so the issue is how
close they can come to it. Others like to set goals that can be
achieved with just a reasonable degree of effort. Both of those
approaches are valid as long as people know which one is which, which
one to follow. If we tried to establish a goal as a Committee of 19
people, I am not sure how we would do it.
Secondly, my working vision of how this opportunistic
approach works is to get ourselves, as we have, into a downward
sloping channel. We expect to have a little fluctuation inside that
channel with regard to the performance of various indicators, but
inflation would be pointed downward toward price level stability. How
we articulate exactly what inflation will be as a point estimate at a
future point in time using an opportunistic strategy is a little
difficult for me to conceive. So, exactly how one sets a goal in a
quantitative sense if one is basically of an opportunistic inclination
is a little difficult for me to see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. I agree that we have to clarify the difference
between a forecast and a goal, and for that reason I agree with
Governor Yellen that the further out we go in time, probably the
better because I think it will be clearer that we are talking about a
goal.
But Mike Kelley also made the point, which obviously is a very
important one, that people set goals in different ways. That is one
of the things that would come out in a discussion about what
assumptions people made when they set the goal, whether it really
involved a stretch or whether it was something that they felt was
achievable.
I realize this could be a difficult exercise. We have
19 different people coming at it, but I believe we may learn something
in the process.
I think a discussion would be useful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. This is an idea that we ought to pursue. I don't
know if Don's suggestion is optimal, but we have to start somewhere.

-46-

5/21/96

I also think that we need to start with at least some structure. In
this case I don't think it's critical whether we use a 1998-type goal
or push the goal out a little in time. We have to start with some
structure and some process because many of the questions that have
been raised around the table have suggested, at least to me, that
there are a lot of very difficult issues involved here. While we
might agree that we are all in favor of price stability, we need to
get beyond that general notion and decide what price stability means
and, practically speaking, how we should go about implementing it,
over what timeframe, and so forth. Those are difficult questions.
They will get even more difficult as we really start to contemplate
them, and it seems to me that we ought to get our feet wet somehow.
What Don is proposing strikes me as a reasonable way to get started.
We will see what kind of issues surface; we will see what we learn
from this; and we may see how we can address issues like an
opportunistic versus deliberate approach to disinflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I don't have any disagreement with what Don is
recommending, and I think it can be done in terms of what one sets as
a policy objective for a year like 1998. We use policy rules at the
San Francisco Bank. We have some idea about what we think price
stability means, and I think we would be able to do what Don is
proposing quite easily. In a way it does put the cart before the
horse because the real discussion is about what we as a Committee mean
by price stability and over what timeframe we should seek to achieve
it. Since we haven't been able to talk about that for 10 or 11 years,
[Laughter] if Don's proposal gets us closer to it, I am all for it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
discussion?

Would anyone else like to add to this

MR. BROADDUS. I agree with Gary Stern. I think this is a
nice initiative. In my view, it's very important to start somewhere,
and I am very glad that Don has suggested this and put it on the
table. I also agree with some of the other comments, though, in the
sense that I think focusing in a fairly unstructured way on 1998 is
not the way to go. I believe we need to have a longer-term horizon.
I would also suggest, Don, that the staff needs to put some structure
on this kind of policy discussion just as you do on our long-term
policy deliberations. The form that it usually takes is some set of
alternatives. You do that with simulations to a degree already, but I
am thinking about something that would be more structured in terms of
a goal. That might beg some questions about what price stability is,
but that's okay because we need to confront those one way or another
in any case. If I may be a little more specific, it might be useful,
say, with a horizon that runs out to the year 2000, to flesh out how
you might interpret an opportunistic strategy under certain kinds of
assumptions and what that might mean in terms of some price measure
like the CPI. Perhaps as another alternative, you might add something
that is a little more like our traditional inflation targeting with
more specific numerical goals, year by year. That kind of structure
might allow us to get a little more quickly to some of the questions
with which we really need to grapple.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

5/21/96

-47-

MS. MINEHAN. There was a wonderful quote by Ed Boehne in the
research paper that we got on opportunistic strategies. It went along
these lines: Well, we are where we are; sooner or later we will have
a recession; we don't want a recession; but if we can work things in a
way that takes advantage of the inroads that we have made against
inflation and hold the line to the next cycle, then we will achieve a
pattern of every cycle having lower rates of inflation than the
previous cycle, even at the cycle peaks. To me that is the operative
definition of an opportunistic strategy, but it raises the issue of
whether or not we can sit down and say, okay, by the year 2000 I
anticipate that we will have had at least one recession and have made
the same inroads into inflation that we made in the last recession.
Therefore, my goal for the year 2000 is 2 percent inflation rather
than 3 percent. I find that level of precision difficult to deal
with. We need to have this discussion about what we mean by price
stability. Does a price stability goal mean holding the line where we
are and taking advantage of opportunities to get inflation lower, or
does it mean some forward-looking policy to drive inflation down with
all that implies about how we measure it. There are a lot of issues
having to do with what are we talking about when we discuss inflation
measures. We know there are a lot of problems with the CPI. What
number are we going to look at when we say we have achieved victory?
It's only part of the discussion, but I think we need to have it. I
don't know whether all of us giving you a specific number
incorporating a lot of different assumptions in "X" year has to be the
way we start. We need to start talking about this, though.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I agree with President Minehan. I think it
will be useful to have the discussion. I generally prefer an openended, longer horizon for a goal, but starting the discussion is what
is important. We need to have some kind of discussion about what
price stability means and what time horizon we are talking about, and
if what gets us started is thinking about 1998, that's okay with me.
My preference would be to base the discussion on a longer-term horizon
than 1998, but I think getting started is more important.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

President Parry.

I hope that we can have two discussions.

I would

set aside the question of strategy and discuss it sometime later
because I think the two different approaches to strategy raise a lot
of other issues. So, confining the discussion to our goals and
objectives and the time period for achieving them would be very
useful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think the discussion would be quite useful.
But starting it with a number doesn't strike me as the way to do it.
We ought to have a broader discussion on the issue of price stability,
what we mean by it, and how we can get there.
I think that if we have
the substantive discussion, then numbers will fall out. But if we
reverse the order, I think we will end up with a heavily philosophical

discussion.

So, I support the notion of having a discussion and

focusing on the substantive question, and I would leave the issue of
numbers for a later date.

-48-

5/21/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President McTeer.
cookies!

MR. MCTEER.
[Laughter]

Does anyone have anything to add?

I'll use my turn to compliment the chef on these

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was the definitive end-of-meeting
remark! I'll remind you that our next meeting is on July 2 and 3 and
if events require, we will meet sooner by telephone communication.
Hopefully, at some point we will have a broader telecommunications
capability, but at the moment we are limited to telephone
communications.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, we were hoping even before we had
this discussion that we would perhaps have time at the July meeting-probably at the end of the meeting--to discuss the swaps issue, which
we have kept pushing off. Hopefully, we will have a full Board by
then, but who knows. We were thinking of starting that meeting
earlier, say, at 1:00 p.m. on July 2. Perhaps we could start the
meeting with lunch. Would that be-MS. MINEHAN. All the major unresolved issues of monetary
policy in one meeting? Swaps and price stability?
p.m.?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have a problem with 1:00
[Secretary's note: No member indicated a scheduling conflict.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's now end this meeting.
END OF MEETING

