Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 2-3, 1996
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 2, 1996, at 1:00 p.m. and continued
on Wednesday, July 3, 1996, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT: Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Jordan
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Meyer
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Mr. Stern
Ms. Yellen
Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, Moskow, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig and Melzer, and Ms. Minehan,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, Sniderman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
1/ Attended portion of meeting concerning issues relating to long-run
price objective for monetary policy.

Messrs. Madigan and Slifman, Associate Directors,
Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Brayton, 2/ Ms. Johnson, 2/ Messrs. Reinhart
and Smith, 3/ Assistant Directors, Divisions of
Research and Statistics, International Finance,
Monetary Affairs, and International Finance
respectively, Board of Governors
Ms. Kusko 2/ and Mr. Wilcox, 2/ Senior Economists,
Divisions of Research and Statistics and
Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of
Governors
Ms. Garrett, Economist, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas
Mr. Beebe, Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald,
Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, and Hunter, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Atlanta, Richmond, and Chicago respectively
Messrs. Kos and Meyer, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York and Philadelphia
respectively

2/ Attended portion of the meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run growth ranges
for the monetary and debt aggregates.
3/ Attended portion of the meeting relating to the Committee's review
of its swap line agreements.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
July 2-3, 1996
July 2, 1996--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would like to welcome Governors Rivlin
and Meyer to their first exposure to this Committee. I also would
like to welcome Helen Holcomb, who is First Vice President of the
Dallas Bank, to her first meeting. I hesitate to welcome, but I have
no choice after we approve the minutes, our friend over there. Would
someone like to move the minutes?
SEVERAL.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Peter, I was
[Laughter] You are on.
referring to you a moment ago.
MR. FISHER. I will be referring to the package of charts
that was just distributed. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. These are very interesting charts. I am
a little puzzled by the implicit theoretical construction in the
charts showing the relationship between implied volatilities on
currency options and exchange rates. I would not have a problem if
you were endeavoring to evaluate a market price for stocks, bonds,
tomatoes, or whatever in which there is only a net long position. But
exchange rates are not of that nature, of course, and what appears to
be a theoretical basis for arguing that low volatility is a harbinger
of a weak dollar--or whatever you were saying!--is it a sharply rising
volatility that you were saying is a harbinger of a weaker dollar?
MR. FISHER. A change in the dollar. I tried to be careful.
If you look at those two charts, they tend to suggest a random walk in
the relationship between increased volatility and the direction the
dollar will go, but in the last few years the direction has been
toward a weaker dollar.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What I have to say has nothing to do

[Laughter] I am a little puzzled in the sense
with your statement!
that whatever the theoretical construction there is for the dollar, it
has to be exactly the opposite for the deutsche mark. I am curious as
to how you explain the fact that you are getting this type of
relationship in one currency and not the reverse in the other. Are we
looking at really random events or is there a theoretical conception
that you can impose on these data to explain why you don't get
opposite effects for the dollar versus the mark.
MR. FISHER. Well, I am not going to be able to answer that
at the theoretical level for the long sweep of history. The data show
that it is in the last couple of years that the market has had a bias
in favor of the mark; when volatility pops, it is the dollar that
weakens. The point is that it ought to be a random walk as to which
way the exchange rate goes when volatility goes up, and I think that
is probably the case in the long sweep of history. The phenomena that
I am looking at and I am concerned about are not a theoretical or
principled articulation of the relationship between options and spot
prices, but they relate to what I have observed and heard in talking
to dealers, namely, that people are writing a very large number of

7/2-3/96

options right now. So, I am offering you statistical data points in
the chart that reflect what we hear in the market about all the
options that are being written.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Theoretically, in exchange transactions
all technical factors should be neutral. To the extent they are not
neutral, then we have only net long positions in some particular
security, or claim, or something of that nature. I am really puzzled
that we can construct something like this. I don't deny the
relationship, but it is not outside the realm of a random walk.
Clearly, we get noise in any series, and I am just curious whether or
not you have come upon something that has little more than curiosity
value versus something that may explain certain fundamentals about the
market itself.
MR. FISHER. I think I have both a degree of curiosity and,
given the history of the last few years, a point of concern about the
level of options being written.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You should think about that. This is an
interesting set of relationships, but I am not sure what to make of
it. As I said, I am curious. Governor Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. I share your concern. I am a little worried
about what we may be seeing. I had thought about this a little
differently. It would seem that this autumn is going to be an
interesting period, particularly among European currencies. What is
motivating banks to write options, to bet on continuing low volatility
in the exchange market when, just reading the papers, we are told that
volatility is going to be increasing? It seems to me that there is a
lot more risk out there than usual.
MR. FISHER. The incentive that is most evident to me is that
they can't make money through normal channels.
MS. MINEHAN.

They can't make money the old-fashioned way!

MR. FISHER. They now are subject to a rather disciplined
approach to income targets that are set in terms of the level of
income they are supposed to achieve month by month. I am not saying
that is a pretty sight.
MR. LINDSEY.

So, we are back in the incentive-structure

problem?
MR. FISHER.
part of it.
MR. LINDSEY.

I think in the short run, yes, that is a big
It is not the first time.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Peter, I have a question about your domestic
operations. When I see something like a 50 percent fed funds rate, it
catches my attention. In your comments you made some reference to the
inefficiencies and anomalies in the distribution of reserves yesterday
and again today that initially led banks to think that the market for
reserves was tighter than was actually the case. What all that says

7/2-3/96

-3-

to me is that there is an inefficiency in the market due to the
quality of the information. Some of that information we have. It is
an infinite regression sort of thing. We are trying to guess at what
bankers' behavior is going to be over the maintenance period. Their
strategy is to run reserve deficiencies until the 14th day of the
period and then look to us on settlement day as the reserve supplier
of last resort. We and they guess at what the total supply of
reserves is in the market and its distribution, and on the last day of
the period they come in to borrow from the Federal Reserve. Can't we
improve on that somewhat either in the quality of the information we
give them or the way we operate to smooth out the availability of
reserves over the maintenance period?
MR. FISHER. Let me try to take the second leg of that first.
The skewing of the demand for reserves toward the end of the
maintenance period is a normal pattern but one that we have seen
become more pronounced in the past year. My initial reaction to that
was to try to force banks to smooth their demand for reserves, force
them to come to me in a smoother way over the course of the period.
That, though, has the negative feedback consequence of making the
funds rate very soft early in the period. We just can't fight it.
They want the reserves when they want them and pushing too hard to
counter that does not work. So, in the current environment I have not
found it a fruitful course to try to insist that they take reserves
when I want to give them.
With regard to the information available to the market, I
think there may be some steps we could take. I am somewhat
uncomfortable with the continued use of the customer RP, which is a
bit of an historical artifact. It used to reflect the pass-through of
the repo pool when the repo pool was only $2 or $3 billion or some
similarly small amount. Now the repo pool is $10 billion or more, and
we really do not pass it through to the market in any sense. The
customer RP also was used by my predecessors as the non-signaling
device, which likewise is no longer necessary, but it does have the
tradition of having the amount to be done publicly attached to it.
One thought I have, which I intend to propose when I come back to you
with an outline of the steps we have to go through to conduct our
operations earlier in the day, would be to ask for your guidance on my
desire to eliminate the use of the customer RP as we now employ it.
We would do only System Account RPs. Currently when we do a customer
RP, we announce that we might do, say, a total of up to $1.5 billion;
however, if we tell the market that we are doing RPs for System
Account we never announce how much we are doing.
I think a big step in the right direction would be to limit
our operations to System repos and when we finish our review of the
propositions we have received in a given operation we could then
announce to the market how much was done--whether it was $4.5 billion
or whatever the amount. Interestingly, that would not have helped us
all that much yesterday when we had a very anomalous day. There were
more reserves than we thought, and we would have led the market astray
in thinking there were fewer reserves. So, that would not have
helped. A combination of things occurred yesterday. One major bank
making payments on corporate securities delayed the payments until
very late in the day, so recipients of very routine dividends did not
think they were coming. Another bank experienced a shortage early in
the day but ended the day with much more funds than they had

-4-

7/2-3/96

anticipated. All of that money became available toward the end of the
day, and the federal funds rate fell sharply late in the day. So, our
provision of a little more information yesterday might have misled the
market. But in general I think the practice would be useful and I
intend to come back to the Committee--perhaps at the August or
September meeting--with a little more detail on how we might provide
more information to the public.
MR. JORDAN. Will what you come back with address the
fundamental issue of the current reserve settlement structure, which
as I recall was set up in the early 1980s to improve the control of
Ml? That was the motivation, which is no longer relevant, for setting
up this kind of settlement procedure.
MR. KOHN. We do have some folks looking at what you are
referring to--the notion of contemporaneous reserve accounting versus
lagged reserve accounting. There would be transition costs to going
back to lagged accounting and the issue is whether those costs would
be outweighed by the benefits of reduced reserve requirement
uncertainties. We have staff both at the Board and at the New York
Bank looking at how we could simplify things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I would like to state a hypothesis
and then ask Peter how he would evaluate it, since he is closer to the
foreign exchange market these days than I am. It seems to me that one
of the reasons that people are writing a lot of options--because that
is where profitability is available--is driven by developments in the
foreign exchange market. The major players now have such an
investment in people and systems that they have very heavy fixed
costs. For example, part of the remuneration that they had deemed to
be variable in the past, namely the bonuses, are now becoming more and
more sticky. We have major foreign banks, mainly in the New York
market, who are hiring reasonably pedestrian dealers in all kinds of
market instruments but especially foreign exchange and giving them
fixed-period contracts with assured bonuses. So, the bonus becomes a
fixed cost for two or three years. When they are in that kind of
situation, unless they are willing to absorb operating losses, they
have to scramble and look for whatever profit opportunities seem to be
available. That means that they would have a tendency to develop very
large positions, whether it is in derivatives or the cash market. So
if there is an unexpected move in the market, the likelihood of people
scrambling to cover their positions can lead to greater volatility.
Does that make sense to you, Peter?
MR. FISHER. Yes, I think it does, particularly in the
foreign exchange market. The early to mid-'90s was a period when
these firms were building up capacity. The great successes in income
terms in '92, '93 and '94 for many dealing rooms led them to build up
their capacity and their fixed costs just as you described, and I
think they are all feeling some pain now and, perhaps regrettably,
that is driving the expansion in their position-taking.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would the implied volatilities and
the historical volatilities move with respect to the magnitude of
exchange rate movements?

7/2-3/96

MR. FISHER. The exchange rate movements follow changes in
historical volatility but with a lag.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

What is the order of magnitude?

I am sorry I can't calculate that off the top of

my head.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the issues that raises is that,
if you have a structural problem in the supply and demand for options,
it would tend to reflect itself in an inefficient options market which
in turn would tend to reflect a pattern that differs from the actual
volatility in the exchange market. One way of testing this hypothesis
is to look at how these option volatilities relate to actual
historical volatility, and that would give us at least some sense as
to the structural change in the system.
MR. FISHER. Well, let me try this on you. I hope this is
helpful. I talked with one person at a firm in this market for whom I
have a great deal of respect, and he referred to the current level of
options as both too high and too low. Implied volatility was too high
because it was still considerably above the recent historical
experience.
It was too low for his taste because he didn't think he
was going to get compensated for the risks he would be taking at the
current levels.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
am learning something!

I don't know what I am learning, but I

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think the hypothesis checks out,
but we can go back and do some work on that.
MR. FISHER.

Yes, we will go back and work on that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Peter, I just wanted to ask what the source of
these options data was that you use for your calculations and charts.
MR. KOS.

A couple of investment firms gave us the data.

MR. FISHER. The back data were provided by a couple of
investment banks. We have been collecting more recent data routinely
off the screens ourselves.
MR. KOS. These are fresh 1-month and 12-month implied
volatilities on OTC options that are collected every day; the data are
not obtained from the exchanges.
MS. PHILLIPS. So, they are basically over-the-counter.
you think they are comparable going back as far as you do?
MR. FISHER.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Do

They are the best data we have been able to get.
Well, okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? Would somebody
like to move approval of Peter's domestic operations?

-6-

7/2-3/96

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
SPEAKER(?)

I move approval.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on to
the Chart Show presented by Messrs. Prell and Truman.
MESSRS. PRELL and TRUMAN. [Statements--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Going back to your analysis of world oil
markets, I notice in Chart 8 that North Sea oil production is still
increasing but at a slower pace.

Are these statistics millions of

barrels per day?
MR. TRUMAN. They are changes in production in barrels per
day. Production is expected to peak in 1997 and to turn down after
that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I gather that the Norwegian expansion
has been accelerating very recently. Is that going to peter out?
MR. TRUMAN.

Well, as you probably know better than I, every

time we have looked at North Sea production over the last 10 years, it
was going to diminish in 2 years. The people who look at this, and

they include the experts of the International Energy Agency, expect
that Norwegian production will level off at a peak level in 1997 and
then decline.

That is, of course, one of the reasons why we don't get

the same non-OPEC supply coming on stream as in recent years. That is
the logic. New discoveries and new techniques obviously could lead to
more production than we now assume, but that remains to be seen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This table implies that we will reach
oil inventory equilibrium at the end of this year. Is that going to
happen considering the extreme shortfalls that we have experienced?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, one issue has to do with the question of
Iraqi production coming on stream. In fact, we had assumed in our
forecast that the 800 thousand barrels per day from Iraq in the second
half of the year would be enough to plug the hole in stockbuilding
that was created over the first half of the year. If that were not to
happen, if the oil flow from Iraq were to start on January 1 instead
of August 16, we would have oil prices staying up above the $17 per
barrel range through the fourth quarter and then coming down to the
$17 per barrel range over the first part of next year. So, the
inventory plug results in some sense from the supply coming from Iraq.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the assumption is that there will be
no endeavor by other producers as a group to pull back on their oil
production?
MR. TRUMAN.
more cheating.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In fact, we probably will have a little
President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, when I compare the current forecast to the
May forecast, there appears to be virtually no change in the economywide measures. I guess an exception is the CPI in 1996. Yet, as I

7/2-3/96

read the Greenbook, and the same impression came through in your
presentation today, you seem to have shifted your assessment of the
risks significantly to the up side. What is your rationale for
shifting the risks without having an impact on the expected values in
the forecast? In fact, I think I have asked this question about risks
many times in the past, and as I recall I have gotten only one answer,
namely, that the risks were symmetric.
MR. PRELL. I think there have been some occasions when we
have indicated that the risks in our outlook were asymmetric. I would
characterize our forecasts over the years as an effort to present a
meaningful, modal forecast of the most likely outcome. When we felt
that there was some skewness to the probability distribution, we tried
to identify it. In this instance, as we looked at the recent data, we
felt that there was a greater thickness in the area of our probability
distribution a little above our modal forecast, particularly for the
near term, than there was on the other side of our forecast. I am
very conscious of the fact that we have made some of our biggest
mistakes in the past by losing sight of the trends in responding to
the run of recent data, and that is part of the reason why I tried to
focus some attention on the GDP pattern on a moving-average basis. We
have been getting very erratic movements in GDP data over the past
year or two, and we may well be seeing another episode of that kind.
I don't feel uncomfortable at all in saying that we think the highest
probability is that we are going to experience some significant
slackening of the expansion in the near term. We can point to some
special factors that have lifted growth in the most recent quarter.
Some of these affected just the second quarter and they were offsets
to developments in the first quarter. Some may have lifted activity
above what the second-quarter level would have been in the absence of
various shocks, thus raising the first-half growth rate. On balance,
we think there is a good case for the slowing scenario, but we also
can see an alternative scenario with somewhat faster growth in the
near term than we have projected.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Ted, in Chart 10, you have given us a nifty
tool of analysis.
I had a question about one of your assumptions.
The policy assumption in the chart is that U.S. and foreign monetary
authorities target nominal GDP. To my knowledge the nominal GDP
developments in the developing countries, including much of East Asia
and Latin America, have not had a big effect on our decisions. Would
there be a need to relax that assumption with regard to developing
countries?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, you have uncovered a sleight of hand.
Actually, the formal assumption that we make for the developing
countries in the model simulations is that their interest rates follow
our interest rates.
So, if we damp our nominal GDP or lean against a

surge in nominal GDP by raising our interest rates, their rates go up,
too. Actually, when we ran this simulation, that proved to be
insufficient, for perhaps obvious reasons. We therefore went in and
constrained the GDP growth path for those countries. That took out
some of the shock, if you want to put it that way, so that growth in
the developing countries did not continue on a higher path.

7/2-3/96

MR. LINDSEY.

But your added constraint certainly isn't --

MR. TRUMAN. We got that result without specifying the policy
mechanism by which nominal GDP is held down for those countries, but
in terms of trying to control the impetus to the U.S. economy, we have
achieved that modest result. In fact, when we did it another way, we
came up with a huge expansion in the developing countries because the
rise in U.S. interest rates was insufficient to set off a timely
multiplier-accelerator process in reverse. We therefore went in and
essentially damped things down so that we got something close to the
same growth path from the developing countries as we did with the
developed countries where the real level of economic activity rises
through the first two years, then essentially levels off, and
subsequently comes down a bit as the interest rate effects take hold.
We have essentially the same income path in both cases for the U.S.
economy.
MR. LINDSEY. Why wouldn't an exchange rate peg work in that
model? It would be a somewhat more relaxed assumption than the one
you made, but less relaxed than in an unconstrained model.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but the model runs off interest rates and
the exchange rates of the developing countries do stay pretty much in
line with the dollar. That is one of the reasons, in fact, why we
have a different exchange rate in the two scenarios. In the first
case interest rates go up more in the industrial countries than they
do in the United States and as they go up that pulls up their
currencies. In the second case, we don't have that effect, so that's
why the dollar goes the other way than it does in relation to the
currencies of the industrial countries, because we share in some sense
the same income growth factors.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I would like to refer to Chart 14
relating to the labor markets. On labor productivity, which obviously
is a key consideration for the forecast, I think the most recent
economic data have productivity trailing off even more than this trend
line would indicate. Indeed, you have productivity improvement in
1997 at 1 percent in the forecast.
MR. PRELL.

Roughly.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Is that something that you are
concerned about in terms of the possibility that it might be on the
high side or is that something that, within the confidence factors for
estimating productivity, you are feeling rather confident about?
MR. PRELL. I would say that is one of the things that we
feel the least discomfort about. We are forecasting fairly steady,
moderate growth in productivity. We don't start off with any major
disequilibria that we can see in terms of employers having hired well
beyond production levels. A trend increase in productivity seems
entirely reasonable in these circumstances. I think the question is
whether the trend from here will be what it has been over an extended
period. As I said, the trend has been pretty steady since 1973, and
obviously we have discussed many times around this table whether
recent higher levels of investment or changes in technology and so on

7/2-3/96

might bring about some acceleration in productivity growth. We have
not seen it yet; the most recent figures don't indicate it. So, we
are staying pretty much with a fairly straightforward extrapolation of
recent trends.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.
Mike, I want to ask a question to get your
response from the standpoint of the forecast, but I also want to get
Peter Fisher's response from the standpoint of how the market would
react. You made reference to slight declines in longer-term interest
rates; you used the 10-year rate in the chart. As I think about your
forecast for the next six months, I ask myself what is going to happen
after real GDP decelerates from an indicated growth rate of around 4
percent in the second quarter to rates in your forecast of 2.3 and 1.9
percent in the third and fourth quarters; the monthly average for the
CPI is an increase of .2 percent for the remaining seven months of the
year; housing starts drop from the 1.46 - 1.47 million area; motor
vehicle sales and production drop from a rate of over 15 million units
to something below that; and job growth slows to increases of only
100,000 a month in the final three months of the year. I wonder what
the reaction is going to be in the bond market, if that pattern of
economic statistics is seen as unfolding. Is that consistent with
only a slight decline in bond yields?
MR. PRELL. That is a quite reasonable question, and I
certainly would not see it as implausible to have the bond market
rallying beyond our assumption for some period of time. In my view,
the only thing that would tend to limit such a rally in terms of how
far down yields might go permanently is that we don't have a
particularly steep yield curve at this point. And if one hypothesized
that a few months down the road the economy is perceived to be on a
stable, sustainable, and moderate growth course with inflation perhaps
creeping up, I would not expect--with the assumed 5-1/4 percent
federal funds rate--to see the bond yield go a lot lower than we
anticipate. Basically, we have the long bond moving down to a range
of somewhere around 6-3/4 percent. It would not be surprising that a
run of softer data would induce a bond rally that would bring the
yield noticeably below that level. How far down the yield on the long
bond would be expected to go an ongoing basis, I think, is the
question. Clearly, there are some in the market who are talking about
6 percent bond yields and in terms of the variability we have been
seeing in the market--the overshooting--that level is well within
reach on a run of appealing data.
MR. FISHER.

I can't improve on that; I agree with Mike.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Mike, we recently had an auto industry consultant
drop by the Bank. He had a couple of things to say that I, at least,
found interesting and I want to get your reaction to it. First, he
was quite sanguine about the outlook for light motor vehicle sales
extending over a number of years; basically, he saw them continuing to
run at 15 million units or so at an annual rate. It was largely a
replacement story that he was telling. Having provided us with that,
he also talked about what he perceives to be a great deal of excess
productive capacity worldwide. Even allowing for further sales growth

7/2-3/96

in Latin America and parts of Asia, his view is that there is a lot of
excess capacity around. I wondered if that was in fact right, because
that would have some implications for the labor negotiations coming
along later this year.
MR. PRELL. I don't know how much useful excess capacity is
left in the United States. I suspect that when we tote the numbers up
it looks as if there is a lot, but when we look at current production
problems, we see that, for those categories of cars and trucks that
people want to buy, the manufacturers would like to build more than
they currently can. It isn't simply a matter of assembly capacity.
In many cases the capacity limits are in the production of some key
components -- engines and so on. So, effectively there may not be a
lot of slack in this country. I suspect there is some considerable
slack in Japan at this point and maybe elsewhere. When we talk about
yearly sales of 15 million units or a little more on an ongoing basis,
I guess I can't quarrel with that too much. I think the foremost
authority in the room on replacement demand is the Chairman. He has
done some research on this subject in the last few years. Looking at
the results of that analysis, 15 million would seem to be a little
high. But if you talk about an economy in which incomes are rising
and people have a taste for having more motor vehicles per household
-- maybe everyone wants to have a sport utility car, a family sedan,
and who knows what else -- perhaps there is a potential for higher
ongoing demand. I think the automobile manufacturers are looking at
forecasts based on trends that are a little higher than we have in our
forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Just a quick couple of questions, Mike. In the
adjustments on the CPI that are more or less technical adjustments,
have you gone back and redone the CPI over time, or perhaps back a
couple of years, to see if we still have the same trend that we saw
before? The striking thing about this Greenbook is that, because of
those technical adjustments, we see inflation flattening out from
where we think it has been. But it really has not been there because
the numbers that we were using before did not have those technical
adjustments in them.
MR. PRELL. Well, I will yield to my colleague, who is much
more expert on this, but there is, in a sense, a discontinuity here.
Some of the adjustments we are making have to do with the arithmetic
that perhaps you can view as fairly predictable. When it gets to
things like changing the way in which costs of medical care are
calculated, there are real underlying economic considerations involved
and the relationships could shift.
MS. MINEHAN.

They may not be the same.

MR. PRELL. We have tried to make a sensible assessment of
how movements in the old and new versions would go and that is what
led us to make the adjustments that we did, but I think that all this
is a little problematic.
MS. MINEHAN.

Maybe very minor.

-11-

7/2-3/96

MR. STOCKTON. President Minehan, we have a long history of
adjustments to the CPI; it goes back over the entire postwar period.
Improvements are continually being made, but I believe there will be a
concentration of them in this 1996, 1997, and 1998 period. In fact,
we could see some discontinuities stemming from the improvements in
methodology as well as changes in medical care estimates. In 1998,
another significant change could be an updating of the weighting
scheme that could take another couple of tenths off the core CPI.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You also have to look back historically
and ask yourself what was actually going on. If we combine all the
adjustments and go back in time, it does show a different picture. We
have been looking at a picture in which core CPI appears to have
flattened out.
MS. MINEHAN.

Maybe it really has been declining.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The mere change of the dubious medical
price component in the CPI for the much better medical net output
price in the PPI plus a change in the weights in and of itself takes
what was a flat trend and turns it down.
MS. MINEHAN. The Greenbook projects the core CPI to decline
and then to come back up again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it has not come back up if you
look through the month of May. That's the whole point. In other
words, the backup is a forecast. I will try to document this at some
length tomorrow. It is a very relevant issue and it is very important
for us to answer the question of what in fact the inflation rate has
been. The problem that we are running into here is that we are
combining changing inflation with changing BLS procedures. I think
that is creating a degree of skewness that we have to cut through.
MS. MINEHAN.
is in absolute terms.
understand.

For me the question is not even what inflation
It is what the trend is and that is hard to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll try to explain it tomorrow on the
basis of the data we have put together. If we look at various broad
measures of inflation including the core PCE chain price index, which
is the best consumer price index by far as Roberts pointed out in his
memo, it really makes a difference. Even looking at broader measures
such as the gross domestic purchases chain price index, which picks up
consumer prices plus everything else, that index has been going
straight down into the current quarter with no evidence yet of a turn.
Our view of what is happening to inflation is a critical issue here
because it says a great deal about what is going on in the economy.
It is very difficult to forecast the outlook for economic activity
unless we have some sense of that pattern. The emphasis that we have
been putting on the consumer price index, I think in retrospect, is
turning out to have been a mistake. It has been a mistake in the
sense that the CPI is biased not only with respect to the absolute
amount of change--the 1/2 to 1-1/2 percentage point bias--but there is
also increasing evidence that the bias is increasing. That suggests
that the true measures of inflation are giving us a somewhat different
picture, one that in a certain sense is ambiguous but, to the extent

-12-

7/2-3/96

that we can observe, one that indicates a slower rate of inflation.
Now, that may be noise but that is the interpretation.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have one
other small question. Ted, on your Chart 7, Foreign Growth and U.S.
Exports, is that merchandise exports alone or merchandise and
services?
MR. TRUMAN.
MS. MINEHAN.
services as well?
MR. TRUMAN.

The top chart?
Yes, or any of those charts.

Do they include

No, the top chart in the top panel includes just

goods.
MS. MINEHAN.
MR. TRUMAN.

Are the rest of these just goods, too?
These are all goods in nominal terms.

MS. MINEHAN. It doesn't show on the charts on the next page
or at least it doesn't show clearly as I understand this, but exports
of services are growing more than exports of merchandise, are they
not?
MR. TRUMAN. My memory would be that, for example this year,
we have exports of merchandise growing 7 percent and exports of goods
and services together growing 5 percent. Next year it is 11 and 9
percent.
MS. MINEHAN.
of growth down?

So you have services pulling the overall rate

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, services are pulling it down. Last year
services in the GDP accounts grew only 1-1/2 percent over the four
quarters. I hesitate to offer a firm opinion because this calculation
may not have been done correctly. There were revisions and we tried
to incorporate them in the historical GDP numbers. Whether the
revisions got incorporated in the right way, I am not 100 percent
confident. There was some double counting of services. I think that
happened more on the import side than on the export side.
MS. MINEHAN. Is there any reason to assume that the growth
of services in foreign trade is being skewed by the relative
performance of trade with developing countries versus industrial
countries?
MR. TRUMAN. Because you come from New England, you probably
think that your region is providing a lot of services.
MS. MINEHAN.

That don't get measured, yes.

MR. TRUMAN. That don't get measured in. I have the same
bias, but I have not been able to convince anybody that the treatment
is wrong.
MS. MINEHAN. We believe that, but maybe like a lot of the
other things we believe, it isn't true.

-13-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mike, I have a question on the housing sector.
We are seeing some quite good increases in the average price of houses
in our area and some buying in the expectation of further increases.
That may help to explain the run-up in mortgage rates. What do the
data show more generally about housing prices? Are you seeing any of
that in the data for the nation or is that just a local phenomenon?
MR. PRELL. If we look at the constant quality or repeat
sales prices, there has been some pickup in house price inflation over
the past year or so. This is uneven across the country. Your
regional market may be experiencing some pressures that we wouldn't
find elsewhere.
MR. HOENIG.
more generally?

Do you see it in terms of anticipatory buying

MR. PRELL. I don't recall that that stood out in any major
way in the Michigan Survey, for example, where people are able to cite
that kind of factor as a reason why they think this is a good time to
buy a home.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Mike, at the top of Chart 14 there is a red line
labeled productivity trend.
"Trend" tells us about slope and growth
rate, but is there a level connotation here as well?
Is that similar
to what we would get if we were asking what the level of output is
relative to potential?
MR. PRELL. We would take this as a reasonable representation
of where productivity is relative to the trend and say that we are
pretty close to trend growth, thus arguing against a big pickup or
decline in the near term.
MR. MEYER. Do you measure separately an actual potential
output gap as opposed to a labor market utilization gap?
MR. PRELL.
MR. MEYER.
it done separately?

We do have corresponding numbers.
And is it just an Okun's Law transformation or is

MR. STOCKTON. It's not just an Okun's Law transformation.
It is a little more complicated in the way it is estimated. But it is
conceptually quite similar.
MR. MEYER.

And what would it be showing right now?

MR. STOCKTON.

It would show a slight excess demand at this

point.
MR. PRELL. Yes, we are talking just several tenths of a
percent, very much in line with our NAIRU.

7/2-3/96

-14-

MR. MEYER. You mentioned that you are discounting recent
increases in average hourly earnings and, I take it, in the employment
cost index measure of wage gains. Why?
MR. PRELL. For average hourly earnings, the charts that we
look at are dramatic if we take the latest observation and think about
it in terms of the 12-month change. We recognize that there was an
odd reading a year earlier that will drop out when we get the next
reading, and we would not be surprised to see the 12-month change move
from 3.4 percent in the latest month back toward 3 percent. That
would still be above the lows we saw a couple of years ago and it
gives us a sense of an upward movement, but it would be more the kind
of creeping movement that we would have anticipated, given price
behavior and what we perceive to be the moderate size of the gap
between unemployment and the NAIRU over this period. On the ECI,
looking at the composition, looking at what happened in terms of sales
workers and some of the unevenness in those figures, we think it
likely that we are going to see some considerable slackening in the
rate of increase in this wage measure in the second quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, did you get a confirmation on the
chain-weighted average hourly earnings calculation? Has it come in?
MR. PRELL. I was told that we would be trying to get that,
but I have not heard anything.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you ought to point out that the
BLS does calculate a chain-weighted average hourly earnings index that
endeavors to take out the inter-industry effects of approximately 300
to 400 industries. Unless that calculation is done inappropriately,
it shows an actual diminution instead of an acceleration over the last
12 months on a year-over-year basis. That implies that there has
been, if these calculations are correct, a significant shift in the
composition toward higher-paid production worker industries--not
occupations but industries--and this raises some interesting issues
about what the trend in the raw average hourly earnings data shows
over and above the year-over-year question in the May data. I assume
that we will get a test on Friday as to whether that hypothesis is
correct.
MR. PRELL. What we are anticipating might yield a
considerable narrowing of the gap between the recent levels of those
two measures. I guess I would characterize that chain-weighted
measure as having moved pretty much in a sideways channel over the
last year as opposed to an upward sloping channel. I still think the
regular average hourly earnings series and the compensation per hour
data from productivity and costs, which don't have fixed weights, can
also yield some useful information about what is going on within the
labor market that is relevant to thinking about pressures on prices.
That is, a markup might be applied to this kind of compensation
measure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Doesn't that depend on the relationship
between individual wages and individual productivity? The reason is
that if there is a fixed relationship between any individual wage and
the productivity level, then a change in wages will be associated with
a comparable shift in productivity, and unit labor costs will be
invariant to that shift. So, you really have to stipulate that the

-15-

7/2-3/96

relationship between marginal productivity and wages is different by
groups and I don't know that we have the evidence for that.
MR. PRELL. Again, we have not explored this in great depth
but the concern might be that, in the cyclical experience, one sees
these changing weight measures as tending to accelerate, perhaps as an
early signal of the broader pressures in the labor market. So, I
think it's worth looking at all these measures, and certainly that
chain-weighted measure does suggest there may be some complexity in
this picture, which is worth some investigation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That second-quarter ECI will certainly
be a very interesting piece of information. It looks as though it is
calculated unambiguously in an appropriate manner.
MR. PRELL. Well, there are a lot of definitional problems,
and I suspect some firms that have to fill out that form are
confronted with a real challenge in sorting through the instructions.
MR. MEYER. I have a question about the role of the stock
market in the forecast. It seems to me that it has some important
role in the slowdown scenario in two ways. One, am I correct that you
have not passed through the full wealth effect of the stock market
rise relative to what the models would suggest?
MR. PRELL.
[Laughter]

One can reach that conclusion.

One has!

MR. MEYER. As you know, I have done the same thing, so I can
sympathize with that. You are leaning a little against the wealth
effect relative to the historical regularity.
MR. PRELL.

I think that's right.

MR. MEYER. Secondly, on top of that you have a mild stock
market correction built in.
MR. PRELL.

That's right.

MR. MEYER.

How "mild" is the mild correction?

MR. PRELL.

About 5 percent from where we were as of last

night.
MR. MEYER. I would take it the source is twofold. To what
extent does it depend on your judgment that the current market is
high relative to fundamentals, and to what extent is it driven by
expectations of an earnings slowdown?
MR. PRELL. On the latter point, it is not at all clear as we
look at various reports of analysts' expectations that our profit
forecast is really lower than what is anticipated in the market now.
So, that leads me to characterize this expectation as being in essence
some faith in gravity. We have a feeling that the market has been
defying it to some extent recently. It's not that every current
measure of aggregate valuation is outside of historical ranges by any
means. But when we look at some of the internal aspects of the market
-- the IPO craze and some of the other things going on -- and look at

-16-

7/2-3/96

that against a backdrop of some high valuation measures, it suggests
to us that there is room for at least a moderate downturn.
MR. MEYER.
forecasting!

I think gravity is underappreciated in economic

MR. PRELL. Usually it doesn't work
either. So, the fact is that the market, as
significantly above where we though it might
before. In the last half year or so we have
our stock market forecast in the Greenbook.

when you expect it to,
of last night, is
be just a couple days
consistently had to raise

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, who
would like to start the roundtable? Mr. Broaddus, go ahead.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to keep
this brief in the hope that you might give me one or two extra minutes
when we come around to the discussion of our longer-term policy
strategy. Really one or two minutes is all I want.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Will you take seven-eighths?

MR. BROADDUS. Let's negotiate! On balance, the anecdotal
reports and surveys that we have been looking at for our District
suggest a more rapid pace of expansion over the last several weeks.
To mention a few of the high spots, commercial real estate activity
seems to be almost uniformly robust throughout our region, and sales
of both new and existing housing also are quite strong just about
everywhere. There are a few pockets of resistance, but for the most
part housing sales are strong. In the industrial sector, we focus a
fair amount of attention on the shipments index from our regular
monthly manufacturing survey. In May, that index was at its highest
level since last spring. With respect to employment and labor market
conditions, we have the impression that labor markets in the District
have tightened further recently. We hear increasing reports of
recruitment difficulties not only for skilled workers but for less
skilled workers as well. That is a relatively new development.
Finally, we have little that is new to report on pricing behavior in
the District except that we were told by one chemical company in West
Virginia that they finally were able to make a price increase stick
for the first time in the last year and a half or so.
On the national economy, the June Greenbook forecast is not
very much changed from the May forecast. It still shows real GDP
growth dropping back promptly to trend as we move into the second half
of the year. Although labor costs as indexed by the employment cost
index drift up over the period, as was already pointed out this
afternoon, the basic inflation rate is reasonably well contained at
around 3 percent through the projection period. But even though the
numbers in this forecast and those in the last forecast look roughly
the same, I would argue that this is a much more optimistic
projection. As has already been suggested, it seems to me that the
upside risks in the projection are considerably more pronounced now
than they were at the time of our last meeting. The Greenbook itself
seemed to signal this shift at least implicitly. There is very little
reference to downside risk in this Greenbook; there is a lot of
reference to upside risk. For example, there is a reference to the
surprising strength of job growth, housing activity, and consumer

7/2-3/96

-17-

spending. The point is made that we are now looking at the highest
ratio of household net worth to disposable income in a couple of
decades. There is reference to the fact that the manufacturing sector
seems to be waking up finally, and there is a comment on the
possibility of some inventory restocking going forward. For what it
is worth, our own Bank's forecast is very close to the Board staff
forecast, Mike. But the Bank forecast is based on the assumption that
we will tighten policy a notch at this meeting. Without this
tightening, we think that the Board's staff forecast is on the
optimistic side. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, recent economic growth has
accelerated in California and to some extent in the remainder of the
District. Job growth has remained strong in Oregon and has picked up
further from already high rates in Nevada, Utah, and Idaho, leaving
those four states the fastest growing in the nation. In several
District states, job gains have been tilted toward higher-paying
industries, and labor markets are tight enough to place substantial
pressures on wages. For example, over the past 12 months average
manufacturing wages have increased about 6 percent in Idaho and about
10 percent in Nevada. The stronger economic growth in California is
evident in a wide variety of statistics: The unemployment rate is
falling, and employment gains, income tax withholding, and consumer
spending are picking up. Business firm formation and small business
loan demand also have taken off, and even real estate values in the
state's long depressed housing market are moving up, at least in the
northern part of the state. Residential building has not yet
responded to this pickup in profitability, so looking ahead we can see
a further boost to growth in California from its construction sector.
For the national economy, the news since we met in May has
caused us to revise up our forecast for the second quarter and for the
year as a whole. A combination of stronger-than-expected demand in
the first and second quarters and lean inventories in the first
quarter have led us to raise our forecast for real GDP growth in 1996
to 2.9 percent from the 2.3 percent figure we had in May. We expect a
slowing in the expansion next year to about 1-3/4 percent as a result
of higher interest rates and more moderate growth in spending stemming
from the accumulation of larger stocks of consumer durables, housing,
and plant and equipment.
The forecast I have just given you is even stronger than it
may appear to be because it incorporates a significant rise in the
federal funds rate by early 1997. Although I do expect some slowing
in growth next year, it would not be enough to prevent the economy
from stretching beyond the full utilization of its resources. As a
consequence, even with the tighter policy I have assumed, I believe
that we face the substantial risk that underlying inflation,
abstracting from oil prices and the like, is set on a gradual upward
trend. I find this prospect alarming, and I certainly would like to
see the inflation rate trending down.
So as not to confuse
the Humphrey-Hawkins forecast
federal funds rate and showed
than the forecast I have just

Mike Prell, I would like to note that
I sent last week assumed an even higher
a lower real GDP growth rate for 1997
discussed. I believe that such a policy

-18-

7/2-3/96

would be an appropriate response to the inflationary threat we are
likely to face.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you are forecasting?
MR. PARRY.

The one you have there is not the one

That is not what I am forecasting, right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like the Greenbook, we
are close to the consensus forecast that sees real GDP growth
moderating over the balance of 1996 and into 1997. We, too, see the
risks on the up side.
Our forecast for auto and light truck sales this year and
next is quite similar to that in the Greenbook, and that forecast
implies some slowing in sales from the pace we have seen in the first
half of 1996. We have not seen much slowing yet. Dealer orders
remain quite strong. Reports from our contacts indicate that light
vehicle sales in June were coming in near the average pace of 15.2
million units recorded in the first five months of this year. The
final tally will depend on foreign-nameplate sales in the days around
month-end.
Like the auto industry, other durable goods producers in our
District generally have seen somewhat stronger-than-expected demand
for their products in the first half of the year, and they have raised
their forecasts for the year to reflect this. In most cases, however,
they still expect sales to soften in the second half of 1996. For
example, home appliance shipments rose to a record high in April, a
record that was broken in May. The industry does not expect this
strength to continue, however, and revised forecasts for 1996 are
consistent with slower shipments in the second half. Other industries
projecting weaker shipments in the second half include heavy duty
trucks, construction equipment, and machine tools. We have already
seen production cutbacks in heavy-duty trucks. The story for steel is
a bit different because there is likely to be some inventory building
even if demand slackens in the second half.
Reports from District retailers were mixed but generally
consistent with some moderation in the growth of consumer spending in
June. Inclement weather again was cited as a contributing factor. Our
directors continue to express concern about increases in credit card
delinquencies and personal bankruptcies.
The level of housing activity is still fairly strong in most
parts of the Seventh District, but we are beginning to get reports
that higher mortgage interest rates are having an impact. Contrary to
the national data, permits in the Midwest declined more than starts in
May. While weather was cited as a contributing factor, District
realtors noted a definite slowing in contracts that were signed in
May for sales of existing homes. These will show up as decreases in
existing home sales over the next few months. But new home sales
continue to be quite strong in some parts of the District, with
shortages of homes in the mid-price range being reported.

7/2-3/96

-19-

Labor markets remain tight throughout the District. The
unemployment rate in our states is still about a percentage point
below the national average, but we continue to have very few reports
of mounting wage pressures. Two weeks ago, I met with six chief
executive officers of firms and banks based in Wisconsin, where the
unemployment rate is now 3.6 percent. Only one of them expected an
acceleration of wage increases, and that was for a specialized group
of employees working on oil rigs in Louisiana. The other five CEOs
expected wage and benefit increases for their employees to be about
the same in 1996 as in 1995. On the other hand, we have had several
recently signed labor contracts for building trade workers in Chicago
that feature wage increases averaging 1 to 1-1/2 percent more per year
than the contracts that they replaced. As I mentioned at the last
meeting, wage increases in the steel industry will be higher than
those in the contracts they are replacing, and that is now in binding
arbitration. There also is a definite trend to longer-term collective
bargaining agreements, with a number of four-year contracts replacing
who comes from
three-year contracts.
believes that this is an indication that workers are less
concerned about inflation now.
On the price front, most reports seem to point to little
upward pressure on prices. Energy prices in the District are expected
to continue moderating as supplies of natural gas accumulate.
Competitive pressures also are keeping District businesses from
raising prices, particularly in retailing. However, the steel price
increase announced for July is expected to stick, as there is very
little excess capacity in the steel industry and the order books are
full through the third quarter. In agriculture, corn stocks obviously
remain critically low. Record-high prices have not generated the cuts
in usage needed to stretch available supplies through to the new crop
harvest. Pressure on corn prices probably will not ease soon
especially if, as seems increasingly likely, temporary shortages occur
in the summer prior to harvest.
In summary, the Seventh District economy continues to expand,
with the pace of growth expected to moderate as we move into the
second half of the year. Price pressures generally seem contained,
although some recent labor contracts have included higher wage
increases than the agreements they replaced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, the New England economy continues
to chug along, though I am struck by the moderate nature of the data
versus some of the heat we sense in the economy from the anecdotal
reports of our outside contacts and groups that visit the Bank. My
comments will be based both on the data from the region and what we
have been hearing anecdotally.
The pace of job growth is fairly modest overall in New
England. The unemployment rate remains below the national average.
Initial unemployment claims are at low levels, and labor force growth
recently has begun to pick up. Most of the growth in employment
continues to be in services, especially business services and health
care. Within business services, temporary help agencies are doing
very well. Demand for workers in information technology fields is
especially high, as I have said before, and there is talk of importing

7/2-3/96

-20-

labor, particularly telecommunications specialists, from other regions
of the country and of the inability of some money management firms to
find even back office staff. We have noted that the nature of the
workplace is changing. One of our manufacturing contacts, who makes
machine tools for the auto industry, currently has 100 to 150
engineers working on a temporary basis. These people will be let go
as the engineering phase of the project is completed, and he will then
hire temporary production workers in their place. There is a lot of
change going on in how employers are hiring even in skilled
occupations.
Although manufacturing employment in New England continues to
drift downward, the rate of decline has slowed, and the high-tech area
seems to be stabilizing at last. Employment in computer and office
equipment manufacturing has picked up over the first half of the year
after a very long period of decline. Even the cutbacks in defense
spending seem to be coming to an end. Layoffs are still ahead in
Connecticut at Electric Boat, but defense contractors in both New
Hampshire and Vermont are planning to add workers because of new
contracts. The anecdotal evidence from the manufacturing sector is
generally positive. Materials prices have moved around a bit but are
not rising overall. Selling prices are up very slightly, but people
continue to say that it is very hard to raise prices. Inventories are
generally at satisfactory levels, though companies continue to find
ways of bringing them down, often through innovative technologies. A
couple of manufacturing contacts commented on the prospect of lower
electricity prices arising from deregulation of the industry.
Deregulation of electricity could have some fairly significant but
difficult-to-anticipate consequences, particularly for the New England
economy where electricity prices are unusually high.
The retail picture in New England remains difficult to assess
because retail competition is so fierce. Some companies are doing
well, but others are experiencing sales declines and even bankruptcy
because of new entries into the market. Retail inventories seem to be
in pretty good shape and price increases, if any, are very moderate.
Our real estate contacts report mixed signals in recent months after a
very strong first quarter. However, housing activity is quite high in
eastern Massachusetts, with both existing and new homes moving well.
For example, last Sunday's Boston Globe had a front page story that
began as follows:
"Housing inventory has been drastically reduced in
the suburbs and cut in half in the city over the past 12 months.
Demand is astonishingly high, and properties are selling within days
of coming on the market." That news item was basically residentially
oriented, but the commercial real estate market in the greater Boston
area is also quite healthy. Brokers report that building prices in
suburban Boston are back to their peak of the late 1980s, although
prices downtown still have some distance to go. The Providence market
is improving and commercial space is reported to be fully occupied
even in Springfield. Now, if we could just do something about
Hartford and New Haven, the First District as a whole would be back to
high-occupancy levels.
Growth in bank lending remains below that of the nation, in
part because of balance sheet restructuring efforts on the part of
newly merged large banks. However, reports of keen competition
continue. The senior lending officer for a large nationwide insurance
company told me that he has almost never seen such an availability of

-21-

7/2-3/96

capital. From venture capital, mezzanine financing, to commercial
loans and mortgage lending, according to him almost any project can
get financed. He and others believe that the IPO market in particular
has gotten frothy of late.
On the national scene, we agree with the Greenbook that the
risks seem even more heavily weighted to the up side, especially for
the near term. We see fairly strong second and third quarters, with
moderation after that. But the resulting rise in inflation that we
see is somewhat larger than in the Greenbook even in the face of some
increase in interest rates, which we have factored into our baseline.
Moreover, when we look at the tighter federal funds scenario that the
Greenbook assumes, we see higher inflation, lower unemployment, and a
better growth path than is presented in the Greenbook numbers. Thus,
we might see both a greater need and a greater ability to tighten
policy than is reflected in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Philadelphia
District economy is growing at a moderate pace, and virtually all
sectors are sharing in the growth. That is an improvement over
conditions last year and early this year. Still, the region lags the
performance of the nation, and that is not likely to change in the
foreseeable future. Wage and price pressures appear to be contained.
Although labor markets have tightened some, there is no obvious
acceleration in wage gains. Raising prices also seems to be difficult
because of competitive pressures.
The national economy continues to perform at levels that
should generate accelerating price pressures, judging from past
experience. Yet, there are few signs of accelerating movements in
core prices. Perhaps there will be more signs and perhaps there
won't. I think we need to be watchful. Some moderation in the pace
of real economic growth is likely during the second half of 1996 and
into 1997. The increase in longer-term interest rates almost surely
will damp interest-sensitive expenditures. Consumption spending
generally will likely grow more in line with disposable income and
debt levels. Growth in business fixed investment is already
moderating. Increases in government spending also should moderate.
Only inventory investment looks notably stronger for the second half.
So, all in all, the economy is not likely to break away on the up
side. Nonetheless, I think we need to be watchful here as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the economy in our District
continues to grow at a relatively strong pace, with gains spread
broadly across most of our industries. Manufacturing and construction
remain major sources of strength in our region. Factory jobs in the
District rose again in April, and industry contacts indicate that
production schedules remain strong. In addition, our directors report
brisk activity in construction, although slightly less than earlier in
the year. Retail sales also continue to improve across the District.
While retailers and automobile dealers report modest sales gains, most
expect sales to strengthen further during the remainder of this
summer. Energy activity continues to strengthen in our District
despite somewhat weaker crude oil and natural gas prices. Drilling

-22-

7/2-3/96

activity increased in May for the fourth consecutive month and is up
noticeably over a year ago. The agricultural area remains weak both
in the cattle industry and with crops where prices are good but some
of our producers got about half a crop at most, some none.
While economic activity is generally solid across the
District, we have seen signs of very modest price pressures in the
retail sales area. However, there continue to be strong indications
of tight labor markets. With regard to the anecdotal information, a
major distributor of housewares headquartered in our region indicated
that there actually has been a small decrease in the prices of the
products that they purchase for sale across the United States, perhaps
in the neighborhood of 1 percent, in contrast to consistent 2 percent
increases in the last several years. However, their wage costs are
rising. The average increase this year will be in the 4 percent range
for new entrants, 6 percent for those in the training or the sales
areas, and even higher for other workers. So, they are experiencing
differing pressures in their costs of doing business.
On the national level, I am broadly in agreement with the
Greenbook and look for second-quarter growth of 3-1/2 to 4 percent,
with growth moderating toward 2-1/4 percent near the end of the year.
Looking into next year and assuming current interest rates, I would
expect growth to remain slightly above potential. Like the Greenbook,
I believe the risks are largely on the up side. Virtually all sectors
look solid. While we would expect higher long-term interest rates to
temper demand, it is possible that interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy may be more resilient to higher rates than we formerly
believed. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy is doing very
well. Employment grew at a rate of about 4 percent in April and May,
and most observers do not expect much slowdown in the second half.
For reference, our long-term employment growth trend is around 3
percent. On the negative side, the mantra in Texas is still "eat beef
and pray for rain." The drought continues and it is as bad as it has
ever been. It has not been as prolonged as yet, so we do not hear
quite as much about it. Willie Nelson's Fourth of July party in
Luckenbach is dedicated to raising money for rain-starved ranchers and
farmers. He is not worried much about the ag bankers as yet!
[Laughter]
Neither are our supervision people; we had a talk about
that. The condition of the ag banks is pretty good and crop insurance
is very prevalent, so that will ease the situation. The effect of the
drought on Texas agriculture is estimated at $2.4 billion or about .5
percent of gross state product. Last year the ag sector represented
1.8 percent of gross state product and 1.3 percent of employment.
Just for comparison, in 1940 agriculture represented 30 percent of
Texas employment.
Cow chips have been replaced by computer chips in the Texas
economy. [Laughter]
The semiconductor industry has rebounded
somewhat from a disappointing performance earlier in the year. The
construction of several new wafer fabrication plants is being slowed
down or put on hold, but other similar projects are moving full speed
ahead. Computer chips have replaced the oil and the real estate
business as the source of Texas excess
spent more

-23-

7/2-3/96

than $1 million on the groundbreaking party the other day for its new
Indicators of the District's high-tech sector
chip factory
have picked up recently. The book-to-bill ratio has increased for
three months in a row, to .84 in May, but was still below the year-ago
level of 1.18. After I wrote that, I read an article in the Dallas
Morning News by the number two person at Texas Instruments who argued
that the book-to-bill ratio is worthless as an indicator. So you can
strike that!
The energy sector has been doing better lately, and not so
much because of higher prices. Past downsizing and improved drilling
technologies that have reduced the number of dry holes being drilled
are improving profitability. Five years ago when I went to Texas, it
was thought that $25 to $27 oil was necessary for drilling in new
fields. Now it is felt that such drilling can be profitable in the
$18 to $19 range. Drilling in the Gulf of Mexico has been constrained
recently by a shortage of rigs.
The rebound in the Mexican economy, which has been going on
for a year now, is being increasingly felt in the Texas economy.
Southbound train and truck traffic is up more than 50 percent from
last year's lows. Retail sales to Mexican citizens have improved
noticeably in our border towns and in Houston. Our indexes of leading
indicators, for both Mexico and Texas, are signaling continued growth
in the coming months. The Mexican rebound will likely get a lot more
attention in the press in about a month when the second-quarter
results are in. That GDP number will be contrasted to the second
quarter of 1995, which was the bottom of their recession, and it is
likely to be a very large positive number. Of course, the Achilles
heel of the Mexican economy is the dire banking situation.
The national economy has continued to strengthen since our
last meeting. We in Dallas believe that the real GDP number in the
second quarter will be more than 4 percent--possibly 5 percent--rather
than just under 4 percent. The growth in employment has continued to
surprise us on the up side. The implications for inflation, however,
are not that clear to me, although the risks certainly have increased
on the up side and are clearly asymmetric. But on the comforting
side, much of the increase in consumer inflation so far this year has
been in energy, which should ease during the remainder of the year.
Commodity and metals prices peaked some time ago, and gold is now near
its 12-month low. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Southeast economy
continues to grow moderately, slightly outperforming the nation by
almost all measures. Georgia and Florida particularly are doing
extremely well. Although much of that can be attributed to the
Olympics, the District would still be performing quite well even
without the Olympics. There are a few imbalances and those that exist
are not surprising. Tourism throughout our Southeast region would
have to be characterized as spectacular, as it should be going into
the Olympics. Florida tourism is having a record year. Manufacturing
activity is steady. Employment and orders were up just a little in
recent months. Apparel remains weak. Alabama, Tennessee, and Georgia
have lost almost one-third of their apparel manufacturing employment
over the last four years. That loss is occurring in regions where the

7/2-3/96

-24-

new southern automobile industry is moving in, and it is a perfect
example of the mismatch between the qualifications of many of the
jobless who are leaving the apparel industry and the qualifications
needed for the new jobs in the automobile industry. Single-family
housing activity generally remains good, with inventory shortages of
single-family homes reported in some of our areas. Multifamily
occupancy remains quite high and building of such units continues.
Commercial real estate activity is strong except for the retailing
sector. Labor shortages and wage pressures now exist in several
markets in low-skilled and unskilled positions, primarily in retailing
and construction. But it is our sense that those should abate as we
get past the Olympics and as housing and other construction slows as
we expect.
There is a lot of discussion and we get a lot of questions
about the economic impact of the Olympics. Our judgment is that the
macro impact will be quite small. Only foreign tourists who would not
otherwise have come to the United States will make a net contribution
to GDP. Everything else is a substitution or a change in timing and
by that I mean the building of facilities a little early to have them
open in time for the Olympics. Our best guess is that total
construction that would not have occurred were it not for the Olympics
totals less than $1/4 billion. Also, our best guess on the employment
gains that can be expected during the Olympics is that 60,000 to
70,000 jobs will be added at the peak. That peak falls between two
employment survey periods. Our guess is that the July survey will
pick up about 40,000 of those Olympic jobs and most will be gone by
the August survey. Our sense from talking to people in the community
is that many of those jobs are second jobs or retirees who are coming
out of retirement just for a few weeks and have no intention of
staying in the workforce. Our best estimates are that the gains will
contribute about $5 to $6 billion to the District over five years, the
bulk of that coming about now. So, on a regional basis it certainly
is a big deal.
As far as the near-term outlook for the national economy is
concerned, the Atlanta forecast and that in the Greenbook are almost
indistinguishable. Both see a spurt in activity in the second
quarter; both show a slowing in the second half of the year based on
expectations of a deceleration or outright decline in housing activity
combined with the already observed moderation in the growth of
business fixed investment. Each forecast also shows the CPI at about
3 percent and little change in the unemployment rate. Notwithstanding
these similarities, we have a somewhat different interpretation of
recent events. I contrast our outlook with the Greenbook's not by
disputing that demand is relatively strong but by noting that recent
history shows that increases in demand and increases in relative
prices that accompany it very quickly elicit increases in supply,
which sharply reduce upward price pressures. If we have learned
anything from the last five years of expansion, it is that a focus on
demand to the exclusion of supply and competitive pressures may not
tell the whole story. Importantly, the change in the dynamics of
demand and supply relationships makes traditional measures of
potential price pressures, such as capacity utilization and the
unemployment rate, less reliable in our view than in the past.
Against this broad framework, we do not believe that we have already
accommodated an increase in demand. Consequently, common observations
about the strength in current and prospective activity lead me to

7/2-3/96

-25-

temper my interpretations of at least overall price pressures beyond
the forecast horizon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The pace of economic activity in
the Eighth District continues to pick up from the more sluggish levels
I mentioned earlier in the year. District retailers and auto dealers
report sales at or above last year's levels, and most contacts are
optimistic about sales prospects over the summer, though there is some
concern about consumer debt levels. District payroll employment grew
at an annual rate of 2.2 percent for the three months ended in April,
slightly below the national rate. Nonetheless, unemployment rates in
the District remain below the national average. The District labor
market appears tight. Some businesses are coping with a shortage of
entry-level workers--for example, in the fast food area--by offering
starting bonuses and wages well above the minimum wage. Poultry
producers in parts of the District continue to attract workers from
Mexico. There also are growing wage pressures for skilled workers.
Computer-literate workers in a variety of occupations are in short
supply. There is also some restiveness on the part of organized
labor. The strike at McDonnell Douglas by about 6,700 union
machinists, which began on June 5, continues though negotiations were
restarted last week with the involvement of a mediator. The proposed
four-year contract--and this is what was originally on the table
before the strike--includes a cost-of-living adjustment plus a 2-1/2
percent increase in base salaries during the first year of the
contract and 2-1/2 to 3 percent bonus increases during the remainder
of the contract. So, that contract works out to an annual increase in
the range of 5 to 6 percent. That Boeing and other companies have
been actively wooing striking McDonnell Douglas machinists to leave
St. Louis is another indication that the market for machinists is
tight. Whether tight labor markets get reflected further in rising
wages and prices remains to be seen, although I suspect they will.
District auto output has been unusually strong, and auto
makers in the District expect production to be up about 16-1/2 percent
in the third quarter over a year earlier. There has been a
substantial increase in the capacity to produce popular models.
Nationally, light trucks and autos are selling at a pace unmatched
since 1988. A surge in automotive output in the second quarter to
meet consumer demand and rebuild inventories is expected to increase
real GDP growth by more than a percentage point at an annual rate.
With respect to inventories generally, the main National Federation of
Independent Businesses survey suggests that about one-fifth of
District firms want to add to stocks while a slightly smaller fraction
of District firms want to reduce them. Residential building permits
picked up substantially in April in most District metropolitan areas,
though builders still expect a slowdown because of recent increases in
mortgage rates. Loan growth at District banks continues slightly
faster than in the nation. Finally, crop conditions are better than
was expected earlier.
With respect to the national economic outlook, we are
forecasting continued real growth at essentially the average growth
rate of the past ten years in terms of the new chain-weighted
measures. We are forecasting real growth of about 2-1/2 to 2-3/4
percent this year and 2 to 3 percent in 1997. We have the

7/2-3/96

-26-

unemployment rate holding in the range of 5-1/2 to 6 percent. We do
not see a recession over the next year and a half, although I am aware
that forecasters generally are not able to tell a boom from a bust 12
months hence. Our CPI forecast is for 3 to 3-1/2 percent inflation in
1996, up from 2.7 percent in 1995. However, assuming that policy
moves aggressively toward restraint during the remainder of this year,
we believe inflation could move down to the 2 to 3 percent range in
1997. The slowing in inflation that we forecast will not occur if the
current inflation gets embedded in expectations, which we see as a
growing risk given the accommodative stance of monetary policy.
One final comment with respect to the forecast:
I am
concerned about how these forecasts may be interpreted. We are asked
to prepare forecasts based on what we think an appropriate policy
stance would be, although the policy assumptions themselves are not
published with the forecast or for that matter even requested. If the
FOMC consensus happened to be identical to the St. Louis forecast of
lower inflation in 1997, would the interpretation by the public be
that nothing more needs to be done to contain inflation? There is the
dilemma. On the one hand, if we forecast accelerating inflation
assuming no change in the stance of policy, we may make it easier to
take appropriate actions to contain it. On the other hand, if we
forecast decelerating inflation predicated on a tightening of policy,
we may make it more difficult in fact to take the necessary actions.
Either way our credibility could be damaged. I think we should make
it clear in publishing our forecasts that the outcomes are not
independent of policy actions and may in fact presume some tightening
actions. Having said that, our forecasts of variables that we can
influence, namely inflation in future years, are important to markets.
We ought to use every opportunity to forecast lower inflation in the
years ahead and do our best to make such an outcome a reality.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The regional economy
continues to do well. Most sectors are healthy. Construction in
particular is strong, housing is very strong, and home prices are
rising significantly. Those conditions have prevailed for quite some
time now, and I won't elaborate. Exceptions to this generally
favorable set of conditions are weather-related problems adversely
affecting tourism and agriculture. The cattle industry continues, of
course, to have serious difficulties.
I have commented on this before but I think it is worth
mentioning again that labor is scarce in the District. There seems to
be a shortage, especially of entry-level workers, and we see signs of
wage pressures at that level. When we talk to some people about that,
the attitude seems to be that, of course, the entry-level labor force
is mostly young and inexperienced, very mobile. These people are
anxious to get some training but they do not care at all about the
benefits that might go with the job. So once they get the training or
if they get an offer of somewhat higher earnings across the street or
across the city, they will move on. More experienced workers seem to
be a good deal less mobile. They put a higher value on benefits, and
they are concerned about the obsolescence of their skills.
labor leader
At a meeting that he attended a couple of weeks ago, he
was using a lot of language like "labor isn't very comfortable,"

7/2-3/96

-27-

"labor isn't very confident," and so on. I did not have the sense
that he was choosing his words that carefully just to influence us. I
think what he was saying is an accurate reflection of attitudes in a
fairly well organized, fairly highly skilled labor force.
As far as the national economy is concerned, my view of
current conditions is that they are too good to last. Relative to our
expectations of late last year and early this year, the economy
certainly has done better, perhaps considerably better, than
individual Committee members expected. The Greenbook forecast has
aggregate demand slowing just perfectly to the trend growth of
aggregate supply. We achieve equilibrium and in some sense we ought
to close up shop! My experience tells me that such a very smooth
adjustment is highly unlikely and that may be putting the best face on
it. Things are unlikely to work out that favorably. I do expect that
aggregate demand will slow, but not so much and not so rapidly as in
the Greenbook, in part because I think the expansion has a good deal
of momentum right now and in part because I do not see any
corroborating evidence at the moment that such slowing is in train.
This leads me to the conclusion that sooner or later the growth of the
economy will strain capacity, and so I am concerned about prospective
inflationary pressures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, for the last three
years I have been reporting on the economy of the Second District in
rather dismal terms, and I am now changing from a minor to a major
key. The Second District economy has been accelerating in recent
weeks and the reason is that the District is amazingly dependent both
economically and, perhaps more important, psychologically on what is
happening in the New York metropolitan area. Economic conditions
there seem to be very much on an upbeat. Payroll employment rose at a
rapid clip in May in the District following a pause in April. New
York State added 16,700 jobs; that is an annualized gain of 2.6
percent. The unemployment rate held steady at 6.4 percent. In New
Jersey, employment expanded 2.3 percent with 6,800 jobs and the
unemployment rate fell to 6.1 percent, which is a five-year low. The
job growth was, not surprisingly, dominated by gains in business and
consumer services. Manufacturing continues to decline in the
District. The real estate industry is beginning to pick up. But as I
said earlier, I think the biggest change is happening in the "feel" of
New York City. Some changes are in the purely economic area and some
are not. The City is absolutely booming with tourists. That is
helped a great deal by the fact that it feels a lot safer, and that
feeling is not unrelated to a different approach to policing. The
police also have been perhaps brilliant, perhaps lucky, perhaps some
of each, in solving some very difficult and problematic serial crimes.
The teachers of the City of New York, about 110,000 in number, who had
turned down their labor contract late last year, have now approved it,
even though there are no pay increases in the first two years. The
New York City partnership, which has had a spectacular success in
promoting lower-level and middle-level housing in the city over recent
years, has announced the creation of what is essentially a start-up
venture capital fund of $50 million, and the rather brilliant lady
executive who was head of the housing partnership is going to move
over to run that. Perhaps equally important, the Yankees are having a

7/2-3/96

-28-

great season and last night they scored their second run on a squeeze
bunt, which is the baseball equivalent of "chutzpah." The good
feeling from New York City seems to be moving out into northern New
Jersey and the rest of New York State, and the District as a whole is
doing very well.
On the national level, our forecast for the rest of this year
is virtually equivalent to that of the Greenbook. For 1997, we have
some difference of opinion. It is largely related to my question to
Mike Prell concerning what is going to happen to productivity since it
has not been showing all the improvement that we have been waiting
for. My colleagues in New York are inclined to think that it could go
in the opposite direction, which would give us weaker growth next
year. We also have inflation ticking up as the Greenbook does to 3.0
percent next year. Our views are based on models that all of us have
to use and that have the quality of thinking that past events are
likely to be repeated in the future. Intellectually, I think that is
probably very sound. However, I am having great difficulty trying to
reconcile my intuition and my mind.
That may be because of my strong reaction to what I think is
a very unfortunate debate going on in the country with those who
consider price stability as somehow antagonistic to growth. The
higher the growth, the more we have to worry about price stability in
that view. Some of us unfortunately have contributed to that debate.
At the same time, what my intuition is telling me is that, rather like
the comments the Chairman made in response to a question by President
Minehan, there may in fact be developments on the cost side, on the
wage side, and therefore in the future on the price side that we do
not fully understand. I think it probably would not be a very good
idea for us to move policy at a time when the outlook for what we are
uniquely responsible for, which is price stability, is questionable
both intellectually and practically. So, I think we must busy
ourselves between now and the next meeting with trying to understand
as best we can what if anything new is happening, as you suggested in
your remarks, Mr. Chairman. I know that you are planning to go into
that more fully tomorrow, and I look forward to hearing your comments.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I will begin by saying that we seem to have
"weathered" another price scare in agriculture. At the May meeting, I
reported on the wet conditions that were panicking the farmers in our
area. Many had sold crops that they had not yet planted, and because
of the adverse weather conditions the day was getting very close when
it would be too late in the season for them to plant a crop. This was
going to be a very big problem. In fact, there is an article in
today's Wall Street Journal about some of the problems stemming from
that. However, our farmers got a window of a few dry days, as we are
prone to get every year in our region. Because of "no till" farming,
they are now able to get a crop in the ground in a few days that
literally would have taken weeks before. This raises some interesting
questions about measuring productivity in agriculture. What we would
compare is a crop that was planted under old technology with one that
was planted under new technology to see how much less labor was used.
But how do we take into account crops that simply would not have been
planted under old technology because it was too late in the season to

7/2-3/96

-29-

do so? In any event, we are going to have a good agricultural year in
our region even though our productivity figures are not going to show
the real benefits of the new technology.
At the March and May meetings, we were worried that the rise
in energy and food prices would become more generalized throughout
the economy and would therefore set a tone of broadly escalating rates
of inflation. It now seems that this has been another episode like
last year's paper price scare when the concern was that we were going
to have shortages of paper forever. That fear has now vanished.
Before that it was metals. Last year we also had to worry about Class
8 trucks being produced at unsustainable levels well above capacity,
but now the production levels are down 25 percent from a year ago. At
one point we worried about escalating prices of lumber and other
building materials as being the acorn that could grow into a
generalized inflation. One after another, these concerns have popped
up and have gone away. In line with Jack Guynn's remarks, I think
that these are good reminders that generalized price inflation is not
caused by isolated events. As long as we keep an effective lid on the
growth of aggregate demand, these price changes, up and down, are
critical really to the efficient performance of the economy.
I want to comment about the productivity issue. Bill
McDonough raised some questions about the labor productivity chart in
the Chart Show and Larry Meyer also made reference to it. When we
look at a chart like that, we know that for a growing share of the
economy there is no improvement in labor productivity because we
measure the output in those parts of the economy by labor inputs and
we define the latter as not having any productivity growth. So, there
is both a cyclical dimension and a secular dimension to that chart.
The cyclical relates to periods when there is a pickup in economic
activity that tends to be concentrated in sectors of the economy,
notably in manufacturing where, according to the data that we use, the
proportion of labor having high productivity growth rises relative to
labor defined as having no productivity improvement. In such a period
we would expect to see an increase in overall productivity and vice
versa in a cyclical downturn. But in the secular sense, we are moving
increasingly toward a situation where labor productivity in that chart
will have no growth at all. If we define 99 percent of the economy as
involving industries where there is no labor productivity growth, then
the economy's overall productivity growth has to approach zero. So,
instead of saying that productivity has been stuck at 1 percent or 1.1
percent or whatever the number is, the question should be, why hasn't
it gone down?
The anecdotal reports at the micro level tell us that
productivity is booming, especially in manufacturing where
productivity gains of 4 or 5 percent or sometimes even 6 or 7 percent
are mentioned. In order not to have one iota of improvement in
productivity at the macro level, as somebody was quoted as saying, we
have to have at least a sharp slowing in productivity growth in
nonmanufacturing sectors of the economy if not an absolute decline.
Then the question becomes, is that credible given what is going on in
the world today? Statistically, we know how it is happening. We know
that total factor productivity is measured as declining in such
sectors as financial services,, because output is falling or there is
less labor employed with more nonlabor factors. As a result we have
negative total factor productivity. We add that to manufacturing

7/2-3/96

-30-

which has big productivity gains, and there it is, 1 percent
productivity growth again. But that is really masking the dynamics of
what is going on in the economy. We all know that at the micro level
improved productivity means less inflationary pressure, but then
somehow we get caught up in this loop that says increased productivity
gets added together with labor. This means more output and that
somehow causes inflation. That does not compute.
As we go around the Fourth District asking questions about
plans for price increases, the disconnect in the responses that we get
is certainly interesting and I suspect a lot of business people think
the same way as our contacts. When we ask them what their pricing
plans are for their products over the next five years, they say they
are going to try to maintain their prices or reduce them as slowly as
possible. We do not hear anybody talking about raising prices. The
question for these people is whether they can assume that their prices
will stay the same or how much they think they may have to cut them.
Then we ask them, what is their inflation forecast? They will usually
give a number like 3 percent. When we ask why, they say that is the
CPI rate of inflation. When we probe into this, we find it mainly
means that that is what they think is going to happen to their labor
costs. Then we ask, how does this work? If you are not going to
increase the prices of your products and your wages are going to go up
3 percent on average, how do you do it? Then they tell us
productivity stories. It is interesting in an ironic way that, for a
lot of the economy, the more efficient the sector, the less productive
it is estimated to be, if we can figure out what that means.
We also ask people a lot of questions about what they worry
about. The frequency with which companies talk about financial
stresses is interesting. Generally, we hear comments from bankers and
nonbankers alike who are worried about declining credit quality,
slowing collections of receivables, and rising delinquencies and late
payments. Such comments are more frequent than Mike's charts would
suggest or than the national data show. Companies tell us that they
were surprised at how good the first half was but also that their free
cash flow is falling. So something is not quite right. In the second
half of this year, if the Greenbook forecast is correct, we will have
to be alert to the debt service burdens, which will be a growing
problem because those Greenbook numbers imply that revenue and sales
growth will be a lot slower. We are going to see squeezes on
earnings, as most firms expect and the national projections suggest.
We will hear more stories about the cost of carrying the inventory
that apparently is being built up, and people are going to say that
their financing is getting more burdensome. So, I think that six
months from now we may be quite concerned about more financial
stresses in the economy than seem to exist today.
Let me also comment about the labor markets. There is good
news/bad news in the Bluebooks. I went back over the last six years
of these semiannual projection exercises, at the beginning of the year
and in July, that look out five years. The good news is that the
staff keeps notching down the unemployment rates associated with a
given inflation path and the inflation path has not been notched up.
If anything, it is down slightly over those semiannual intervals. I
try to imagine what we will be looking at when we come back in January
or February for the next semiannual review. Currently and for the
last year, all but four of the large eleven states for which we have

-31-

7/2-3/96

the data have unemployment rates that are well below the 5-3/4 percent
staff estimate of the NAIRU. Three of the four other states, as we
heard this afternoon, have experienced rapid growth in employment:
California, Texas and New York. Bill McDonough mentioned that
unemployment fell to a five-year low in the fourth state, New Jersey.
The unemployment rate for the other seven states is below 5 percent.
What is going to happen? If employment continues to grow as rapidly
as people anticipate and the unemployment rate moves down in some
other states, especially those that produce motor vehicles--Mike
Moskow mentioned Wisconsin and we know that very low unemployment
rates already exist in Kentucky and Tennessee--will we talk six months
from now about 5 percent unemployment and yet lower inflation? I hope
so.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I think these semiannual meetings are best used
to assess whether there are any major trends that have surprised us.
There are two that have surprised me: consumer debt and public policy.
I will restrict my comments to consumer debt.
I think the consumer situation is best summed up by the old
labor ballad about "another day older and deeper in debt." The ballad
concludes with the phrase, "I owe my soul to the company store." Of
course, the song was written in a less enlightened time than the
present one. Today the singer would simply declare bankruptcy!
The reason all this is a surprise to me is that 18 months
[Laughter]
ago I thought the consumer would have cut back spending by now either
out of voluntary recognition of the family financial situation or
because creditors would have stopped extending additional credit.
Neither has occurred. In fact, it is now obvious that credit
extensions continue to mushroom in at least some areas. Credit is
much easier to get than it was 18 months ago. Revolving credit
increased $75 billion in the 12 months ended in April according to our
latest statistical release. That is a 20.5 percent annual increase.
Auto credit increased only 10 percent and total consumer credit was up
13 percent. Our 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances, when adjusted to
match flow of funds data to overall household debt, shows that roughly
one household in six now pays 40 percent or more of its income in
debt-service payments.
This is showing up in consumer delinquency rates. In the
first quarter, just under 3 percent of all auto loans at finance
companies were 30 or more days delinquent. In 1991 when the
unemployment rate was 6.8 percent, which was the previous peak, the
delinquency rate was 2.65 percent. Credit card delinquencies at
commercial banks were 3.49 percent in the first quarter of this year
and they were 3.21 percent at the previous peak in 1991. Interestingly, the Survey of Consumer Finance shows that the usual signs of
economic distress were not the cause. The proportion of consumers
with debt payments exceeding 40 percent of income who reported either
unemployment during the survey year or unusually low income for the
year was actually lower in 1995 than in 1992. That may help explain
why the new computerized underwriting procedures continue to extend
ever more credit even as debt levels grow. The traditional warning
flags simply are not present for the great majority of people who are
taking on new debt.

7/2-3/96

-32-

Anecdotally, lenders invariably cite "competitive pressures"
as the reason for granting ever more and ever riskier credit. I
called up the American Automotive Manufacturers Association (AAMA) to
get some feel for their view on credit. The average term for their
members in extending credit is between 52 and 57 months. The standard
offer now is 60 months, although one of the captive auto finance
companies is now offering a 72-month loan on minivans. The reason
they gave for extending the maturity on such loans was competitive
pressure from the banks. My colleagues on the Board might chuckle
since the members of TIAC, who were here last week, were saying that
they were now offering 72-month loans and even some 84-month loans.
The reason given was competitive pressure from the auto finance
companies! When I hear about an 84-month auto loan, I know that the
credit merry-go-round has not stopped and it is probably picking up
speed. But I do not think that is the whole story. The AAMA reported
their captive members are now financing only 15 percent of their total
sales.
Fully 30 percent of sales--I guess we call them sales--are
now leases. In addition, that 30 percent tends to be heavily weighted
toward higher-priced cars. The economics of the auto leasing industry
is interesting. From the point of view of consumer debt, it should
make our view of the household situation even more troubling. Auto
leases are not in the debt numbers or in the debt-service numbers.
But in fact, they are really the worst type of debt service since
there is absolutely no equity buildup in the payment. I have gotten
deeper into this area than I ever dreamed, thanks to our current work
on Regulation M. Those efforts have indicated to me that we actually
face another macroeconomic problem from leasing, which I thought it
was important to share. The auto companies currently are tending to
offer high residual-value option prices on their cars. They know this
will mean that fewer consumers will end up buying the leased vehicle
when the lease is up. The reason for this practice is that it tends
to make the lease more attractive to current buyers because it lowers
the monthly payment. And given the high sticker price of autos, this
is viewed as a necessary sales incentive. The auto companies are
willing to do this because they are making an implicit bet on the
ability of their cars to hold up in value for longer periods. Now,
this is not an altogether bad bet. Auto quality and durability are
up. But higher prices in the future for used cars depend in part on
prospectively higher new car prices. For this to work, new car prices
must therefore continue to rise faster than family incomes, making
them ever less affordable and requiring continuing innovation in the
financing areas in order to keep sales up. The auto companies are now
recognizing, or at least their finance divisions are now recognizing,
that they are on a credit-based merry-go-round of their making that
must eventually stop. But at the present time, none of them can
afford to get off.
Future credit problems also are apparent in the trend in home
mortgage financing. According to the Federal Housing Finance Board,
45 percent of all mortgage loans granted in May had loan-to-value
ratios (LTVs) in excess of 80 percent. Some 26 percent had LTVs in
excess of 90 percent. The average LTV on all 30-year fixed, non-jumbo
loans was over 82 percent. Also, it is not the S&Ls, the traditional
and well-qualified source of mortgage funds, that are making the bulk
of these loans. Mortgage companies and commercial banks had 28
percent of their originations in over 90 percent loan-to-value

7/2-3/96

-33-

mortgages versus just 18 percent for the S&Ls. Now, from my
experience at Neighborhood Reinvestment and from the studies done here
at the Board, it is clear that high LTVs are a big risk for future
delinquency. No one purchases a home expecting to default, but when
economic distress occurs, individuals with no equity in their homes
have less incentive to stay than those who have such equity. Our
experience shows these high LTV loans can be successfully and
profitably made, but they require enormous amounts of handholding and
follow-through with the borrower. While there are firms with staff
capable of doing this, the personnel infrastructure in the country is
simply not adequate to do an effective job at anything approaching the
current volume. The problems here are already showing up and are
going to get worse. Although, as Mike Prell pointed out, 60-day
delinquency rates on mortgages are still fairly modest in the
aggregate, the same is not true for those loans that are targeted to
populations likely to get into trouble. For example, FHA 60-day
delinquencies hit 2.83 percent in the first quarter of this year.
That is a new record, and the worst is yet to come. Delinquencies and
foreclosures tend to peak a few years after the mortgages are
originated. Mortgage lenders were particularly aggressive in this
type of lending during 1994 and 1995, in large part because of
impending CRA reform and other regulatory jawboning.
Why care? I think there is a long-term social cost we are
going to pay from all this, but my Calvinist instincts should not have
any bearing on your decision. More topically, I do not believe that
these issues are of the type or magnitude that will affect the
integrity of the banking system. The banks are well reserved for any
reasonably expected losses and increasing portions of their mortgage
portfolios are being securitized. But from a timing point of view,
the increased availability of credit has allowed this expansion to
continue longer than it otherwise would. Consumption has expanded
more quickly than the income of the great majority of American
households. This has not proved troublesome for the expansion because
these households took on increasing amounts of debt. I admit to
having been surprised that this has gone on for such a long time and I
am now convinced that it can go on so long as lenders remain willing
to extend the terms and conditions under which they make loans. But
the price we are paying is the increasing fragility of the underlying
financial structure of the household sector. While increasing debt
burdens will not of themselves end the expansion, they do make the
economy more susceptible to unforeseen developments. The next
recession will be longer and deeper than it otherwise would have been
because of this extra debt. Our memories of 1991 and particularly
1992 should be fresh enough to remind us of what balance sheet
problems in a significant sector of the economy can do to
macroeconomic performance.
At the same time, I do not believe that a sudden burst of
aggregate demand is likely, given these conditions. As long as the
real incomes of the great majority of American households remain
stagnant, borrowers and lenders would have to take complete leave of
their senses to finance an accelerated consumption binge. It would be
one thing to go deeper in debt; it is another to go deeper in debt at
an ever accelerating rate. I am also concerned that the
computerization of the credit-granting decision is going to accelerate
the speed with which any adverse economic shock is transmitted to and
throughout the household sector. Aside from lowering the cost of

7/2-3/96

-34-

credit decisions, credit scoring also makes it easier to review
existing credit files. In the present upturn, this has meant faster
granting of increased credit lines on credit cards and easier terms
for auto loans and mortgages. In the future downturn, it will mean
just the opposite. The normal decision lags in the process will be
far shorter next time, and thus the time available for the shock to
work itself out before it becomes self-reinforcing will be reduced.
From a policy perspective, this is the real meaning of the term
fragility with respect to the economy; and all we can do is watch and
wait.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the last meeting, I
observed that I thought we were entering a watershed period. I
believe that we are now in that period, although I think it is too
early to tell just which way the water is going to fall when it falls.
Certainly at this time, we have an economy with a good head of steam.
Many have remarked on that. And we could be looking at a pickup of
inflation; that prospect could certainly raise its head. If we are
convinced that the likely scenario is intensifying inflation and that
it is baked in the cake, then I think it is time for action. It is
better to adjust policy sooner rather than later, once we believe
that. But I still must question whether or not that is the case. If
we look at the past four quarters including the second quarter and
assume 4 percent growth for the second quarter, four-quarter GDP
growth would be a little over 2.5 percent. Over most of this past
period, many observers here and elsewhere have believed that the
economy was at capacity; we started talking about that some time ago.
And yet where are we? Most of our inflation measures--the core CPI,
the core PPI, and the GDP deflator--are flat on a rate-of-change basis
or else the rate of change is beginning to drift down in some cases.
Foreign inflation is half that in the United States. Unit labor costs
currently are rising at a rate of around 2.3 percent, and they have
been decelerating over the course of this four-quarter period. The
capacity utilization rate has been flat at about 82 percent.
Unemployment has been flat at 5.5 or 5.55 percent; there are two 5.6s
in there. Commodity prices are now falling almost across the board,
including virtually all industrial commodities, gold, oil, and even a
large number of foodstuffs.
I think the third quarter may be a time when we will get a
reading on the watershed. When we are talking about a four-quarter
change, folding in one quarter forward could make a lot of difference.
If the third-quarter growth rate is going to be another 4 percent or
so, then the four-quarter rate of change will accelerate to about 2.7
percent. If the growth rate is going to fall back to 2.5 percent,
which is still above the Greenbook forecast, we would then be talking
about a four-quarter rate of change falling back to 2.4 percent and we
would have a declining trend. So, the current quarter will make a lot
of difference in terms of judging the trend.
If we look at the Greenbook for the rest of the forecast
period of six quarters out, as Mike Prell noted the staff has
projected a trend rate of growth of about 2.2 percent, a flat
unemployment rate at 5.5 percent, a flat capacity utilization rate,
unit labor costs rising at a 2.5 percent rate without much trend, and

7/2-3/96

-35-

no acceleration in the growth of activity over the course of that sixquarter period. One certainly can argue that that may be too modest a
forecast on the output side and that the rate of inflation may rise
during that forecast period. That is the risk. We have had a very
fickle expansion for 20 quarters or so now. The rate of economic
growth has changed its direction something like 11 times in those 20
quarters, so the rate of expansion has repeatedly sped up and slowed
down. Even if the risk is to the up side, it may not be that great a
risk. If we look at the last two years and where we are today, and
particularly if we focus on the last year to date, it is hard to
generate much conviction out of that experience that we necessarily
are going to see any inflation impulse at all, given economic growth
in line with the Greenbook forecast. Certainly we could, but it seems
to me that if the economy runs a course similar to that over the past
year or two, at the worst increased inflation will be rather slow to
materialize and will not have very much muscle behind it. So, there
is some chance in my opinion that we may be able to continue to ride
the crest of this really remarkable period for some time to come.
Beyond that, who is to say which way the water is going to flow?
Mr. Chairman, the tale is not yet told in my view. I do
agree that the risks are on the up side, and as a consequence I am
sitting very lightly in my chair.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr Chairman. The moderate growth
story that we have been talking about certainly seems to be playing
out. The second-quarter information looks generally strong, and
indeed most of the members around the table have ratcheted up their
growth projections. The difficult question before us is to what
extent the slowdown that is projected in the Greenbook will
materialize. A turn in direction is the most difficult thing to
project, and I suspect that may be why we are getting some differences
around the table in our forecasts. There clearly are some good
arguments for a slowdown. Higher bond rates certainly should affect
interest-sensitive sectors of the economy. Housing is showing some
signs of a pause. The slowdown in business fixed investment seems to
depend on people's expectations of slower growth in final sales,
including the notion that we have run through pent-up demand.
Consumer spending has been a consistent source of strength, one that
has been financed by increased consumer debt as Governor Lindsey has
just documented for us. So, I think that consumer spending will at
best only track increases in income, which again supports the argument
of a slowdown. The notion that job insecurity stemming from
downsizings and improvements in technology continues to generate
substantial uncertainty is another factor that should help to slow the
growth in consumer spending.
I do have to say that a slowdown in the second half is not a
sure thing. We have been saying, for example, that business fixed
investment would slow in 1996, but so far we have clocked in a doubledigit rate of increase. Although interest rates are up from their
lows, the overall cost of capital is fairly reasonable. The cost of
equity capital is really quite favorable. The term structure of
interest rates is fairly healthy in terms of both the overall level
and the slope of the yield curve. Various types of risk management
tools and new financial instruments are allowing businesses and

7/2-3/96

-36-

households to time-adjust their expenditures and their commitment
patterns. I think that this is adding to the difficulty of projecting
a slowdown. Another reason why a slowdown is not necessarily a sure
thing is that wealth effects may encourage consumers and businesses to
continue to spend and invest. As long as we have unemployment in the
5.4 to 5.6 percent range, people are working and they are likely to
continue to spend. So, it is hard to argue that there will be a big
pullback in consumption. The industrial sector is showing some
strength. We do not have major economic imbalances to work through in
terms of inventories, which are relatively well aligned with sales.
Business balance sheets have been improved in many cases. Capital and
banking markets are well positioned to support increased growth.
There has certainly been progress on the Federal deficit, at least in
the short run.
Turning for a moment to inflation, as measured by the CPI it
clearly has accelerated in early 1996, but if we take a longer look at
some of the broader statistics, we are getting very mixed signals. I
was particularly impressed by one of the tables in the Greenbook
showing changes from 12 months earlier for a whole series of
indicators for the period ended in May. Comparing the year ended May
1995 to the year ended May 1996, there actually have been improvements
in the CPI, core CPI, core PPI, intermediate PPI, core intermediate
PPI, and core crude materials. The only major indexes that did not
improve are the PPI and its crude materials component, and the reasons
there are the oil and food stories. But crude materials excluding
food and energy are down 12-1/2 percent for the year to date, and
other commodity price measures also are down. I would not have
expected to see an improvement in inflation given the fact that we
have seen a fairly strong economic performance this year.
Looking forward as opposed to looking back at the last 12
months, the inflation risk from the energy sector that we cited in May
seems to have abated and energy prices appear to be coming down. But
while the risk from energy appears to have lessened, the risk from
rising food prices remains. We have come far enough along in the
planting season that the chances of a disastrous harvest have
diminished, but we still are at some risk in the food area. Wages are
another area at risk, given the outlook for a hike in the minimum
wage, reports of scattered labor shortages, and the ECI surge that we
saw for the first quarter of this year. The federal deficit situation
remains a problem for the long term, and we need to make some progress
on that. So, the risk of rising inflation is definitely present.
Even so, I think there is some room for optimism. There has been some
discussion around the table about productivity. Are we measuring
productivity in services correctly? Are we measuring the productivity
gains from technology accurately? We also have had an expansion in
capacity over the last few years that should help in terms of
moderating cost pressures. In addition, I believe that inflation
psychology has lessened somewhat. So, there is some room for optimism
on the inflation side, but there is certainly continued risk.
In sum, I think the economy is doing quite well, and the
strength is all the more impressive because we have seen improvement
in inflation. But the risk to the expansion does seem to me to have
shifted to the up side. To the extent that we have a second-half
slowdown, it may well be fairly shallow.

-37-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be brief
because, like President Broaddus, I would like to take a little extra
time in our next go-around concerning price objectives for monetary
policy.
The key questions today are identical to those at our last
meeting. Will aggregate demand really moderate in the second half of
the year, and are we about to see an uptick in core inflation due to
increasing wage pressures in already tight labor markets and the
feedback of higher food prices into wage demands? With respect to the
slowdown in aggregate demand, I confess both ignorance and concern. I
agree with the Greenbook that aggregate demand will probably slow
toward trend, for all of the reasons that are by now familiar, and
will probably do so with the usual long and variable lags. Higher
interest rates and a somewhat stronger dollar will eventually take
some toll on housing, associated consumer durables, and net exports.
The influence on growth of inherently transitory factors like the
rebuilding of auto inventories will soon wane, and the data already
point to a slowing pace of noncomputer investment spending, consistent
with predictions of the accelerator. But I admit there is only scanty
evidence that housing markets are poised to cool. Computer investment
may turn out stronger than the Greenbook anticipates. I also agree
with the Greenbook that with leaner inventories, a surge in inventory
investment is possible and poses upside risks. If final demand growth
proves significantly stronger than was anticipated, inventory
investment could again increase, touching off a new round in the
inventory cycle. The risks here seem weighted toward the up side.
With respect to inflation, though, as a number of you have
emphasized, the news has been favorable. Core inflation in the CPI
and PPI remains well contained and, as the Roberts memo and the
Chairman highlighted, consumer inflation as measured by the chainweighted PCE is running just over 2 percent. I would emphasize that
our most recent readings on long-term inflationary expectations also
are quite positive, suggesting the absence of any deterioration there.
Food prices do seem poised to rise, with pass-through to wages and
core inflation a possibility. But eventually, even if it is beyond
our forecast horizon, it seems to me that these weather-related price
hikes will unwind, bringing core inflation back down, too. In my
opinion, temporary supply shocks should be essentially irrelevant to
monetary policy.
At the same time, labor markets do seem tight, although they
are no tighter now than they have been for most of the last two years.
Several of us commented at our last meeting, and a number of you
focused on this today, that there are several aspects of labor market
behavior that are puzzling. Increases in compensation are running
significantly below what our models would predict. Core inflation
still exceeds the pace consistent with the apparent trend in unit
labor costs, and profit margins have widened. In my estimation, the
entire pattern of surprises that we are seeing is exactly consistent
with what one would expect to see as a result of a structural change
that has a negative impact on the bargaining power of workers. Such a
shift might result from an increased sense of job insecurity related
to technological change or corporate restructuring as the Chairman has
emphasized. It could be due to factors raising workers' perceptions

7/2-3/96

-38-

of the likely cost of job loss. It could be due to improvements in
the ability of firms to outsource either domestically or
internationally because this poses a threat to the bargaining power of
workers. It could be due to an increased prevalence of more flexible
pay-for-performance arrangements.
We often remind ourselves that the natural rate is not a
time-invariant constant. But it is structural shifts like the ones I
have mentioned that in modern theories of the labor market would shift
the natural rate of unemployment and result in a persistent, not just
a very transitory, decline in the natural rate. The unfortunate thing
is that the hypothesis that the natural rate has declined for these or
for other reasons remains just that. It is a hypothesis, and it can
only be confirmed with an accumulation of data and the passage of
time. The staff, I believe, is properly skeptical. We may be living
on borrowed time, and there may end up being a price to pay for having
allowed the economy, to use Governor Lindsey's phrase, "to push the
envelope."
In my estimation, though, with each passing quarter--and I
now count seven--in which unemployment remains near 5-1/2 percent and
core inflation declines or remains stable, the Committee's degree of
confidence that the natural rate has fallen should rise a little.
Mine certainly has.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During the last couple
of months, I have had plenty of time to anticipate my participation
[Laughter] in the discussion around this table, and I am delighted
finally to have this opportunity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We welcome you.

MR. MEYER. Thank you. It is nice to begin by finding myself
in such strong agreement with the staff forecast, both in anticipation
of a slowing toward trend immediately ahead and in appreciating upside
risks in the current environment. Now this agreement is both pleasing
and disappointing at the same time. I am pleased on the one hand to
find that the approach and the judgment of the staff is so similar to
mine and, in that respect, it feels like home. On the other hand, I
have to admit that this robs me of some potential value-added that I
might otherwise bring to this group.
I want to focus my remarks on what I view as the two key
issues in the forecast in relation to the decision that is before us.
If it sounds like there is an echo in this room, it is really my fault
for allowing Governor Yellen to slip her remarks in before mine! The
first issue is, is growth likely to remain above trend? If so, then
given the already high levels of resource utilization, we will
certainly have to tighten sooner rather than later. Second, even if
growth quickly returns to trend and the unemployment rate stabilizes
at the prevailing level as in the staff forecast, are utilization
rates already so high as to make a gradual increase in inflation
inevitable? If we are going to reach this conclusion, a tighter
policy would also be called for, though the small gap implied by the
staff forecast makes such a move less urgent than in the case of
persistent, above-trend growth. I want to comment a little further on
each of these two points.

7/2-3/96

-39-

First, with regard to a slowdown toward trend, I expect the
economy grew at a rate of about 4 to 4-1/2 percent in the second
quarter. If the staff forecast is correct and if mine is correct,
this will be the only quarter during the year when growth is
significantly above trend, and it will follow a year when growth was
decidedly below trend. I think Governor Kelley did a very excellent
job of putting that in historical perspective by looking at fourquarter growth rates. That would produce growth for the year of about
2.7 percent on a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis, but I am
looking for a growth rate of 2 to 2-1/4 percent both in the second
half of 1996 and over 1997.
Now, why do I think the expansion is likely to slow? As has
been well documented, part of the largess in the second quarter is due
to special factors, including the end of the first-quarter GM strike,
reversal of the effects of the government shutdown and a rebound from
adverse weather. Of course, these special factors have just shifted
growth between the first and the second quarters, and they do not take
away the fact that the expansion accelerated to a rate of about 3
percent over the first half of the year. Still, the strength now
apparent in the second quarter overstates significantly the
sustainable momentum in the economy going forward. I expect that
final sales actually will have slowed in the second quarter and that
the inventory investment that was such a powerful contributor in the
second quarter will provide a declining contribution to output growth
in coming quarters, setting the stage for trend growth. The projected
slowdown in final sales is suggested by both the rebound in long-term
interest rates this year and the appreciation of the dollar. It is
consistent with at least some hints about what is going on in some key
sectors. There is no question that housing has been a lot stronger
than I expected in the first half, but I believe that the decline in
housing starts we saw in May is the beginning of a gradual erosion of
strength in the sector largely due to the rebound in long-term rates.
Contract data suggest that nonresidential construction activity is
also on a slowing path. There appears to be very little life left in
equipment spending other than computers, reflecting a combination of
accelerator and cash flow effects. Having said that, I can see the
upside risk in this environment and I will say here that if it were to
persist and the economy were to be a lot stronger, I would not have to
be dragged kicking and screaming into another view of monetary policy.
Let me talk about the uncertainty, which I think is also
important, about the implications of current utilization rates.
Utilization rates have eased in manufacturing since the cyclical peaks
in late 1994 and early 1995 and have remained nearly constant for
almost the last two years in the case of the labor market. The
unemployment rate is admittedly below the staff estimate of NAIRU,
which in turn is virtually identical to my own point estimate.
However, there is no broad-based evidence of a demand-induced
acceleration of inflation despite the persistence of a low
unemployment rate for nearly two years. Indeed, core measures of
inflation for both the CPI and the PPI actually have moved lower this
year. So for my part, if there is any surprise about inflation, it is
how well contained it is rather than how high it is. The staff
continues to project, based on the unemployment gap, a gradual
acceleration of inflation pressures in coming quarters. But there is
certainly some hint in the recent data of a change in the fundamentals
governing the wage-price process. In the current context, I wonder if

7/2-3/96

-40-

it would not be useful to think of NAIRU more as a range than as a
point--say, 5-1/2 to 6 percent. If the unemployment rate remains
within this range, then there is no case for intervening. As the
unemployment rate moves toward the bottom end, then we should become
increasingly alert to the potential need for a tighter policy but
action should be postponed until the rate moves outside this range.
Now, we seem to have a pattern where we see scattered evidence of wage
pressures but little evidence of price pressures, and I wonder whether
or not what we are seeing is some reversal of the pattern of widening
profit margins that occurs early during a recovery when wages lag
price inflation. If so, we can accommodate the somewhat faster wage
gains without having them pass forward in the form of higher
inflation.
I also want to say a few words about special-factor
inflation, which clearly has boosted inflation so far this year. I am
leery of supporting what I might call "counter-weather," as opposed to
countercyclical monetary policy that would seek a tighter policy to
offset the temporary blip in food prices that has not yet even
arrived. In addition, I have some strong priors favoring a sharp
decline in oil prices by the fourth quarter, and I expect that oil
prices are going to be below the staff forecast in 1997.
In summary, I expect growth to slow to trend in time to
prevent the unemployment rate from moving below the narrow range that
has prevailed over the last two years. The current level of the
unemployment rate is not definitively below NAIRU. I am happy with
the current environment. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. I have been on the job exactly five days, so I
am not going to say a great deal, in part for that reason and in part
because an awful lot has already been said with which I agree. But I
think you will have to admit that Larry and I chose a remarkably good
time to join the Federal Reserve and the FOMC. This is the most
favorable set of economic statistics and projections that I can
remember and that I think most people around the table can remember.
To have healthy growth and no clear sign of inflation is quite
remarkable, and as I listened to the comments around the table
everybody seemed to be straining to explain to themselves and to each
other why it is so good when we all thought that this probably could
not really happen. My own views fit very closely with the projection
in the Greenbook. That is partly because the Administration from
which I am a recent refugee has a forecast that is very similar to the
one in the Greenbook. When the Administration is so close to the
Federal Reserve, everybody ought to be reassured that there isn't some
kind of hanky-panky going on!
To draw on my recent area of so-called expertise, I do find
the Fed staff a little pessimistic about the outlook for the federal
deficit in 1997. The 1996 deficit is certainly going to be better
than anybody predicted. The $125 to $130 billion range now looks good
to everyone. The 1997 deficit will certainly be higher, but I think
it is unlikely to be as much higher as the Fed staff projects; they
have a $163 billion deficit. I think it is very possible that we will
get a major new effort at deficit reduction, if not before the
election certainly shortly after it, no matter who wins. That might

7/2-3/96

-41-

not be soon enough to affect fiscal year 1997 very much, but it could
have a strong effect in demonstrating the outlook for declining
outyear deficits, which the markets certainly would view as a
favorable thing. Besides that, I am simply in the same place as my
colleagues. Everything depends on whether this slowdown in the second
half of the year actually materializes. The recent statistics do not
show that yet, clearly, and the upside risk is certainly there. But
it is impressive how difficult it is to find any real evidence, either
statistical or even anecdotal, that there are strong wage pressures or
even more so that there are upward movements in prices. Indeed, as
several people have noted, the general inflation trend has been down.
So, I will watch with eagerness as this story unfolds over the next
few months. I just do not think we know yet whether the good news can
hold or whether we are in for some unpleasant shocks.
coffee?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all. Shall we adjourn for
When we come back, we can talk about long-term inflation.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next item on our agenda--the issue
of long-term inflation goals--is something that we have been
discussing on and off for a long while, and I think we will continue
to do so. It is important that we move forward on this issue and more
specifically that we agree on what the goals mean before we can find
some consensus within the Committee regarding their implementation.
As background for today's discussion, Dave Stockton wrote what I felt
was an exceptionally interesting memorandum and raised a number of
what I believe are relevant issues. Basically, I think what we have
to confront is a number of specific issues that we have never really
focused on.
When we talk about price stability as a goal, setting aside
the measurement problem, are we talking about price stability or are
we talking about zero inflation? As we all know, those are two
separate things. Choosing zero inflation means that, when a deviation
occurs, we would forgive past mistakes or changes on either side of
price stability. But if the objective is to maintain price stability,
a deviation implies action to reverse the changes. We also might have
some other approach that is a variation of the two. This organization
has become increasingly involved in analyzing the question of the wage
compression that occurs when inflation moves toward zero and wages
move down sharply. Does the issue of nominal versus real wages make a
significant difference as to how the economy functions? Within the
Board, I think we have a wonderful argument brewing. The issue also
occurs with nominal interest rates and their downside limit. There is
also the much broader question of transition costs and benefits, all
of which relate to how we approach this issue. It is a simple matter
to state that we will have such and such a goal, but it is very
difficult to get this Committee--comprised not of 12 but of 19
individuals who are relevant in regard to this issue--to agree on some
simple standard without a really fundamental agreement on what it is
we are talking about when we have such a stated goal. That is as much
as I am going to say on this issue at the moment. We have two
discussants requesting to be recognized, and we will go first to Dr.
Yellen and then to Dr. Broaddus.

7/2-3/96

-42-

MS. YELLEN. I will apologize in advance, since my comments
are a little on the long side. I would like to begin by summarizing
my views and then run through a mini cost-benefit analysis of the
welfare consequences of a permanent reduction in inflation. To
preview my conclusions, I think we should move to lower inflation but
gingerly, because we really do not know how large the permanent costs
might be in the form of higher unemployment, and we should find out by
testing the waters, studying the results, and rethinking further
initiatives if the costs turn out to be too large.
The experience of our northern neighbor should serve as a
warning to us to move slowly. The Canadian economy usually tracks the
U.S. economy fairly closely. Recently, though, Canada has pursued and
achieved very low inflation targets, but its real economic performance
relative to the U.S. economy has been very poor. The divergence
between the two economies in the 1980s was likely due to differences
in the U.S. and Canadian treatment of unemployment insurance, but the
declines in the employment ratio since 1990 are most likely due to
restrictive monetary policy targets that have achieved the lower end
of the Canadian target range of 1 to 3 percent inflation. Since mid1992, the Canadian unemployment rate has averaged 10.5 percent, 3
percentage points above the estimated Canadian NAIRU, while core
inflation has remained virtually stable instead of decelerating the
6 percentage points--to negative 4.5 percent by mid-1996--that would
have been predicted by the usual Canadian Phillips curve relationship.
That suggests a long-run Phillips curve that is quite flat in the
neighborhood of zero inflation.
To perform the relevant cost-benefit calculation of lower
inflation in the United States, we need to measure both the transitory
costs involved in moving from where we are to our ultimate inflation
target and then any permanent costs and benefits associated with
different steady-state inflation rates. I would like to start with
the easy part, the short-run costs because here I think the literature
is clear and we can narrow down the range. The sacrifice ratio in our
new FRB-US model without credibility effects is 2.5, resulting in an
output cost of about 5 percent of GDP per point of inflation. In
principle, credibility effects could lower the sacrifice ratio, but
both international cross-section evidence and time series evidence for
various countries provide no support for a credibility effect, and I
agree with David Stockton's conclusion that "empirical evidence of
credibility effects of announced inflation targets is difficult to
find."
So much for the range of short-run costs. Now, to make it
worthwhile to bear an output cost in Dave Stockton's range of 3 to 6
percent of GDP per point of inflation reduction, the permanent net
benefits would have to be substantial, although any benefits that are
dependent on GDP will grow over time. If we think of the short-run
costs as a risky investment, we would need to earn a pretax return on
a par with alternative uses of funds. If we assume a 6 percent
required rate of return and 2 percent growth in real GDP, we would
require an expected permanent net benefit somewhere in the range of a
bit over .1 to .25 percent of GDP-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
interest rates?

Excuse me, that 6 percent is real

-43-

7/2-3/96

MS. YELLEN.

Right.

If you like, you can vary the

assumptions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, it's just that you did not specify.

MS. YELLEN. I'm sorry; I am thinking of real rates. So one
would need a little over 1/10 percent to about 1/4 percent of GDP as a
net gain per point of inflation reduction to justify that type of
investment. The question is, from whence might such benefits accrue?
In the interest of time, I want to focus on only the things I consider
maj or.
The only identifiable benefit of low inflation that I think
could be big enough to create the needed payoff is connected with the
tax system and its interaction with inflation. The most important
recent study is that of Martin Feldstein, and it shows that the
benefits in question are positive and large, contrary to most people's
intuition. Feldstein calculates that the benefits due to lower tax
distortions from a 2 percentage point reduction in inflation under his
baseline assumptions amount to 1 percent of GDP. The lion's share of
that gain, .92 percentage point, accrues from reducing the deadweight
loss associated with distortions in the timing of consumption over the
typical saver's lifetime. But Feldstein's calculation relies not only
on the assumption of a moderate positive interest elasticity of
savings demand but also on the, to me dubious, assumptions that first,
most saving is for retirement and second, that there are no taxsheltered retirement savings vehicles. Feldstein's calculations omit
the many ways under existing tax codes that savers can and do shelter
income on retirement savings, including pension plans, tax-deferred
savings plans, and annuities. This suggests to me that Feldstein's
number could be off by an order of magnitude. I would add that
despite the technical difficulties in rewriting the tax code, these
gains could be achieved at far lower cost simply through legislation.
Now, I think there are likely to be significant, permanent
costs of very low inflation, and David Stockton pinpointed them
accurately. First, a little inflation permits real interest rates to
become negative on the rare occasions when required to counter a
recession. This could be important, and I think the current situation
in Japan provides a textbook example of the difficulties in
stimulating an economy that is experiencing deflation. Even with
nominal short-term rates at .5 percent, real short-term rates cannot
fall into the needed negative territory.
Second, and to my mind the most important argument for some
low inflation rate, is the "greasing-the-wheels argument" on the
grounds that a little inflation lowers unemployment by facilitating
adjustments in relative pay in a world where individuals deeply
dislike nominal pay cuts. With some permanent aversion to nominal pay
cuts, the output and unemployment costs of lowering inflation that we
ordinarily think of as transitory simply never disappear because the
long-run Phillips curve becomes negatively sloping as inflation
approaches zero. This is arguably the recent Canadian experience. A
recent paper by George Akerlof, Bill Dickens, and George Perry, forthcoming in Brookings Papers, shows through simulation experiments the
frequency with which nominal wage cuts would be required to avoid
permanently higher aggregate unemployment as American inflation falls
toward measured zero under realistic assumptions about the variability

7/2-3/96

-44-

and serial correlation of demand shocks across firms. The authors
assume that firms experiencing losses can and do cut wages after two
years, which is in accord with existing evidence by Blinder and Choi,
Bewley and others, and that workers will accept nominal wage cuts when
they perceive it as needed and fair. Even so, these authors find that
the needed frequency of nominal cuts rises rapidly as inflation
declines. Here are some numbers: On top of those firms that would cut
wages after two years of losses, an additional 5 percent of firms
would seek to cut wages at 3 percent inflation, 10 percent at 2
percent inflation, 19 percent at 1 percent inflation, and 33 percent
of firms would ideally impose wage cuts on workers at zero measured
inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What is the productivity growth level?

MS. YELLEN. Productivity growth is placed at the current
1 percent level. An aversion on the part of firms to impose these
desired nominal wage cuts results in higher permanent rates of
unemployment. As the numbers I just cited would suggest, the impact
of resistance to nominal wage cuts on permanent unemployment is highly
nonlinear. It would be barely noticeable at present U.S. inflation
levels. It is also worth pointing out, picking up on the comment the
Chairman just made, that what matters to permanent unemployment is not
the steady state inflation rate per se but the sum of the inflation
and productivity growth rates, which determines the trend in nominal
wages. If we go back to the 1950s and 1960s and ask why we had low
unemployment with low inflation, I think the answer is that
productivity growth was much more rapid and that makes a big
difference.
The key question is how much permanent unemployment rises as
inflation falls, and here the methodology used to assess the
consequences does matter. These authors used general equilibrium
methodology and here is what they find: The natural rate rises above
its assumed 5.8 percent minimum to 6.1 percent as measured inflation
falls from 4 down to 2 percent; the natural rate rises to 6.5 percent
at 1 percent inflation, and then to 7.6 percent at zero percent
inflation. With different methodology, the impact of nominal rigidity
could be lower. But even so, I think it is apparent that an economy
where 20 to 30 percent of firms need to impose pay cuts in a typical
year to operate efficiently is likely to be an economy that will end
up functioning below its potential.
The simulations in this paper assume that, except in
circumstances where the firm is really in trouble, workers resist and
firms are unwilling to impose nominal pay cuts for fear of harming
worker morale and causing productivity-reducing backlash. In Canada
between 1992 and 1994 when core inflation was under 2 percent and
unemployment 3 percent above the estimated NAIRU, 47 percent of 1,149
observed labor contracts had pay freezes but only 6 percent had wage
cuts. The question is, how common is resistance to nominal wage cuts?
I certainly do not have time to review all the available evidence, but
I want to say that I think we are dealing here with a very deep-rooted
property of the human psyche that is uncovered repeatedly in
experiments, surveys, and interviews. Very recently, Bob Schiller of
Yale posed the following question to a random sample of Americans. He
asked, "Do you agree with the following statement:
I think that if my
pay went up, I would feel more satisfaction in my job, more sense of

7/2-3/96

-45-

fulfillment, even if prices went up just as much."
Of his
respondents, 28 percent agreed fully and another 21 percent partially
agreed. Only 27 percent completely disagreed, although I think it
will comfort you to learn that in a special subsample of economists,
not one single economist Schiller polled fully agreed and 78 percent
completely disagreed. [Laughter]
To the best of my knowledge, the only potential evidence in
favor of the proposition that Americans will and frequently do accept
nominal wage cuts without changing jobs comes in recent studies whose
methodology I consider flawed. These studies use individual data from
the Panel Studies on Income Dynamics, a longitudinal study that
follows individuals over time. To compute the wage changes of
employees who remain in the same job, these various studies take the
difference between wages reported by the same individual in
consecutive years. The problem with this approach is that it is known
that reporting error in wage levels is very large, and such errors
result in an artificially high incidence of calculated wage cuts. In
commenting on the most recent paper of this sort, by David Card and
Dean Hyslop, John Shea computed the incidence of reported and actual
wage cuts of 379 participants in the PSID whose occupation, industry,
and area of residence enabled him to uniquely define the bargaining
agreement covering them. He found that 21.1 percent of those
respondents had reported wage cuts, but in contrast, only 1.3 percent
were actually covered by bargaining agreements that contained wage
cuts.
Where does that leave us? I want to wrap up by indicating
what happens when we do the cost-benefit analysis by using the
Akerlof, Dickens, Perry estimates of inflation-related changes in
permanent unemployment along with Feldstein's estimates of the taxrelated welfare benefits under his baseline and more conservative
assumptions about the interest elasticity of savings. As I total
things up, it appears to me that a reduction of inflation from 3
percent, which I take as roughly our current level, to 2 percent, very
likely, but not surely, yields net benefits. The "grease-the-wheel"
argument is of minor importance at that point, and tax effects could
be significant. But with further reductions in inflation below 2
percent, nominal rigidity begins to bite so that the marginal payoff
declines and then turns negative. To my mind, to go below 2 percent
measured inflation as currently calculated requires highly optimistic
assumptions about tax benefits and the sacrifice ratio. Of course, if
inflation cum tax distortions were remedied through legislation
instead of Federal Reserve policy, the net benefits would be lower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Al, may I respond to this just for a

minute?
MR. BROADDUS.
just a comment.

Absolutely.

I do not really have a response,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have an argument that is very well
put together. In an unusual way, what you have documented is one of
the necessary conditions for price stability, which is accelerated
productivity.
MS. YELLEN.

I agree with that.

7/2-3/96

-46-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But let me go further. I must admit
that several years ago I raised this hypothesis with our staff
colleagues and had them take a look at what happens to productivity as
the inflation rate moves toward zero. Lo and behold, they got a
reasonably good correlation that unfortunately disappeared to a large
extent when the data were revised. Leaving the statistical tests
aside, we do observe out in the world that as the inflation rate
falls, it becomes increasingly difficult for producers to raise
prices. They therefore tend to try to reduce costs in order to
maintain margins. We have seen that as a generic observation. We
know that if everyone does it, since on a consolidated basis 65 to 70
percent of the cost structure is labor manhours, of necessity we will
tend to get an increase in productivity because it is being forced on
the system by the downward compression. If that is the way the system
functions, then we can turn the analysis on its head and raise the
question of what type of productivity increases are required to
maintain nominal wage level distributions in which the compression
does not occur and all of the adverse tradeoffs that are involved with
the Phillips curve do not occur. Implicit in that argument, if we are
to move toward price stability, is that the process in and of itself
induces an acceleration of productivity.
MS. YELLEN. I would agree with your conclusion that we need
higher productivity growth, but I have not seen any evidence that
convinces me that we would get it. But certainly if we did get it, or
if productivity growth were higher, it would be easier by an order of
magnitude to live with price stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do see significant acceleration in
productivity in the anecdotal evidence and in the manufacturing area
where our ability to measure is relatively good. We can see that
acceleration if we look at individual manufacturing industries. It is
our macro data that are giving us the 1 percent productivity growth
for the combination of gross industrial product and gross
nonindustrial product, which do not show this phenomenon.
MS. YELLEN. One could argue that we have roughly a 1 percent
bias in the CPI so that right now we have, say, 2 percent productivity
growth and 2 percent core inflation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We have not had such productivity growth

for long.
MS. YELLEN. Such productivity growth would mean that we are
living successfully with 2 percent inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is exactly the point.

That is

another way of looking at it.
MS. YELLEN. Because productivity growth is really higher
than we have measured it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In fact there is obviously an exact,

one-to-one tradeoff. That is, we can reach price stability either by
driving down the inflation rate and getting productivity to bounce up
or by revising down the inflation figures and producing higher
[Laughter]
productivity!

-47-

7/2-3/96

MS. YELLEN.

I am perfectly happy with the last view.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Al.

MR. BROADDUS. This is a big and broad issue. Janet has
approached it one way. I am going to approach it a somewhat different
way rather than try to respond in detail to her comments, which I
thought were very interesting and constructive. For some time now, we
have had these monetary aggregate ranges under the Humphrey-Hawkins
procedure, but I think we would all agree that they have not been
effectively playing their traditional role of serving as a nominal
anchor for monetary policy and a signal of the Federal Reserve's
commitment to longer-term price stability. We need a better anchor.
We have discussed this issue on several occasions in the last couple
of years, and I am glad we are continuing the discussion today. But I
would hope that we can do just a little more today than simply discuss
this issue and perhaps get at least a little closer to deciding on a
strategy for actually achieving our longer-term objective. We do a
lot of strategic planning at the Fed; we have a strategic plan for
supervision and regulation and we have a strategic plan for financial
services. Mike Kelley and Susan Phillips and our staff colleagues are
working on an umbrella strategic plan. I think we need a better and
clearer strategic plan for monetary policy.
In thinking about this, I found Dave Stockton's memo very
constructive but mainly in the sense that it serves to underline and
make very clear the substantial disagreement among economists and
others regarding exactly what our long-term goal should be and how we
should pursue it, and the large number of complicated issues in this
area. Reading that memo and listening to Janet Yellen has served to
convince me that if we are really going to make progress, we need to
prioritize some of these issues. In particular, I think we need to
sort out those issues on which we might be able to make some progress
relatively easily in the near future from those that are going to be
more difficult and complicated and take longer to deal with. Against
that background, I ask myself whether there are particular points,
even if they are limited ones, that most or at least many of us around
this table could agree on to serve as a starting point or a cornerstone for building a long-term strategy.
This may involve some risks, but I would assert that there
are, or at least there may be, some points of agreement. I think most
of us would accept the view that at a minimum we want to hold the line
on inflation--that is, to preserve the gains we have made over the
last 15 years or so in bringing the trend inflation rate down and then
to bring the rate down at least somewhat further over a period of
time. Moreover, I think many of us would regard the line to be held
as an underlying rate of something like 3 percent on the core CPI,
although we can debate which measure it should be. Most of us would
like to avoid a situation where the underlying trend rate of inflation
moves back up significantly over 3 percent for any length of time. If
I am right that we could forge a consensus on what I would regard as
pretty basic points--that's obviously because they leave most of the
really difficult questions unanswered and I recognize that--I think
acceptance of these points would be consistent with either the
opportunistic or the conventional deliberate approach to policy, in
the language of the Orphanides and Wilcox paper that Don Kohn
distributed back in May. I would argue that agreement on these points

7/2-3/96

-48-

--holding the line on inflation at 3 percent and subsequently bringing
the rate down further--would at least be a start. I think that is
important. It would move the ball forward two or three yards in what
is certainly going to be a very difficult ball game, and it would do
so for the first time since we have been talking about this issue over
the last year and half or so.
To get the full benefit, though, I think we would need to
make some explicit public reference to these benchmark points and our
commitment to them. From my standpoint, Mr. Chairman, an ideal
opportunity would be your upcoming Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. Some
of you may recall that I made essentially the same proposal at the
January meeting, our last Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. At that time,
several people responded, not unreasonably, that what really matters
is not words so much as deeds, and that certainly is true in general.
But I'm not sure that we have to choose between words and deeds. I
think a few well chosen words stemming from the right source, backed
up by deeds, can be a powerful credibility builder over time. The
advantage of a public reference to a 3 percent ceiling, as I see it,
is that it would commit us to something at least a bit more concrete
than simply indicating our commitment to price stability over some
indefinite time horizon. We would be putting something on the record
for which we could more easily be held accountable. The bottom line
is that this kind of commitment would raise the probability--maybe not
a whole lot but at least somewhat--that we would eventually get to
price stability and achieve our longer-term goals. In this difficult
area, I think that is reason enough for doing it. Also, I think
public support for the notion of holding the line on inflation and
then subsequently making some further progress is probably as high now
as it ever will be.
If we succeed in putting a firm ceiling on inflation, we
could subsequently move on to the separate and more difficult issues
revolving around how we should go about reducing inflation further -what the timing should be and what approaches we should use. Janet
has done an excellent job of outlining some of these issues and
tradeoffs.

At this stage, two approaches have been suggested -- an

opportunistic approach and a conventional or more deliberate approach.
I am uncomfortable with the opportunistic approach, and I
will offer three reasons why. First, keeping in mind that the
ultimate goal is not temporary price stability but permanent price
stability, an opportunistic strategy seems to be premised on the idea
that recessions are permanently rather than just temporarily
disinflationary. I have trouble understanding that. It does not make
a lot of sense to me unless the recession is a byproduct of deliberate
efforts by the Federal Reserve to reduce trend inflation. In short, I
am not sure that there are autonomous recession opportunities out
there, if I can use that awkward phrase, that can be counted on to
reduce inflation permanently in the absence of some deliberate effort
to do so on our part.
Second, I think one of the more persuasive arguments for
following an opportunistic policy would be that it might deflect some
of the criticism we could be expected to receive if we follow a more
deliberate approach and are perceived by the public as perhaps keeping
policy tight and keeping the economy slack as a way of reducing the
inflation rate. But if this kind of strategy is going to work, it

-49-

7/2-3/96

would seem to imply that in recessions we would not ease policy as
aggressively as we would if we were not trying to reduce the inflation
rate permanently. At first glance, it might look as if this approach
would be less visible, less open to criticism, less of a lightning
rod, and thus one that would be more likely to succeed. But I think
there is a risk here that eventually the public would catch on, and
then we would be open to the criticism that we are not easing policy
aggressively enough in a recession. Think of the phrases that might
come out -- "we are kicking the economy while it is down" and so
forth. If we got that kind of feedback, that could undermine the
effectiveness of this strategy over time.
So, it is not really clear
to me what we would be gaining from this approach.
Third and finally, I have always thought that the word
opportunistic had a mildly pejorative connotation. So I looked it up
in Webster's and it is defined as follows:
"The act, policy, or
practice of taking advantage of opportunities or circumstances,
especially with little regard to principles or consequences."
[Laughter]
So, if we decide to adopt this strategy, I would hope that
at least we would find another name for it. Better yet, I think it
would be better to follow a more deliberate, conventional policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Principled opportunism.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Or deliberate moderation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we are going to get anywhere, we
can't have people literally talking at cross purposes. Janet, you did
not even accept the premise with which Al is starting, that everyone
agrees that we should seek price stability as a goal.
If we are going
to get anywhere, the question I have to ask first is whether you agree
with Al that price stability is a goal we should seek. If you do not,
this discussion then gets to the question of whether there is a
consensus among the Committee members that price stability is
something that should be our long-term goal, not how we get there.
First, we have to agree on the goal.
MS. YELLEN. I would simply respond to that by saying that
the Federal Reserve Act directs us to aim for both maximum employment
and price stability. To the extent that there is no tradeoff at low
inflation rates and there are benefits that outweigh the short-run
costs, then price stability, literally zero inflation, is good and we
should go for it. To the extent that there is a tradeoff, we have to
weigh what to do, and I think I am pointing to the possibility of a
tradeoff as we go to very low inflation rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, you are discussing the issue of the
transition, not the ultimate goal?
MS. YELLEN. No, I am discussing the issue of the ultimate
objective. If we have to pay a permanent price at zero measured
inflation in the form of permanently less employment and higher
unemployment, I do not read the Federal Reserve Act as unambiguously
telling us that we should choose price stability and forego maximum
employment.

-50-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act says that we
should have 3 percent adult unemployment. That is the law of the
land.
MS. YELLEN.
pursue that goal.

But it does not obligate the Federal Reserve to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The fact that it is promulgated in a
statute does not mean that it is achievable or that it is something
that we assume is achievable because it is in the statute.
If I can
get the two of you to reconcile, we can move forward.
MR. BROADDUS.
I'm not really sure that we are approaching
the problem that differently. I am talking more about the process.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Something is happening to the sound
waves between there and here.
[Laughter]
Go ahead, Bob.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, is there a way to focus on what was
agreed to between them as an interim step? It looked as though both
had the same view about the desirability of not allowing inflation to
go higher. There also was a very explicit agreement that inflation
should begin to move lower, and I think I heard Janet say something
like a full percentage point lower.
I agree, yes.

MS. YELLEN.

MR. PARRY. Why not set that out as an objective, and then we
can have another meeting when we reach it.
[Laughter]
MR. BROADDUS.
a great idea.
MR. PARRY.
in 11 years.

I would like to second that.

That would mean more progress than we have made

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.
MS. YELLEN.
MR. PARRY.

I think that is

Janet, didn't you say that?

That is actually what she said.
That is what I said, what Bob Parry just stated.
That's progress; now we have to talk about when

and how.
MS. YELLEN.

There are 17 other people besides the two of us.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's okay, but you would be surprised
at what happens in a discussion.
If you let everybody speak and if
they all deliver the speeches that they prepared before walking into
this room, we will come out of this room with chaos. Let me see if we
can establish some structure for our discussion. Can you give me
three sentences in conclusion on how you view the question: Is longterm price stability an appropriate goal of the Federal Reserve
System?
MS. YELLEN.
for me?

Mr. Chairman, will you define "price stability"

-51-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Price stability is that state in which
expected changes in the general price level do not effectively alter
business or household decisions.
MS. YELLEN.
[Laughter]

Could you please put a number on that?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say the number is zero, if
inflation is properly measured.
MS. YELLEN. Improperly measured, I believe that heading
toward 2 percent inflation would be a good idea, and that we should do
so in a slow fashion, looking at what happens along the way. My
presumption based on the literature is, as Bob Parry summarized it,
that given current inaccurate measurements, heading toward 2 percent
is most likely to be beneficial.

move on.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.

Could we leave it at that?

Let us now

MR. JORDAN. I'm not sure I'm going to offer anything helpful
in terms of how this discussion is progressing. I may want to come
back in a moment to the issues about productivity because I think that
the incentive effects, on business decision-makers in particular, with
regard to efficiency and productivity versus what Janet was citing
about wage cuts are an important manifestation of what we are trying
to do. The Chairman's version does not affect business decisions.
In my view, businesses and households make their best
decisions about the future, whether personal investment decisions or
business decisions, when they expect the purchasing power of the
dollar to be the same in the future as it is today. It may turn out
to be somewhat more or somewhat less, but people make the most
efficient decisions about the allocation of resources when they expect
the value of the dollar to be the same later as it is currently. If I
could be persuaded that permanently eroding or conceivably increasing
the purchasing power of the currency, changing the standard of value
over time, somehow improves resource allocation and standards of
living, I would be very interested. But I am not persuaded. If we
can create a situation in which people say that the dollar will
purchase the same in the future as it does today and they proceed to
base their decisions on that expectation as the most probable outcome,
we then would get standards of living that rise at their maximum
potential.
We also would get maximum employment and the other
developments that foster economic well being. The question about an
inflation objective versus a price level objective is relevant only if
If bygones are
we do not have instant and total forgetfulness.
totally bygones no matter what happened yesterday, and if all of prior
history has no effect on people, and their best expectation for the
future is that the dollar will buy the same later as it does today,
then there simply is no difference between the two types of
objectives. They are identical. A difference comes into play only to
the extent that there is a credibility issue. If there is uncertainty
about the objective, people will treat yesterday's price shocks as
something that we will or will not offset. We then get a difference
between a price level objective and an inflation objective. If we are
going to talk about the difference between those two, we have to talk
about credibility and how we can achieve it.

-52-

7/2-3/96

With regard to international comparisons, I too thought about
Canada. I have looked at it and tried to understand whether there is
something useful for us to learn there or not. Since I do not speak
French and do not know what to do about the problem of Quebec, I
usually focus on the other provinces. Investment in British Columbia
and Alberta is extraordinarily different from that in the Maritimes,
for instance. If I had to conclude anything about Canada in the last
few years, given the separatist effort, I would say that I just do not
find its experience useful for the United States. I would rather say
let us learn from New Zealand because they reduced inflation to 2
percent and had 6 percent real GDP growth. But my guess is that other
people would not find that the right place for us to learn from.
If I were going to do surveys about wage cuts or increases of
the sort that Janet reported on, one of the surveys I would want to
conduct is to ask people as we approach the end of this century to
choose between two things. If the central bank had an objective of
reducing the purchasing power of the dollar to 13 cents or 7 cents
over the next century, which would you prefer? I would expect the
majority of the responses to be, why are you going to reduce it at
all? Explain to me why the dollar is not going to purchase the same
at the end of the next century as it does today. The difference
between 13 cents and 7 cents is the difference between a 2 percent
rate of inflation and a 3 percent rate of inflation over 100 years. I
think most people would view that as a silly alternative. They would
say, why not zero inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I know you will all be happy that I am going to
scrap my prepared comments. I will just address a couple of issues
that both Al Broaddus and Janet Yellen raised because I am in complete
agreement with two things on which I think they agreed. That is, we
should at a minimum hold the line on inflation where it is and go
somewhat further if we can do so. Now, it seems to me that the
context in which we should go somewhat further is the important aspect
of this. I would argue that that context has to be one where we have
a favorable economic situation including decent levels of growth,
employment, and so on.
All of that depends on the subject that was raised before-productivity growth and ways in which productivity growth can be
enhanced in order to bring about this favorable economic situation.
Does a climate of low inflation enhance productivity growth to the
point where we can reliably go from 3 percent inflation to 2-1/2
percent, to 2 percent, or to the 1-1/2 percent that we had on average
over most of the 1950s and the first half of the 1960s? I do not
know. In my view monetary policy's impact on the ability of
productivity to grow is indirect. It creates a climate in which I
think people make better decisions and focus on investments that
enhance productivity as opposed to speculation. So, I believe there
is an indirect effect of low stable rates of inflation and arguably of
declining inflation on the ability of people to plan and make
productivity enhancing investments. That is where monetary policy has
an important impact on the growth of productivity. There are others
that have some role to play in productivity growth, however. Fiscal
policy has a role to play. The amount of investment that we are
willing to make either on a public or a private basis in our education

-53-

7/2-3/96

systems has a role to play. Those are not things that monetary policy
can affect.
But I think in terms of how we discuss moving from where
we are to potentially lower and lower rates of inflation, it has to be
in the context of better productivity growth, a better overall
economic situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I think price
stability is a means to an end, and the end is sustained economic
growth, which is how I resolve what appears to be the conflict in the
Humphrey-Hawkins legislation and the Federal Reserve Act. I define
First of all, it is a very
price stability exactly the way you do.
good working definition, and secondly, since you are the head of the
Federal Reserve, using your definition makes a great deal of sense for
all of us.
If we each have a different definition of price stability,
it certainly confuses the body politic. Since most of the speeches
that I give are on price stability, because I think that is what we
ought to be talking about, I would also argue that it has major
sociological and therefore political benefits.
Since most people can
understand that more readily than the economic definition of price
stability, I think it gets the point across better.
As long as you are willing not to put a number on this purely
verbal definition of price stability, we in fact have a national
Therefore, the question is whether it is to
consensus on it.
anybody's benefit to define it more exactly. I am reminded of my days
at Holy Cross College studying scholastic philosophy, which had been
debating more or less the same major points for seven centuries by the
time I came along. Some of those points on which absolute truth had
not been defined are probably easier to resolve than an exact
numerical definition of price stability. I am not sure that we are
ever going to find the absolute truth here or that the search for this
absolute truth is anything other than something that would give the
FOMC something to do for the next seven centuries.
[Laughter]
Therefore, why would we want to have anything other than the informal
I think the reason is that an informal
consensus that we have?
consensus is more easily breached than if somehow we could bring about
a more formalized national agreement that price stability is the
appropriate goal of monetary policy. Previously in our history, we
had something closer to price stability for a period of 10 or,
arguably, 15 years, as noted in the Stockton paper, and that did not
keep us from the guns-and-butter decisions of the 1960s and 1970s that
ended that period of relatively stable prices. It had to be
reachieved, assuming we think that we are somewhere close to it now,
at enormous expense to the American people.
I think the people who should decide that price stability,
hopefully as a means to an end, is the appropriate goal of monetary
policy are not the people sitting around this table. Rather, it
should be the American people through their representatives in the
Congress. We are dealing with pieces of existing legislation that we
are defining in a way that makes it possible for us to do our jobs.
But those pieces of legislation are on the statute books, and it would
seem to me that in due course, i.e., not in a year divisible by four,
it would be a reasonable and appropriate thing for the American people
to debate through their elected representatives. We could certainly
make an active contribution to that debate. My guess is that it would

7/2-3/96

-54-

probably be better for the Federal Open Market Committee not to take a
position on this issue as an institution. I say that because if we
said price stability is 2 percent--if we were ever able to agree on
that--we might set the Federal Reserve against the people. I think
that would be a very likely outcome, and in my view it would not be in
the interest of the people or this institution.
If the people wanted to formalize the idea of price stability
as the goal for monetary policy, we are certainly unlikely in the
legislative process to get that defined in numerical terms, and
probably not even as unspecifically as a range. In a public speech, I
suggested a range of 1/2 percent to 2 percent largely because of the
lack of precision in such a range and also because I believe very
strongly that although inflation is bad, deflation is truly terrible.
Therefore, if in the implementation of price stability we make modest
mistakes on the up side, I justify those as an insurance premium
against the much greater evils of deflation. That's why I wind up
pretty much where Janet Yellen did--in the 2 percent area. In any
event, I believe that the search for absolute truth is not going to
get us there. I also believe that the true decision on anything more
than the working definition, which I think is the working consensus
that we have now, is really something of such great importance to our
society that it should be the American people who decide that through
the normal legislative processes. I do not think it is up to us to
make what I think would be a rather dramatic and far-reaching
interpretation of what the statutes on the books actually mean.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Lindsey.

Thomas Aquinas would be impressed!

MR. LINDSEY. I am very impressed with the Vice Chairman's
Jesuit training, and I think I agree with him completely. I also
agreed with what I thought Janet Yellen said, which is that we should
reduce inflation to a lower rate and we should proceed gradually from
there as we gain experience. Having agreed with her, I got very
nervous when Al Broaddus said he was not going to rebut her because
the readers of this transcript five years from now will then conclude
that we actually are all on one side of the issue. So, I am going to
do the rebuttal that Al did not do only because she provoked me with
[Laughter]
the use of the word "taxes."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
"tactics." [Laughter]

That was not "taxes;" that was

MR. LINDSEY. No, she said the word "taxes."
she is not going to get away with this!

I heard it and

Let me start off with some calculations very quickly. The
presence of retirement vehicles does not solve the problem, and here
are some examples. Let us do an IRA-type calculation versus a
permanent savings account that is taxed every year and a "let's
abolish inflation" calculation. If you have a 30 percent tax rate, a
2 percent real return, and no inflation, the real after-tax return
after 20 years is 34 percent. If you do not have IRAs, after 20 years
the real return would be 10-1/2 percent, assuming 3 percent
inflation. If you do have IRAs, it is 19.7 percent. That's because
under the IRA system, the fact is the inflation buildup is still taxed

-55-

7/2-3/96

and so the real return is depressed. So, in fact, you have to take
inflation out of the system in order to solve the problem.
MS. YELLEN. I merely meant that the existence of IRAs cuts
the welfare gains from lowering inflation.
MR. LINDSEY. It cuts the gains, but by this calculation it
would reduce the gains by 40 percent, not by 90 percent.
MS. YELLEN.

I did not say what the quantitative impact was.

MR. LINDSEY. Okay, I just wanted to put that in. The
economics profession has for 30 years gone through the functional
equivalent of CRA reform by arguing that we should change the tax code
for inflation indexing. We have tried, we have tried, we have tried,
we have tried; we have failed, we have failed, we have failed, we have
failed. It is not going to happen, and I think the reason is summed
up in what is the most egregious part of inflation treatment in the
tax code, and that is depreciation. Back in the early Reagan
Administration, indexing depreciation was one of the proposed reforms.
The companies are not for it; the Congress is not for it. When it was
tried again in 1995, it just floated up there and was absolutely shot
down because, horror of horrors, a company could actually deduct over
time more dollars than it spent. That was considered politically
unacceptable by the enlightened members of the Congress. So, we are
never, never, never in my opinion ever going to index our tax code
correctly. That is not a first-best solution because it is not a
solution.
Second, on nominal wage rigidities, I agree with your
analysis; I think it is right on target. Here is the case for
reducing inflation gradually, which is where I agree with you
completely. What would happen is that, over time, we would see a
change in the method of compensation in the economy toward a profitsharing mode. If we reduce inflation gradually enough, there is time
for this fundamental change in compensation to occur. Then, I do not
think we will have the same slope of the Phillips curve as we had
before. Such a change is happening right now.
Third, I think there are a lot of other rigidities in the
system. One classic example is our housing mortgage rules with which
I am intimately aware and have discussed. There the solution is no
inflation. So, I do think that the social gains to no inflation in
the long, long term are actually greater than you suggested, Janet,
and the cost, if we do it slowly and gradually and allow the labor
market to get used to it, will be less than you implied. Let's move
to 2 percent inflation, and I will bet that if we do it gradually, we
can move lower than that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have a solution to your political
problem regarding depreciation that we can solve. We just have to
make our dollar bills smaller and smaller to reflect the loss of
purchasing power. The total amount of paper would be the same.
MR. LINDSEY.
we would be all set.

The ecological effects would be the same, and

-56-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The real value of the currency and the
value of the paper would be invariant to the purchasing power of the
original outlay. I better call on Tom Hoenig! [Laughter]
MR. HOENIG. You have lost me, Mr. Chairman; I don't know
where to go from there!
To address the question as you framed it in your discussion
with Janet Yellen and Al Broaddus, I would like to observe that from
my perspective the evidence as presented in Dave Stockton's paper and
others is that high inflation is bad. Everyone agrees with that. It
also is clear that, given the purpose of money, zero inflation
properly measured is where we should be over time. Our experience
shows that even modest inflation causes distortions over time in terms
of incentives and signals in the economy and that inflation therefore
lowers productivity. In my view that requires that we take the
legislation that is in place now and pursue stable prices seriously.
I think the mandate is there. In implementing that mandate, I would
agree with Bob Parry and Al Broaddus that we ought to start somewhere.
I would accept 2 percent inflation as the interim goal if we can agree
on a reasonable timeframe in which we would move systematically toward
that goal. I think we would be much better off doing it over some
definite time period than arguing over whether we have a proper
measure for zero inflation. So, I think moving toward lower
inflation, defined as 2 percent, is a good intermediate goal. When we
get there, we can see how the markets and producers react and discuss
at that time whether inflation ought to go to zero and whether we have
the right measure for inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few random,
hopefully not inconsistent, observations about all this. For me, the
issues that we have been discussing are largely empirical issues.
Janet knows the literature better than I do, and I certainly am
willing to take her estimates. If she believes there are net benefits
in going to 2 percent, then that makes sense to me. The only thing I
would add to that is to go slowly to 2 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Janet said "probably."

MR. STERN. Right. Go slowly to 2 percent, probably. I
would add that Bob Lucas currently has a paper that also estimates
significant gains from bringing down the rate of inflation. So, I
would throw that into the thinking here. I would not do this with the
hope or expectation that we are going to get a lot of benefits from
credibility, especially in the short run. I just am not aware of any
evidence of significant credibility effects. I will not get into it
right now, but I think what we are talking about is going to involve
some challenging implementation issues. Even capping the rate of
inflation at 3 percent, while it sounds simple, may not turn out to be
quite so simple at all. In fact, we may be confronted with that issue
before too long. But what really concerns me about all this and why I
am coming out where I am is that I want to avoid something that puts
us back in the late 1970s and early 1980s kind of situation. I would
like to institutionalize our anti-inflation effort to a greater degree
than we have been able to do up to this point because I think an
increase in inflation could really be costly. I would not be so

7/2-3/96

-57-

worried if it increased from 3 percent to 4 percent for a short period
of time. We really get into trouble it seems to me when inflation
goes from 3 percent to 6 percent to 10 percent and higher. I think we
would benefit from institutionalizing something that would help
strengthen the process to prevent such a rise from happening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is an interesting point to
apply to what we have been saying. There is another side to this
issue, namely whether there is a tendency for inflation to go in the
other direction if we do not move toward price stability, That is an
opportunity cost that has to be addressed. If Gary is right, and I
suspect he may well be, that complicates the issue greatly. Governor
Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Thank you. What I want to do is to sort out a
little of the evolution of the debate on the costs and benefits of
inflation and emphasize what is really novel in the points that
Governor Yellen was making. What she has introduced with a much
stronger theoretical basis is the notion of a permanent tradeoff.
That is what is really novel to the debate. I also want to tell you
why I think the Feldstein estimates of the benefits of lower inflation
are wildly high. Secondly, I think we all can see, and it is
remarkable to me at my first meeting, that we are moving very quickly
to a consensus on, if not a very long-term policy, at least a policy
that goes more than from meeting to meeting. That, I think, is a
great thing. Finally, I do want to respond to Al's questions about
opportunistic disinflation, and I want to explain to you perhaps a
little more clearly how it actually works.
First of all, what do we know about the costs and benefits?
I think it is very clear, from the Stockton paper in particular, that
the benefits from reducing inflation when it is already high are large
and clearly justify the cost associated with disinflation. What is
high? What are we talking about--15 percent, 10 percent, 7 percent,
all of those? We would not be sitting here arguing if inflation were
in that vicinity, and we would not be having a debate on deliberate or
opportunistic strategies. Unfortunately, the benefits of reducing
inflation from an already modest rate are very difficult to pin down,
surprisingly so, and may not justify the cost of disinflation. What
people have been saying, I think, is that the benefits of very low
inflation are there; it has to get to zero; price stability is always
better. And yet we have difficulty actually pinning that down in our
cross-country and time-series analyses. In my view--not everybody
would agree--there is clearly a sizable one-time cost associated with
disinflation and absolutely not a shred of evidence that enhanced
credibility of the Fed from announced or legislated inflation targets
reduces that cost.
One thing we should take into account is that while the cost
of disinflation is high, to the extent that it is a one-time cost, we
have to balance that cost against the permanent flow of benefits from
price stability or low inflation. That is a very powerful argument,
one that Feldstein also has made. But here is the key. There are
hints that inflation can be too low as well as too high from the
perspective of achieving optimal resource allocation and hence the
highest possible living standards. But the evidence here remains
inconclusive. This is what is really new to the debate. The debate
was always between the one-time cost of disinflation and the permanent

7/2-3/96

-58-

benefits of lower inflation. Now all of a sudden we are confronted by
the fact that it is not only a one-time cost that we might be willing
to pay, but there might be a permanent cost of lower inflation,
particularly when it gets below 2 percent. This is a theme that was
not emphasized in the Stockton paper, but I think it is important.
There is a stronger case that deflation is harmful to macroeconomic
performance. This weighs against the price level as opposed to an
inflation target. I do not think anybody has a real difficulty with
that notion, but I think that is important. So when we talk about
price stability, we do not exactly mean price stability in the sense
of a fixed price level that we get back to.
Having said all this, I see all the different sides
converging to a debate about what our provisional targets should be,
not having decided whether we as a Committee believe in a deliberate
or an opportunistic strategy, and I will come to that in a minute.
But without deciding on exactly what the path is, we have an agreement
that we want to hold the line at about 3 percent on core CPI and that
provisionally we want to set a very explicit target for ourselves. We
seem to be headed toward agreement on 2 percent inflation. We still
have to debate how we get there, but this is a lot of progress. I
think this is a good idea in terms of testing the waters, because all
of these issues are still quite unresolved in my own mind. I am very
worried, and again I really have not made up my mind as to whether or
not there are permanent costs to price stability or very low
inflation. I never taught it that way, but I am quite prepared to
consider that possibility, and I think testing the waters gives us
time. As Governor Lindsey said, quite possibly when we get to 2
percent inflation and we find how much we like it and perhaps how much
the real economic environment may have improved, it will give us new
confidence to take the next step.
Now that we seem to have all this wonderful agreement, that
leaves us with one issue: How do we get from 3 percent to 2 percent
inflation? That brings us to the difference between the deliberate
and the opportunistic strategies. There is one strategy that was
articulated by Jerry Jordan in previous meetings--I enjoyed going
through the transcripts for those meetings--where he said that he
would measure economic performance over 1996 and 1997 and evaluate
monetary policy solely by whether inflation was lower over that
period. That is not the way I would do it at all. This leads me to
comment on what the opportunistic approach says and how it achieves
its objective. What Al Broaddus was worried about was that recessions
are temporary. They come and they go. How do we get permanent
declines in inflation with an opportunistic strategy? The answer is
that there is an asymmetry built into an opportunistic strategy, and
here is how it works. During good times, we only get up to full
employment; we never go beyond it. During other times, the unemployment rate is always above the NAIRU. If the unemployment rate
averages above the NAIRU we are disinflating on average. That is what
the opportunistic strategy does. What goes with that is that if you
want to stop at 2 percent inflation, that has interesting
implications. It means that once you get there, for every recession
you treat yourself to a boom. You treat yourself to a little
overheating because that is what it will take to keep the average
inflation rate constant.

-59-

7/2-3/96

My final comment is, gee this is even more fun than I
[Laughter]
thought it was going to be!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tomorrow morning I am going to argue
that we are already at 2 percent inflation.
[Laughter]
MR. BROADDUS.

Hold the line at 2 percent then!

MR. MEYER. Let me tell you why I think Feldstein is wrong.
The issue here is the existence of inflation non-neutralities in the
tax system, for example, tax depreciation based on original cost.
Inflation essentially raises the cost of capital to firms. Think of
these inflation nonneutralities as being like an excise tax that is
imposed on firms. What are they going to do with that? They are
going to try to shift the burden. How do they do it? They shift the
burden by in fact lowering investment, which lowers interest rates and
forces lower interest rates back to consumers. Now, consumers can say
they do not want those lower interest rates, and they can try to
escape the burden of that "excise tax" by lowering their savings.
But here is the rub. It is a battle between who is more sensitive-business firms or households--just as in the typical excise tax
example. If firms are a lot more sensitive to interest rates than
households, and that is what I believe--my best guess at this is a
zero responsiveness of savings to interest rates--then Feldstein is
completely wrong, blown out of the water. I have written a paper on
this, though I would not want the staff to delve into my econometrics
too much, but as a best approximation I find that what actually
happens is that inflation induces firms to shift back the burden
entirely to households in the form of lower after-tax real interest
rates. Households do not escape that at all. In the process, the
after-tax real cost of capital to firms is unchanged, and there is no
inflation bias to the savings-investment process. That might be as
extreme as Feldstein's argument.
MR. LINDSEY. You are assuming that savings are not
responsive to interest rates?
MR. MEYER.

Yes.

MR. LINDSEY.

You assume zero responsiveness?

MR. MEYER. Yes. That might be as extreme as Feldstein, but
I want to say it is no more extreme than Feldstein because the
interest elasticities he has picked are so wildly out of sight from
any empirical evidence, whereas mine are quite reasonably based
relatively. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. This has already been a long day. I must say I
have a lot of sympathy with the sentiments expressed by Bill
McDonough. I did not have the benefit of a Jesuit training, but I
have had a lot of economics, as did a lot of people around the table,
and that is both a blessing and curse. As economists we like things
to be clear and objective and logical. The fact is that policymaking
is ambiguous, judgmental, and practical. The best we can do is to try
to make some improvement from where we are and stay away from
absolutes. With regard to inflation, I think the best we can do is to

-60-

7/2-3/96

hold the line where we are and move inflation down a percentage point
or so over time and see where we are at that point. I think we can do
that over the next several years the way we have gotten inflation down
over the past few years--we take advantage of the business cycle; we
take advantage of breaks when they come our way. I do think, however,
that we need to put this strategy in a framework of growth. For us in
the Fed to be perceived as enemies of growth is a loser. The ultimate
objective of monetary policy always needs to be framed in terms of
maximum sustainable growth and moving inflation down is a means to
that end. If we keep it at that level, I think we can make some
practical progress and have something that is salable to the general
public. If we try to do a lot more in this context, I think we will
let perfection be the enemy of improvement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Hear, hear.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. First of all, consistent with
what I have said before, I think our focus ought to be on prices. In
my view, that is the only thing we really influence in the long run,
and that is what our policy ought to be aimed at. I agree with what
Ed Boehne said; we really are talking about a means to an end. Low
and stable inflation or price stability, however you want to say it,
enables the economy to reach its maximum potential. That is our
ultimate goal.
My inclination would be to take what I perceive might be on
the table now as an interim step. I think it is fairly easy--and I am
basing this on 3 percent core CPI--to get people to buy into the fact
that such an inflation rate is too high. When I talk to groups, they
take notice when I point out to them that a 3 percent rate of
inflation cuts the value of the dollar in half in a generation. We
can make the case that 3 percent inflation is too high and that it is
reasonable to move it another notch lower. I would characterize that
as just another step, and would continue to describe our ultimate goal
qualitatively and not quantitatively at this point. There may come a
time when we are prepared to quantify our ultimate objective, but
right now I would view our intermediate objective as just a step along
the path to price stability.
I think we would have to be explicit about what we were
doing. In other words, whatever price index we use, we should
indicate that we have a particular quantitative objective in mind over
a particular timeframe. I think such transparency is beneficial in
terms of enabling the economy to make the adjustments that need to be
made in connection with that objective. I suppose that smooth
adjustment is dependent to some extent on credibility, and we would
have to earn that.
This is an objective that we are setting for ourselves, but
there is a benefit in my view to being explicit about it. In some
ways, one could look at an opportunistic approach as somewhat
misleading and likely to create uncertainty that does not need to
exist. Unless we are explicit, people do not realize that we have in
mind getting inflation down to a particular level, and suddenly they
are dealing with the impact that our actions are having on the economy
without prior knowledge of their purpose. I do not think that is
useful.

7/2-3/96

-61-

I also think that taking a step in the direction that I have
been describing would be useful to us in that it would force us to do
more in the public education arena in terms of explaining to the
public the benefits of price stability, however defined, the costs of
inflation, and also some of the potential offsets. As I have said to
you before, Alan, I think we have a big job to do in terms of
educating the public, though I believe we are making progress. I
think people recognize that the kind of business environment they have
enjoyed over the last four to five years has a lot to do with
relatively low and relatively stable inflation. This is a good time
to capitalize on that, and I think taking an explicit step on our own
and not waiting for legislation would force us to move further down
that path.
Finally, just a comment on what Larry Meyer had to say about
the opportunistic approach and how it works. Larry, in my experience,
whenever we get to whatever the NAIRU is, people decide it is not
really there and it gets revised lower. This is true of anything we
pick. What I worry a little about is the mentality that I see emerging here, namely that we are not going to deal with inflation until we
actually see "the whites of its eyes." That approach to policy has
never served us well in the past, but in effect that is what has been
happening. We get to what people thought would be the NAIRU, we do
not see wage pressures, and we assume that the NAIRU must be lower.
So it keeps getting revised down. At some point, if we are wrong
about that and wage pressures hit us when we have not anticipated
them, it is going to be much tougher to deal with the practicalities
of even containing inflation at 3 percent. That concludes what I have
to say, Alan. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. Very quickly. It seems to me that we have made
a lot of progress despite the fact that we started with the wrong
question. [Laughter] With all due respect, the question, should
price stability be THE goal of the Federal Reserve--meaning the only
goal--is not the right question, as President Boehne and others have
said. Implicitly, the goal has got to be either maximum sustainable
growth or, as I would put it, raising the standard of living of
average Americans. The only way we know how to do that is through
raising productivity. Now, most of us read the evidence as indicating
that high inflation is detrimental to that end, but there is an
empirical question as to whether the costs outweigh the benefits of
getting out the last bit of inflation. Janet has made a persuasive
case, I think, that there are potential costs and we need to learn
more about them in getting from 2 percent to zero inflation. I think
we should be very humble before we say very much about the effects on
savings in going from 2 or 3 percent to zero inflation. It is very
easy to show that reducing inflation increases the rate of return to
savings. That is very easy. Wayne Angell does it in The Wall Street
Journal this morning, and Larry Lindsey was giving us other
calculations. But the empirical evidence that people actually save
more when the rate of return goes up has been lacking. We have tried
all sorts of experiments through the tax system and through raising
interest rates and through all sorts of other things, and we have not
seen clear evidence that people save more. So, I think we should be
really humble about alleging that there are big advantages to be

-62-

7/2-3/96

gained through the saving rate in squeezing out the last bit of
inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say before we go further, I need
a consensus from this group as to how much time you are going to need
to pack up and get to the British Embassy. It is now 6:08 p.m. We
should be there at 7:30 p.m.
MR. BERNARD. The cars will be at the Watergate and
downstairs here at 7:15 p.m.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It takes about 10 to 12 minutes at that
hour to go from the Watergate to the British Embassy. Would somebody
suggest a time?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think we need to be at the hotel
by 7:00 p.m. just to check in and put our bags away.
SEVERAL.

6:30 to 6:45 p.m.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
until at least 6:30 p.m.?

Are you all saying that we can continue

SEVERAL. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.
[Laughter]

Governor Phillips.

I think I've lost my train of thought here!

I am going to be very brief. I agree with Ed Boehne that it
would be useful to state our goal in terms of maximum sustainable
growth and the notion of trying to achieve price stability. It seems
to me that while we can set 2 percent or maybe something else as an
inflation goal, I am a little skeptical that any one measure of
inflation is the right one. At any point in time, I can imagine that
there will be problems with a particular measure, as there are now
with the CPI. Intuitively, I am attracted to the notion of the GDP
deflator, but I will admit that it too may have problems at times.
There may be unusual circumstances affecting the various measures, so
I am hesitant to pin down a particular number. I am a little more
comfortable with the notion of a range, but I think it might be useful
to continue to state our goal in words as opposed to numbers and then
give examples of what we see as price stability at a particular point
in time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey, you have a question?

MR. LINDSEY. No, I heard the word tax again.
[Laughter]
You have the right to tell me to shut up, but I will otherwise
persist.
MS. PHILLIPS.
me, Larry.

You did not hear the word taxes coming from

MR. LINDSEY. No. It is true that the economics literature
does not show a correlation between the real after-tax return on
savings and the rate of savings. However, in the example I gave

7/2-3/96

-63-

before, 3 percent inflation and a 2 percent real return converts a 30
percent tax rate on savings to an 80 percent tax rate on savings. No
sensible person would recommend that as a sane policy. That's not
because of this elasticity with respect to growth, but because it is
distorting and unfair within the tax system. What it does is to
induce people to "save" in other forms that are quasi-consumption
oriented, which causes an untaxed stream of benefits. Now, given that
they do all that--hold more "saving" in the form of more jewelry, more
land, more housing, rather than financial assets--that is a very
different proposition. I see everyone shaking their heads that they
agree with me; maybe that is to encourage me to be quiet.
[Laughter]
I will take it as assent with my point that what you measured as the
elasticity is not the "be all and end all" of policy here.
MR. MEYER. Even if there is no change, it is still unfair if
savers are forced to accept that lower rate of return.
MR. LINDSEY.

It is still unfair.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I switch the subject? Since we have
now all agreed on 2 percent, my question is, what 2 percent? Let me
present the issue more specifically. You can ask the question, what
is the inflation rate as appropriately measured, which implies that we
can measure it. Or you can ask what is the appropriate inflation
indicator that we should focus on, recognizing that it is not
appropriately measured and has various biases.
There are three fundamentals here. We can continue to use
the consumer price index as we have done over the years and in my
judgment increasingly inaccurately. I think that is potentially very
disadvantageous for us from a policy standpoint. The consumer price
index is flawed with respect to the biases that are in it on a
continuing basis, although it is evident that very significant
improvements can be made and indeed are being made by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis. Clearly, as Roberts pointed out, the PCE chainweighted index, whether excluding or including the energy and food
components, is unquestionably far superior as a measure of the real
consumer inflation rate, including the biases.
Alternatively, we can go further and ask, why not use the
gross domestic purchases inflation measure? Here again we have the
problem of chain estimates that are superior to previous estimates
that used the implicit deflator as a meaningful indicator, which it
was not. Here we have the question of what to do about imports. When
we endeavor to focus on a price, should we be concerned about the
price of imports? I will put it another way: Do we wish to use the
gross domestic purchases index, with or without food and energy? It
may seem that this is not a relevant consideration, but I think it is
a very significant consideration because, in the current environment,
prices of producers durable equipment are falling. We do not quite
measure it that way and our indexes do not quite come out that way.
However, it is apparent that even as badly as we measure it, using
prices of producers durable equipment as a proxy for consumer prices
clearly is not in the appropriate lexicon. Since we have already come
to a major conclusion, I will ask, what in the world are we talking
about? If anyone would like to address that issue, be my guest.

7/2-3/96

-64-

MR. PARRY. It seems to me that when Janet and Al were
talking, they had implicit in their minds something like a CPI or core
CPI. They were able to generate some consensus or agreement about the
desirability of reducing the rate of CPI inflation from its current
level of about 3 percent down to 2 percent. That is the critical
point. If one wants to focus on a different index, let the staff make
a suggestion and maybe we will start out with an inflation rate of,
say, 2 percent and go down to 1 percent. I do not think that is the
critical issue. I think the critical issue is -MS. MINEHAN.

Hold the line where we are.

MR. PARRY. Hold the line and come down one percentage point.
That is the critical issue.
MR. BROADDUS.

And be explicit about it.

MR. MEYER.

What do you think the PCE deflator is now?

MR. PARRY.

I don't know.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is 2 percent.

MR. PARRY.

Okay.

MR. MEYER.

So we are there.

MR. PARRY.

No, you miss the point.

Congratulations.

MR. MEYER. I came too late to take credit for it but I am an
instant winner. [Laughter]
MR. PARRY.
talking about that.
MR. MEYER.

I think you have missed the point.

They were not

But the PCE is clearly a superior measure.

MR. PARRY. That's fine.
inflation and go to 1 percent.

Then we will start with 2 percent

MR. MEYER. We know that there is a measurement issue. Let
us say that the PCE has less of a measurement bias but not a zero
measurement bias. It may be 1/2 percentage point; it may be a
percentage point, and you still have the issues of the permanent
tradeoff that Governor Yellen talked about. I do not know that you
can say that you should go from 2 percent to 1 percent. Maybe 2
percent inflation as measured by the PCE is where you want to be.
MR. MCTEER.
change the numbers.

If you want to change the measure, you have to

MS. MINEHAN. We also are not talking about going from 2
percent to 1 percent overnight or in the context of the next few
months. We are talking about making a change toward lower inflation,
however we are measuring it, using whatever measure. We are moving in
the direction of lower inflation over a period of time to the extent
that that is consistent with the maintenance of favorable conditions
in the economy overall.

-65-

7/2-3/96

MR. MEYER. But we get back to the issue of whether inflation
can be too low as well as too high. We have to take up that point.
What are the benefits of a percentage point reduction in inflation,
given that it is already 2 percent? Those are the things we have to
weigh.
MR. PARRY.
they reached?

So, you did not agree with the consensus that

MS. YELLEN.
I am sorry. I agree with Governor
would support the statements he has made.
I regret that
thought through this measurement issue carefully, and so
not take my 3 percent and 2 percent inflation numbers as
focusing on the CPI.

Meyer and
I have not
you should
necessarily

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I submit that we do not really need to
until we get to the question of whether our goal is 2 percent. Two
percent of what? It is a perfectly credible argument to say, whatever
the inflation rate is now, that it should be lower. That is an
unambiguous statement. Members can have their own particular measure
and say, I think it is 4, I want to go to 3 or I think it is 1, it
should go to zero.
Everyone is in agreement with that.
SPEAKER(?).

Instead of choosing, let's use all of them.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you put a number down, the question
inevitably is raised as to what you are talking about unless you want
a Jesuitical solution that bypasses the whole question.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. My view is that we could make a
contribution to the societal debate by figuring out what the best
inflation measurement is.
If it is not the CPI, we should decide what
we think it is.
It will not be perfect, but if we can determine what
is the best one, then we ought to sell that as the inflation rate
people ought to be looking at.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is another element that has not
been raised and that is the question, what is the real federal funds
rate? In principle, we should be deflating the federal funds rate, to
the extent that we think of it in real terms, by the same price index
we would want to use to determine when we are getting to stable
prices. This matters because, as I will tell you tomorrow, the
decline in the real federal funds rate since its peak is very
importantly a function of which measure is used. The decline can
range from 0 to 50 basis points, and that is a big deal. It matters.
MR. STERN. Another big
if we want to calculate the real
with a different price variable,
perspective. It is not just how
of quarters, but where it stands
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

deal would seem to be, though, that
funds rate or something like that
we need a time series to put it in
it has performed over the last couple
relative to history.

Absolutely.

We need a time series.

MR. STERN. Exactly. It seems to me that there is another
issue we have to think a little about, and this is not a defense of
the CPI. My guess is that to the extent that labor contracts,

7/2-3/96

-66-

government pensions, and the like are actually indexed to something,
they are indexed to the CPI or some variant of the CPI.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The cost-of-living escalator in labor
contracts is rapidly becoming obsolescent.
MR. STERN. I understand that, but there is still some of
that around. The social security cost-of-living measure still uses
the CPI, I believe.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I think there
is a growing consensus that using the CPI on all the government
programs is something that we should veer away from. If we were to go
to the gross domestic purchases price index or something like that, it
would not change the world, but I will bet that it would have some
effect on this sort of discussion.
MR. STERN. No, I was not trying to defend the CPI. I was
trying to acknowledge that it has an institutional role. It may not
be as important as it once was, but it is still there. It may have
something to do with the estimates that Janet cited about what the
Phillips curve is like if inflation is at a very low level because
some of the institutions are tied into the CPI. That is my point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with you. I think they are.
Fortunately, I don't think there is a large number of them with the
exception of the federal government. The CPI is a diminishing
element. Thirty to forty years ago, it was sacrosanct.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Could I follow up on that? If we
come to a conclusion as to what we think is the right inflation rate
and, going back to Governor Yellen's presentation, it turns out to be
a rate where 33 percent of the firms in the country have to force
nominal wage reductions, it will not fly. The American people will
not find it acceptable. It will not be something that the central
bank can live with over an extended period of time because it is
likely that either other people with different views would be taking
our seats or our responsibility would be transferred to an institution
that the people found more sympathetic. So, I think the inflation
number that we will find acceptable will never be zero. It will be
some number above zero, hopefully better measured than it is now. I
think we also should rely less on our instinctive reactions and seek
to quantify better that deflation is truly a bad thing, not just
because it sounds bad but because of the very real costs that it
imposes on the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there is a problem in that when
inflation is up to 5, 7, or 10 percent, people have an implicit view
that there is a floor below which inflation cannot go. It is the
issue of nominal interest rates. People look at nominal interest
rates and say, if they are down to 1 percent, get them as close to
zero as possible. No one ever suggests getting nominal interest rates
to minus 2 percent. But I do not think people are aware that there is
no sound barrier at zero. First of all, people do not know when we
are there. There is nothing visible as a signpost when we go through
zero and into deflation. That therefore makes it a very difficult
issue.

-67-

7/2-3/96

My own view, as I have stated many times, is that our goal
should be price stability. But I do not think we should have a naive
view as to what is required to get there or what it means when we get
there and what we do when it is no longer rhetoric but action that we
need to maintain it. I believe that we underestimate the productivity
effects that occur at those levels. The analogy would be that as a
particle moves to the speed of light, its mass changes. My own view,
which is probably going to be determined to be correct eventually-- in
the year 2252--[Laughter] is that as the inflation rate goes down, the
tendency for nominal wages not to come down will enforce cost-cutting
improvements and technological changes. It is not that low or stable
prices are an environment that is conducive to capital investment to
reduce costs, but rather that it is an environment that forces
productivity enhancements. It forces people who want to stay in
business to take those actions--such as cutting down the size of the
cafeteria, reducing overtime, and taking away managers' drivers--that
they did not want to take before in the ordinary course of business in
a modest inflationary environment because it was easier then just to
raise prices to maintain margins. If you force the price level down,
you induce real reallocations of resources because to stay in business
firms have to achieve real as distinct from nominal efficiencies.
That phenomenon is what price stability means to me, and I see it as a
very complex issue. When we first talked about it in the context of a
10 percent or so rate of inflation, we could just have an academic
discussion.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But now we are getting there and the
question is basically whether we are willing to move on to price
stability. The question really is whether we as an institution can
make the unilateral decision to do that. I agree with you, Mr. Vice
Chairman. I think that this is a very fundamental question for this
society. We can go up to the Hill and testify in favor of it; we can
make speeches and proselytize as much as we want. I think the type of
choice is so fundamental to a society that in a democratic society we
as unelected officials do not have the right to make' that decision.
Indeed, if we tried to, we would find that our mandate would get
remarkably altered.
Let me ask just one quick question that relates to this
issue. It relates to the question of the gross domestic purchases
index versus the GDP deflator. How would we wish to respond if oil
prices doubled? If oil prices doubled and the United States were
fully self-sufficient in crude, then this question would not come up.
Assume that we are effectively out of domestic crude and the oil price
doubles. The effect would be that, unlike the GDP deflator, the gross
domestic purchases index would veer very dramatically.
MR. LINDSEY.

But it is a level change, not a permanent

increase.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, take a look at the Greenbook. In
the first quarter of 1997, the GDP deflator goes up .1 percent from
the fourth quarter of 1996. The gross domestic purchases index goes
up by .7 or .8 percent because we have an assumption of a significant
rise in crude oil prices at the beginning of the year.

-68-

7/2-3/96

MR. LINDSEY.

What happens in the second quarter?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is not relevant.

MR. LINDSEY. Right, that is the point.
meant by a level change.

That is what I

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But supposing the price level goes up
again in the second quarter and up again in the third?
MR. LINDSEY.
oil prices.

That would require a constant acceleration in

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes, sure.

With feedback.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How do we respond to that? The GDP
deflator is 2 percent. I can create a scenario where the GDP deflator
is 2 percent and the gross domestic purchases index is 5 percent.
MS. PHILLIPS.
some point.

It would eventually work its way into GDP at

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Over the long run, oil prices would work
their way through but never fully. That's because there would be a
significant shift to domestic natural gas. The economy would go back
to using more coal, and we would have much smaller cars. So, the
higher oil prices would filter through only partly.
MS. PHILLIPS. But focusing on GDP, you are still going to be
addressing the question of an external oil shock.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. That is a relevant issue. It is
not a hypothetical question. You are talking about a 2 percent
inflation goal. What do you do in this situation?
MR. HOENIG. Hasn't all the discussion allowed for taking
shocks to the system into account? It is not that we would
immediately react dramatically to bring down the rate of inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But there are different types of shocks,
and there are all of these different alternatives. At this point I
will merely suggest that we adjourn. It is 6:31 p.m. We actually
have made far more progress today than any remote expectation I had.
We will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.
[Meeting recessed]

-69-

7/2-3/96

July 3, 1996--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will now discuss the long-term ranges
of the monetary aggregates, and I will call on Dave Lindsey.
MR. D. LINDSEY.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Thank you.

[Statement--see

Questions for David?

How much tighter is the tighter alternative?

MR. D. LINDSEY. A quarter point increase for the next four
FOMC meetings, so an upward adjustment of 100 basis points by yearend.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I want to ask a question about the simulations in
Bluebook Charts 2 and 3. They have interest rate implications that
can affect the growth of the aggregates over the long term.
PCE
inflation has averaged about 2-1/2 percent in the last two years, and
it was as low as 2.1 percent in the last four quarters. The
simulations you ran allowed the PCE to get up to 3 percent.
Is that
consistent with holding the line on inflation in an opportunistic
approach? It seems to me that if you were assuming an opportunistic
approach, you would have taken something like 2-1/2 percent or 2.1
percent and your decision rule would have been to keep it at that
level. Your assumption does not seem consistent with being either
deliberate or opportunistic.
MR. KOHN. When we designed this, we had to design it around
the Greenbook forecast, which already had some uptick in inflation.
Our design process was to level out the PCE and not allow it to rise
any further. In the baseline run, the solid line reflects the fed
funds rate assumption in the Greenbook and then shows what tightening
has to be implemented at the end of the forecast horizon to stop
inflation from rising perceptibly further. The other simulation does
start the tightening earlier and levels out the inflation rate a
little sooner. But you are right; in both cases, the small
acceleration in PCE inflation that is in the Greenbook stays in for
the most part.
MR. PARRY. It really gives one the impression that holding
the line on inflation is a relatively painless process when in fact
holding the line on inflation truly may be very painful.
MR. KOHN. In order to bring inflation back down to 2-1/2
percent, we would need at least the beginnings of a tighter policy.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. David, John Carlson on my staff has been doing
some work with MZM [Money with Zero Maturity]; have you looked at that
recently?

7/2-3/96

-70-

MR. D. LINDSEY. Yes, I looked at the chart that I got from
him yesterday. We have done a little work on MZM. That chart and our
earlier work do not show anything like the breakdown in the velocity/
opportunity cost relationship that has occurred for M2 in the 1990s.
On the other hand, judging by that chart and the econometric work we
have done, MZM has a rather substantial sensitivity to movements in
short-term interest rates and thus opportunity costs. Therefore, it
does not recommend itself as an intermediate guide to policy. The
example I like to think of in this regard is that if nominal spending
starts to drift up sufficiently to cause a problem with inflationary
acceleration and the Federal Reserve tightens a little, the result
could be to drive the growth rate of a very interest-sensitive
aggregate back down at the same time that nominal GDP is still
spurting ahead. Inflation could get out of control by insufficient,
gradual increases in short-term rates even though we would be keeping
this interest-sensitive aggregate well within a range. This is a
problem that harkens back to the situation that developed with M1
after the introduction of super NOWs in the early 1980s. Indeed, I
think the fundamental reason why the Committee deemphasized the Ml
aggregate was that it had become too interest sensitive to be of use
as a normal intermediate target.
MR. JORDAN. I think your analysis is right about the dangers
of using MZM if something causes an acceleration of inflation so that
we get a misreading of what that indicator is telling us. But it is
somewhat less interest sensitive than the old M1. We have the problem
of sweep accounts with the M1 measure that we do not have with MZM.
So, I would suggest that you drop the Ml measure, continue to produce
the charts and the opportunity costs because it will get more and more
difficult to make sense out of these sweep adjustments, substitute
MZM, pay attention to it, and let us see how it behaves over time.
Its opportunity-cost relationship is strikingly tight.
MR. D. LINDSEY. Yes. I am somewhat sympathetic to that
suggestion. Obviously, we do not currently target Ml; we do not
currently put much weight on it. Clearly, the sweep-account problem,
which involves these adjustments only for the initial sweeps, is
making it more and more difficult over time to have confidence in Ml,
even after sweep adjustments. I am a little sympathetic to that idea.
I will not speak for my division director, however. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will assume that you just did! Any
further questions for David? Before we go around the room, let me
just repeat what the structure of the discussion was when we looked at
this issue back in February. I must compliment the staff for
indicating then that growth of the broader aggregates was likely to
run at the upper end of the ranges that we chose, and, indeed, that is
precisely what happened. Therefore, I think we can have confidence
that such growth will continue as the staff suggests. The crucial
issue that I think is confronting us, to repeat what I said last
February, is not how we would set these ranges if we were dealing from
scratch in a wholly analytical environment. It makes very little
sense to choose a range in which expected M2 growth remains in the
upper half of the range. One would presume that we would
automatically adjust the range up a notch to surround the staff
forecast.

-71-

7/2-3/96

In my judgment, were we to do that, we would be signaling
that M2 is back in the ball game. But more importantly, I think we
would be signaling an element of acceptance of inflationary forces.
That is not what we would intend, but it would be interpreted by some
as conveying that meaning. At the moment, despite the evidence that
David Lindsey produced suggesting, I think with some reasonableness,
that M2 is beginning to look like a useful indicator once again, we
have not said that publicly. We have in no way indicated that we have
taken M2 out of the deep recesses of the statistical dungeon in which
we have placed it. I am concerned that we would gain very little in
stirring the pot at this stage. Were there a reasonable expectation
that M2 would run well above the ranges, then I think we would need to
have another type of discussion. As far as I can see, we need to have
some very strong reasons to deviate from a range that we presume would
encompass the type of M2 growth we would expect in the event that we
ever reached the nirvana of a stable price level. Frankly, I would
caution against stirring the pot at this stage even though the
arguments that will be made are unquestionably appropriate, namely,
that it makes no sense purposely to set a range knowing full well that
the actual tracking of M2 is highly likely to remain around its upper
limit. To my knowledge, no one has commented on that fact since we
adopted the range in late January. Were we to change the range, we
would raise potentially a new set of concerns, a new set of indicators
to measure Fed behavior, and a new view of an FOMC less interested in
constraining inflation. All in all, I cannot say that I am intrigued
by the thought of changing what we did last January. That is a deepseated prejudice that I have decided to expose!
[Laughter] Governor
Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, even though you did not utter the
word "tax," I am going to respectfully disagree. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

With respect to tax policy?

[Laughter]

MR. LINDSEY. If you had uttered the word "tax," I probably
would have disagreed disrespectfully or something.
As you stated, Mr. Chairman, we set a range that we thought
was going to be consistent with our intermediate- or longer-run
targets for inflation. The number that I heard yesterday was 2
percent inflation as an interim target. The number that I heard on
expected growth was 2 percent. And 2 plus 2 equals 4.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
structure! [Laughter]

Only in a nongraduated income tax

MR. LINDSEY. That is probably true. The first consideration
is that the midpoint of the Alternative II range is 4, and that range
is therefore consistent with our stated purpose in setting a range.
Second, even though there may be an argument over what the word
"tighter" means in the shorter run, if we tighten 100 basis points
this year, M2 growth will still be near the upper end of the
Alternative I range. Next year, it would fall to the middle of the
range under a policy that we would all acknowledge to be "tighter."
The word "tighter," if translated into a monetary aggregate, means to
me that we are running our monetary aggregate below a normal rate
because we are deliberately trying to disinflate. Under the tighter

7/2-3/96

scenario, our nominal GDP is not 2 and 2.
something like that.

It is 2 and 1-1/2 or

I also disagree about how perceptions would be affected.
Frankly, I do not think that there is any perception out there that we
are aggressively easing policy. I do not think that is true in the
bond market. The risks in that direction may have existed in the
past, but I do not think they exist now. With regard to why we would
be raising the range, the answer is that it is a technical
readjustment just like M3 was last July. In your testimony, you can
state that, Mr. Chairman. No one here is arguing that M2 should
become the pinnacle of monetary policy again. We are reporting these
ranges only because it is required by law. Because it is required by
law, we have a moral responsibility to report a range that is
reasonable and consistent with what we actually are going to end up
with.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, before we go forward,
Governor Lindsey referred to a matter that reminded me how very
important it is for all of us to recognize the highly confidential
nature of what we talk about at an FOMC meeting. We all have seen
some evidence recently of Fed officials mentioning what the Committee
was going to do or what was being said at our meetings. There was
even a rumor of what somebody thought somebody else thought that I
thought! That sort of thing serves us very poorly. The discussion we
had yesterday was exceptionally interesting and important. I will
tell you that if the 2 percent inflation figure gets out of this room,
it is going to create more problems for us than I think any of you
might anticipate. I beseech you all, especially those of you who have
not heard this speech before--and there are a number in this room who
have not--to realize that it is very damaging to this institution when
anybody conveys information from inside the System concerning what
members of this group are thinking or what the FOMC is likely to do.
You are all free to indicate what you think the economy is
doing.

You have the right -- but I would suggest not exercising it --

to indicate how you are going to vote. That is a bad idea, but you
certainly have the right to do it. What you do not have the right to
do is to talk for the Committee. No one has that right. I do not
have that right. Certainly, to do so is a major disservice to this
institution, and I ask you in the strongest terms to remember who has
FOMC clearance when you discuss FOMC matters. Most of our leaks, as
best I can judge, occur when somebody in this room speaks to somebody
else at their Banks or in other institutions, and it is they who leak
to the press. My impression is that security in this room is good
with respect to direct access to the meeting. What happens is that
you go home and you tell somebody, who does not have FOMC clearance,
that it was an interesting meeting. That person, who may be on the
staff at a fairly high level, tells somebody else that it was an
interesting meeting and guess what? That is the type of thing that
you have to avoid. I am sorry to interrupt our discussion at this
point, but it was precisely Governor Lindsey's allusion to the 2
percent that triggered my concern about this. So, please keep this
in mind. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I agree with your initial remark
about the message that would be sent by changing the ranges and to me
that consideration dominates. But with regard to the substance of the

-73-

7/2-3/96

ranges that we announce and any information content they may have, we
know that the lags are fairly long. It is not just 1997 that we need
to be thinking about, though that is what we have to announce, but
1998 and later. If evidence should emerge that the velocity of M2 is
stabilizing at essentially a zero drift or trend, we would then want
to cap nominal income growth. In Governor Lindsey's 2 plus 2 example,
would we want to be considering a world in which nominal spending
rises faster than 5 percent? I do not think so. I think holding the
range at 1 to 5 percent sends the message that we are capping total
spending growth at no more than 5 percent, allowing for the real
growth in productivity and making certain that inflation is still on a
downward trend. So, I think it would a mistake to shift from the
current 1 to 5 percent range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I agree with what you have suggested. I
do not want to prejudge the outcome of this meeting, but it is
possible that we will not take any action with regard to our shortrun policy. In that event, I would not want to take any action with
regard to these ranges. As you suggested, that might lead people to
misconstrue the posture of this Committee with respect to inflation.
So, I think it makes sense to leave the M2 range unchanged. The other
thing I would say is that, even though these aggregates have been on
the bench for a while, I do not believe we can afford to ignore them
totally over longer periods of time. One of the problems is that even
if we move to some sort of inflation target, we have to be very
forward-looking in that regard. In other words, our actions probably
have their impact on inflation with a one- to two-year lag, and I
think monetary aggregates can be very useful interim guides, not from
meeting to meeting but over longer periods of time. So, I believe
there is a policy role for the monetary aggregates once we are sure
that velocity relationships have stabilized.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, if we were starting
out from scratch I would be in favor of Governor Lindsey's position.
But we are not starting out from scratch, and as you suggested the
message likely to be given by a change in the ranges would be an
unfortunate one. We also have to live with the other issue that
Governor Lindsey very correctly mentioned, which is that we have a
statute that we are supposed to be observing. Therefore, I think one
would assume and hope that, in presenting the ranges, you would repeat
something along the lines of your statement in February to make it
clear that the aggregates are likely to grow at rates around the upper
ends of their ranges. Another reason why I would like to retain the
current ranges is that a change would be likely to take on an
importance far beyond its merit and divert attention from what I hope
will be the main message of your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. That
message is that price stability is not an enemy of growth. The
contrary notion is far too much alive in the land, and so it is very
important for us to confront that issue head on. I would not want
anything, including specifically a change in the ranges, to create a
diversion and have people focusing on that rather than on the really
important issue, which is that price stability is the way that we
achieve sustained economic growth and is in no way the enemy of such
growth.

-74-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. I agree fully with Governor Lindsey's reasoning
on this along with his assessment of the likely consequences of saying
that we have made a technical adjustment. I would certainly grant
that our Humphrey-Hawkins report has honestly stated that the ranges
in Alternative I encompass the Committee's expectation for growth of
M2 under conditions of price stability, and we said in the report that
we thought M2 growth would be near the upper end of the range. All
that is true. But what we are required to do, as the Bluebook notes,
is to communicate to Congress our objectives and plans for growth of
the aggregates for the calendar year, taking account of past and
prospective developments in employment, prices, and other factors.
The latter do not include what we view as the likely ranges under
conditions of price stability. My sense is that this is not a big
deal. I think we should simply do what we were asked to do in the
Humphrey-Hawkins legislation. We would say that we are making a
technical adjustment; we made a technical adjustment to M3 in July of
last year. I would note, incidentally, that I have dissented twice
before on this issue; Governor Lindsey has dissented once. No one,
not even a reporter, has ever called me to ask whether there was a
deep monetary policy disagreement among the FOMC members or whether we
had lost our commitment to price stability. I have never heard one
word from any reporter about this. I have said that I dissented for a
technical reason and the boredom factor set in so rapidly that no one
wanted to hear another word about it. I believe that is what would
happen now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I got your message.
Has anybody been asked about the targets of late?
SEVERAL.

I am just curious.

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I agree strongly with your
recommendation and for the reasons you stated. As I mentioned
yesterday, I think monetary policy has to have some long-term anchor.
In the absence of an explicit inflation target, I see the need to
maintain this range, which is centered around the longer-term rate of
M2 growth that we think is consistent with price stability and
sustainable economic growth. This is a substitute. It is not a
perfect substitute, but I think it is a better substitute than the
higher range. So, I feel strongly that we should maintain it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I would join those who argue that
the risk of an unintended signal effect from a change at this time,
even though the probability may be very low, is a risk we just do not
need to take. At least for the moment, that argument substantially
outweighs in my view the argument for a technical adjustment. So, I
would support leaving the ranges where they are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I agree with those who think that the case for
leaving the ranges unchanged at this point is a strong one. I

-75-

7/2-3/96

certainly would welcome renewed usefulness of M2, but I do not think
the evidence, while it may be encouraging, is sufficient yet. As a
consequence, I don't think we ought to raise its profile or
prominence. We are not getting any questions about growth around the
top of the ranges, and there is something to be said for letting
sleeping dogs lie.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation
and with the way Gary Stern phrased it. I think there is a serious
risk that increasing the ranges would be misinterpreted, primarily
because of what we have done in the past. Since we have not changed
them in the past under similar circumstances, why would we suddenly
want to do so now? Another point is that, after our very important
discussion yesterday about longer-term objectives for core inflation,
the time to change these ranges, if we are going to do that, is when
we have a better idea of what policy we are going to propose in terms
of our longer-term objectives on inflation. We may want to go to the
Congress, as was suggested yesterday, for that type of discussion, and
I personally think we should. It just seems to me that the
appropriate time to change these ranges would be when we have a better
idea of what our longer-term objectives on inflation are going to be
and how we are going to present that to the American people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think one can argue this issue either way. It
is not an issue that elicits strong feelings on my part one way or the
other. On balance, I would prefer to keep the ranges as they are. My
primary reason is that you are the spokesman for the Committee; you
are the one who has to present the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. If you
feel more comfortable with the approach you recommended, I am prepared
to support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your
recommendation for the reasons you stated and those that were
mentioned by others. However, I would like to make an additional
point. I think we ought to keep in mind that the projections that we
have here are staff projections based upon the staff's baseline
economic forecast. Quite frankly, I think that it is not the best
forecast for the next two years. As the next two years unfold, I
would expect to see a rise in interest rates and in that event the
growth of the aggregates is likely to be less. So, I think the idea
that higher ranges are more consistent with everyone's forecast is a
mistake in the first place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I agree with your suggestion that we not change
the ranges and only partly because I think a change might give the
wrong impression. Raising a range because our projection is a little
higher is a little like drawing a target around the bullet hole in the
wall. I think we ought to take the M2 range fairly seriously, be
concerned if there is a prolonged period of M2 growth above 5 percent,

7/2-3/96

-76-

and not forget about this aggregate as a potential signal for us to do
something.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, I am uncomfortable with the current
procedure embodied in Alternative I for setting the target ranges of
M2 and M3, particularly M2 in this discussion. It seems to me that
this approach is quite inconsistent with the spirit and the letter of
Humphrey-Hawkins. I believe it also differs from the public
perception of the logic underlying those ranges among even the
relatively well-informed Fed watchers in the private sector. I think
it fails totally in communicating policy intent. Many believe that we
are trapped here and they fear the loss of credibility that, they
assume, would follow the upward adjustment of the target ranges that
is required to make them consistent with both the staff forecast and
the spirit of Humphrey-Hawkins. Now, in commenting on that, my
particular approach may be sharper than I intend, but it seems to me
that it is like trying to use bad policy to compensate for bad
communication. What I mean is that if we are worried about
communicating policy intent to the public, we have a lot of
opportunities to do that in testimony, speeches, and otherwise and we
ought to do that. I do not feel that we ought to compensate for our
inability to communicate effectively by setting target ranges that are
so inconsistent, or that are at least mildly inconsistent, with the
staff or our Humphrey-Hawkins forecasts.
Now, I am uncomfortable about maintaining indefinitely what I
consider to be a ruse, and I think at some point we will probably
regret it. At this time, however, I am going to defer to the judgment
of the Chairman, but I hope that between now and the next time I have
to vote on this issue, we will find some means to improve the way that
we handle the monetary growth ranges.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I, too, am in favor of your recommendation, Mr.
Chairman, for many of the reasons that have been expressed around the
table. I think it is a communication device. With only a few
technical exceptions, all the changes we have made in the ranges over
the years have been to reduce them consistent with our objective of
fostering progress toward stable prices. At this point, I think
keeping the M2 range where it is will send the message that we want to
send concerning our reasonably near-term objectives relating to price
stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no strong feeling about the
ranges themselves, but I do feel strongly that the management of the
issue is important. In that sense, I strongly support your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. It is. certainly premature to restore M2 and M3
to their full status as policy indicators, but I do think that we
should recognize that they are performing a bit better in terms of

-77-

7/2-3/96

velocity and GDP growth. I thought David Lindsey's chart presentation
was extremely useful, and I particularly liked the first chart that
shows the upward migration in M2 velocity. I thought that was very
helpful. But it also points out that we do not yet have a lot of dots
along that green line for the period since the start of 1994, while
there are a lot of dots around the black line for the period from 1960
to 1989. I thought that chart put the recent history into
perspective. But I do think that money remains an important monitor
for monetary policy, and I believe it would be useful in our HumphreyHawkins report to discuss the fact that M2 growth deviated from its
historical pattern for a period of time but that it now appears to be
coming back. Like Governor Meyer, I am uncomfortable with the current
ranges, but I do not want to use them as a monetary policy signal.
So, I agree with your proposal not to change the ranges at this time,
but I think we should beef up our discussion of the monetary
aggregates in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I am for leaving the ranges
unchanged. First of all, Dave Lindsey made a good point in the sense
that, although his chart on velocity suggests more stability over the
past 2 years or so, it is still too early to come to any firm
conclusion. Secondly, I think changing the ranges systematically
involves more than explanations. It involves raising questions in
people's minds as to whether we have changed our attitude about our
long-term goal for inflation. Governor Lindsey makes a point in terms
of 2 plus 2, but I think that requires another discussion. It is 2
plus 2 for some, but it may be another number for others, depending on
what they view as a proper measure of inflation, and that would affect
where they want to set the ranges. So, a lot more discussion is
required before we undertake to change these measures systematically.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. I, too, am somewhat uncomfortable with the whole
discussion, as I think everybody is. I would go along with your
recommendation, but I think we ought to think seriously over the next
few meetings about whether ranges are in any sense an effective policy
tool or whether we are going to have a continued discussion at each
meeting about the symbolism of something that really is not being used
as a policy tool anymore.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We inadvertently got ourselves into this
box, and it occurred in a context of M2 beginning to veer off from
expected relationships. At the moment, we are at the lower end of
potential target ranges largely because M2 was tracking close to zero
for quite a long period of time. We had the problem for a protracted
period of being perceived as allowing M2 to run near the bottom or
even significantly under its target range. As a result we did--I
don't want to use Bob McTeer's language--move the target down over the
years.
SPEAKER (?).

We did draw the target around the bullet hole!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Clearly, there is something
fundamentally wrong here. There is no doubt about that. But before
we play with these ranges, I would prefer that we concentrate on

7/2-3/96

-78-

qualitative discussions with respect to M2 and elevate M2 if in fact
it begins to deserve more emphasis as an indicator. I do not think
there is any doubt that we are in an unsustainable position. It makes
no sense. If M2 ceases to be useful at all, it would then become just
an appendage, which would be unfortunate. But since it looks as
though it is coming back, we are going to have to confront this issue.
For the moment, there does seem to be at least a grudging
consensus to stay where we are. I will ask Normand to read the
appropriate language. I ask you all to listen to it just in case, in
view of our discussion, we want to change a few words here or there.
MR. BERNARD. I will be reading from page 20 in the Bluebook.
The first sentence is the standard one:
"The Federal Open Market
Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster
price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this
meeting the ranges it had established in January for growth of M2 and
M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of 1996." Moving
down the page a bit:
"The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 3 to 7 percent for the
year. For 1997, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth measured from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth quarter
of 1997 of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for M3. The
Committee provisionally set the associated monitoring range for growth
of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1997." And
the standard ending sentence:
"The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would somebody like to move?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

So move.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Boehne
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Meyer
Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin
President Stern
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now we will move on to current monetary
policy issues. I call on Don Kohn.

-79-

7/2-3/96

MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. MELZER. Don, when you think in terms of long-term real
interest rates, where do you conceptually put the uncertainty premium
about inflation? Is that in the real component?
MR. KOHN. Yes, it is and that is because it has always been
there. When we think of these things, we do it based on history, and
the uncertainty premium has been in the real rate historically. I
think that would be another reason why the real rate might move around
over time. If people are less uncertain now than they were 10 or 15
years ago, and it is quite likely that they are, then you might think
in terms of a lower equilibrium real rate.
MR. MELZER. So, if I were comparing a time when a rise in
real rates was strictly due to a change in real activity--real supply
and demand were the sole contributors to an increase in real rates--I
would distinguish between that situation and one where perhaps some of
the increase was due to greater uncertainty about future inflation.
That makes the comparison very difficult.
MR. KOHN. In thinking further about my answer to your
question about where the uncertainty is located, I believe we have to
be careful. There is uncertainty in financial markets that leads them
to demand a higher real rate premium. But we also need to think about
the individuals and the businesses that spend the money. My answer
assumed that they also were uncertain about the outlook for inflation
and that uncertainty would damp their spending at given interest
rates. If that uncertainty does not affect them, then we have a
different situation. The equilibrium real rate probably would not
have declined in that case. But I think uncertainty probably does
play into spending decisions as well as saving decisions, and so it
might be reasonable to think that with less uncertainty, the real
long-term equilibrium rate would be lower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Don, I want to ask you about your relative
confidence level for variables used in your forecast. But in view of
your response to Tom Melzer just now, I am not sure whether I should
rethink the question. In your prepared remarks, you used the
Philadelphia Fed survey of expected CPI inflation, but the Bluebook
looked at the PCE to draw conclusions about the real rate. The
critical variables in the staff forecast are the assumption that the
real fed funds rate is 2-3/4 percent, some measure of inflation and
inflation expectations--the sort of thing we discussed yesterday--and
the NAIRU versus current unemployment. With the nominal 5-1/4 percent
funds rate and with inflation measured by the PCE, one would say that
we were at a 2-3/4 percent real funds rate, that inflation is in the
zone of 2 percent, and that unemployment is whatever number is going
to be reported on Friday for the month of June; it has been in the
area of 5-1/2 percent. So, what is the problem? The problem in this
framework is that the inflation rate has to go up from where it is
because current unemployment is below the NAIRU. That rise in
inflation will reduce the real fed funds rate unless we raise the

-80-

7/2-3/96

nominal fed funds rate. The only way we can get from where we are to
equilibrium is through that mechanism. The confidence question is: If
you look at your key component variables, where would you say the weak
links or the strong links are located? Is your confidence in the 53/4 percent NAIRU instead of, say, 5-1/2 or 5-1/4 percent? Is it in
the 2-3/4 percent real fed funds rate versus 2-1/2 or 2-1/4 percent?
Or is it in a particular measure of inflation or inflation
expectations?
MR. KOHN. I would have to say that I am not very confident
about any of those measures. There is a band of uncertainty around
them all. I do think that, as Mike Prell has commented--and I think
Governor Meyer said this yesterday as well--there used to be more
confidence about the NAIRU calculation. In Mike's chart yesterday, we
saw a lot of scatter points around the regression line, but they were
fairly tightly bunched. However, the more recent information raises
questions about the level of the NAIRU. I think our estimates of
inflation expectations are a very weak link. We really do not have a
fix on that. The Philadelphia Fed survey is very arbitrary because it
is a survey of professional economists and, as highly as we might
think of them, they are not necessarily representative of savers and
investors in society. The Michigan survey has its own problems. It
seems, at least in terms of the means, to be skewed toward too high a
number. I have very little confidence in our projection of inflation
expectations or knowledge of what they actually are currently. I tend
to look at how they are changing, not in terms of levels. If several
surveys and other indicators are all moving in the same direction,
that might suggest that inflation expectations are moving the same
way.
On the PCE versus the CPI, I think one answer is that, if it
is just a level adjustment, it is not a problem because we are
comparing the calculated real rate relative to history. We can revise
historical and current values and the gap remains the same. But I
think the point that the Chairman made yesterday--and one that you
will hear again shortly--is that we might be getting very different
signals from the CPI and PCE, not just a level adjustment but
different information about what is going on in the economy. That is
obviously a much bigger problem than just making a level adjustment.
MR. JORDAN.
fed funds rate?

What about your assumption regarding the real

MR. KOHN. Once again, I think the assumption about where the
equilibrium fed funds rate is situated is very shaky. When we look at
history, we have to conclude that things move around, other things are
not equal, the equilibrium real fed funds rate varies, and as I said
in my briefing, that sort of exercise is at best only a starting point
for thinking about the much more complicated issues relating to
developments in financial markets.
MR. JORDAN.
[Laughter]

You have made me feel a lot more confident!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Don, I want to follow up on your reference to
financial markets in terms of policy actions now or later. It strikes

7/2-3/96

-81-

me that there has been a fair amount of run-up and perhaps even some
artificiality in some of the financial markets, such as those for IPOs
or indeed whatever market you want to talk about. You indicated what
the effect might be on the stock market if we made a tightening move
now. But if there is a certain degree of artificiality, what would be
the effect of waiting, and what is the relative risk that we run by
letting that market run up further and then moving versus moving now
and letting the market adjustment occur and spill over to the real
economy?
MR. KOHN. I guess that depends a bit on what you think will
happen if you do not move. One hypothesis would be that, if you do
not act now, in Mike's words, gravity will take over and the market
will begin to correct itself even without the Federal Reserve. In
that case, waiting to act might even be a positive in the sense that
by the time you did act, the market already would be at more
reasonable levels and less likely to overreact to our tightening
action. On the other hand, if that correction were not going to
occur, if the froth were to remain in the market, I think your
question contained the germ of the answer. The more people build that
froth in, the more likely you are to get a strong reaction. That is
one interpretation of what happened in 1994, in the sense that we had
a low funds rate for a very long period of time and a very steeply
upward sloped yield curve. As economists, we could say that a steeply
upward sloped yield curve means that markets expect us to tighten;
such an action should come as no big surprise. The Chairman had
testified several times telling the markets we would be tightening.
Yet, when we embarked on a tightening course, which was widely
anticipated, I think a lot of people who thought they would be the
first out the door actually got caught. Everybody ran for the door at
the same time, and there was a rather strong reaction in financial
markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don? If not,
let me hold forth for a little longer than usual because I think, as
Governor Kelley indicated yesterday, that we are in one of those
watershed periods that requires deeper deliberation on monetary policy
issues than we have had to face at many of our meetings.
The current period reminds me of our struggle several years
ago to cope with the breakdown of M2 as a forward-looking indicator,
as David Lindsey has amply demonstrated. You may recall that in the
older regime a slowdown in M2 growth was an indicator of increasing
policy restraint, but as the breakdown of M2 became increasingly
evident we resisted taking action largely because the collateral
information that was available failed to confirm the usual meaning of
a sharp rise in income velocity. Current business indicators point to
significant strength in economic activity and raise serious questions
as to whether we are running up against the type of resource
constraints that in the past have been a harbinger of a dangerous
breakout of inflationary forces. Yet, there is something disturbingly
wrong with this picture: The rate of inflation still appears to be
falling; the growth in compensation per hour is 50 to 75 basis points
under the rates suggested by past relationships; and the operating
profit margins of domestic firms have continued to expand far later
into the business expansion than is typical. As a consequence, like
the M2 episode only in reverse, we have held in check our normal

7/2-3/96

-82-

response to tighten in the face of the accelerated current business
expansion.
In my judgment, we have done so wisely because the
credibility of the Federal Reserve System is at stake here. I am not
referring to the important but narrow issue of maintaining, and being
seen to maintain, the purchasing power of our currency but to the
perception that we as an institution know what we are doing. Are we
perceived to understand the changing forces that are driving our
economy, or are we viewed as working with obsolescent models? We have
recognized the crucial need to be forward-looking and preemptive with
our policies. But to be successful in that, we must understand the
economic structure through which our policies will play out. To gain
the public's acceptance of our policies and our ability to respond to
inflation threats in a timely manner, the public has to have
confidence that the Fed knows what it is doing. Without prejudging
the current evolution of economic forces, which I will get to
momentarily, if we are perceived to have tightened and then to have
been compelled by market forces to quickly reverse, our reputation for
professionalism will suffer a severe blow. This will weaken our
future ability to raise rates in a dramatic, preemptive fashion in
order to contain inflationary forces at an early stage.
We are an independent central bank in that our decisions are
not subject to reversal by any other agency of government. Our
existence and ability to function, however, are subject to acceptance
by a public and a Congress who exhibit decidedly asymmetric
propensities in favor of policy ease. The reputation that we have
achieved as nonpartisan professionals enables us to function. The
public and the Congress may not understand what we are doing, but they
trust us, hopefully as they trust the family physician who is
prescribing today's version of castor oil. I assume that everyone
here is old enough to remember castor oil! [Laughter]
We obviously are viewing an economy that at the moment does
not resemble most of our textbook models. The unemployment rate is
low and has remained low for quite a while. Anecdotal evidence
continues to indicate tight labor markets, but with little evidence of
significant wage acceleration. We also have a strong economic
expansion under way, with industrial commodity prices falling even
excluding the plunge in copper prices. Broader measures of price
inflation are, if anything, still declining. There are, however, two
disturbing numbers that suggest the old model may be operative. The
first, of course, is the very disturbing ECI wage and salary figure
for the first quarter. The second is the recent fairly significant
rise in delayed deliveries in the June NAPM report. Most other data,
however, are not supportive of a rising inflation trend. To be sure,
average hourly earnings have been rising at a fairly pronounced pace
in the last two or three years. But as we discussed yesterday, that
series shows very little change when we look at the conversion by the
BLS to a chain-weighted basis. Indeed, in the 12 months ended in May,
it was up 2.9 percent versus 3.4 percent for the published average
hourly earnings. The CPI is becoming increasingly obsolete, as I
explained yesterday. The more analytically accurate core PCE chainweighted price index is increasing now at a rate of about 2 percent,
as is the core gross domestic purchases chain-weighted price index,
with the increase in both measures declining since 1995. The

7/2-3/96

-83-

hypothesis that the inflation rate has stabilized is very difficult to
sustain with this data system.
This result is consistent with the insecurity wage gain
hypothesis that I have been discussing here for the last 12 to 18
months. It is not proof that the structure has changed, but we will
never have definitive proof on which to act in a timely manner if our
policy is forward-looking. We may in retrospect make very
professional and impressively robust econometric estimates of what has
been happening and conclude that, indeed, a significant tradeoff has
occurred between wage gains on the one hand and job security on the
other in the context that I have discussed in the past.
The basic thesis, as you may remember, is that the economy
can be viewed as having a family of functions relating to the real
growth rate of earnings, all with the same slope but with different
tradeoffs between wage gains and job security. These data suggest
that we are moving from one level down to another. If that is in fact
what is happening, one would expect to see the rate of change in
hourly earnings fall below previous expectations and profit margins to
widen, though by less than the gain from lower wage costs because part
of the latter feeds into declining price inflation. Specifically,
this data set is consistent with a lower track of real or nominal
earnings growth, say, until 1993, but it also is consistent with the
reemergence of the old business activity-inflation models after a
transition period because, remember, we are then back to the earlier,
higher rate of change although at a lower level. For those who would
like a more analytic exposition of this type of model, I recommend a
paper that is being written by Janet Yellen. I am certain that she
will make it available to those of you who wish to read it.
For those who are wedded to the Phillips curve format, the
translation of the 50 to 75 basis point shortfall in the growth of
compensation per hour is the equivalent of a perfectly tracking
Phillips curve with a NAIRU of 4-1/4 to 5 percent. With as yet only
limited evidence that domestic operating profit margins are
contracting, it appears that the transition postulated in this
hypothesis is still under way. A falling inflation rate underscores
this. But let us be careful. Even this hypothesis postulates a onetime move of the goal post. Inflation is not dead. As we again get
closer to the new goal line, the old inflation pressures will
reemerge.
Indeed, there is reason for concern in that regard. To be
sure, second-quarter GDP growth is the result of the rebound from a
number of retarding factors--the GM strike, the government shutdown,
and the inclement weather, with the latter having had a very material
effect especially on state and local construction. However,
accelerating economic growth from whatever cause always has the
potential to generate accelerating inventory investment. As I
indicated at the last FOMC meeting, I am concerned that we may be
underestimating the potential for an upward adjustment in inventory
accumulation. If this occurs, then I think we are subject to much
stronger than expected third-quarter and possibly fourth-quarter
expansion in the context of extended lead times and perceived
shortfalls in safety stocks. Even a just-in-time environment gets
overridden in that type of situation. With the income effects that
spill over from inventory investment, it is very easy to draw a

7/2-3/96

-84-

sequence of events that can create much stronger GDP growth than we
have in the Greenbook.
It is too soon to know whether the current surge in the
expansion will gradually vanish and fail to ignite inventory growth or
whether the wealth effect will support PCE, with a lag, on a higher
track than is shown currently in the Greenbook. Fortunately, we have
the luxury of waiting at least for a short while to see what develops.
While I would not describe our monetary posture as tight, it is
scarcely accommodative. Real federal funds are only marginally below
their peak of last year. In fact, using the broader deflator, that
is, chain-weighted gross domestic purchases, we have not reduced the
real funds rate at all. The economy may surprise us and accelerate at
an unexpected pace, moving to the new goal line fairly quickly. This
may require action on our part, possibly even before our next meeting.
Accordingly, I would hope that this Committee, while
accepting alternative "B" to give us the opportunity to assess what is
going on, would nonetheless accept an asymmetric bias toward
tightening with the understanding that no move would occur without a
prior telephone conference. We have to be aware in this particular
context that to reverse direction requires a somewhat higher hurdle of
evidence than would be required if we were merely continuing a
previous trend of monetary policy moves. Given the recent history of
sequential policy moves, any move in a new direction would suggest to
the markets that there will be additional moves in the same direction.
Although we could endeavor to disabuse the markets of that, my
suspicion is that we would fail. My judgment is that in all
likelihood, if the Committee does not move at this meeting or during
the intermeeting period, we probably will do so at the August meeting
or later. It seems quite unlikely to me, looking at the data now,
that we will luck out and find the economy expanding at a pace that
would not necessitate moving. But as I have said, I think we have
time to look, largely because in my judgment our current posture is
not that far from the mark. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, perhaps one of the
chores that goes with being Vice Chairman is that after such a very
interesting and demanding presentation, one fills the vacuum, giving
other people some more time to think. [Laughter] Agreeing with
Governor Kelley's remark yesterday that we are at a watershed, I found
myself sitting up straight at 4:00 this morning thinking about the
responsibility that places on us as a Committee. It is very clear
that the Federal Open Market Committee cannot carry out its
responsibility without the support of the American people whom we
serve. We deserve that support, which we have, and we will retain it
only if we are deemed to be responsible and sensible. That is
something about which I perhaps feel particularly strongly because I
am the only permanent voting member of the Committee who is neither
nominated by the President nor approved by the Senate. Therefore, I
think one has to be very aware that we do serve the people and that we
are not members of a university faculty or a discussion group.
Rather, our purpose is public policy, which is a lot tougher than
being on a faculty or a member of a discussion group.
We are in a period of very considerable uncertainty as to
exactly where the economy is or where we are vis-a-vis price
stability. My own guess is that we are either at or very close to

-85-

7/2-3/96

what might be the upper end of a price stability range. In light of
Governor Yellen's presentation yesterday, which explained that there
are very real and continuing costs to a reduction of inflation at
these very low levels, I believe very strongly that before we do
something we should be certain that what we are doing is right.
Therefore, it should encourage us to be courageous when we need to be
courageous but to have the courage to do nothing when that is the
right thing to do, which is, I think, where we are now.
At the same time, we are clearly in a situation in which the
real economy could operate more strongly than the forecast says it
will, and therefore I think it is equally important that we use the
asymmetric directive. For the new members of the Committee, there are
three interpretations of what an asymmetric directive means for every
member of the Committee, but in this case I think it is clear what it
means. It means, as the Chairman stated, that it is not at all
impossible that we will see enough incoming data of a kind that will
lead us to the conclusion that we have to tighten before the next
meeting. In any event, I think there is a reasonable likelihood that
we will decide at the next meeting that we have enough information to
warrant a tightening move at that time. Therefore, those who share my
view that price stability is what we do for a living because it is the
road to sustained economic growth have to remember that we are not
talking about whether the infidels are replacing the zealots or even
whether we are a group of more or less tough-minded people. All the
Chairman is recommending, which I very firmly endorse, is that we
recognize that we do not know enough to make a firm decision at this
point, but we do know enough so that our watching has to be
particularly attentive. Therefore, an asymmetric directive toward
firming is appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I have not yet had the
opportunity to read Governor Yellen's paper, which I look forward to
doing, But not having read it, I am reluctant at this point to
deemphasize what you refer to as the "old model."
It seems to me that
the information we heard yesterday suggests that the economy is
currently robust, with the risks dominating on the up side rather than
the down side. I think it is instructive, as was pointed out this
morning, that even if the Greenbook baseline projection materializes
through 1997 with no change in policy in 1996 and 1997, the Bluebook
analysis still says that an upward correction of 50 basis points,
maybe more, is going to be needed to contain inflation in the longer
term. Moreover, in the Bluebook discussion of short-run alternatives,
the point is made that if we want to tilt inflation down, we may have
to raise the federal funds rate "considerably"--I believe that is the
term used--or by more than 1/4 percentage point before the end of this
year.
With these considerations in mind, I think the case for a
tightening of policy today is a strong one. I personally believe that
a solid case can be made for an increase of 50 basis points in the
federal funds rate. If we were to do that, I believe there would be a
credibility benefit that could be substantial. A decisive move like
this would tend to reduce uncertainty in financial markets and
elsewhere about the ultimate extent of the tightening we might be
contemplating. We could announce that we expected a midcourse

-86-

7/2-3/96

correction like this to bring the economy back to a sustainable
longer-term growth path with declining inflation, and that might help
to reduce the potential reaction in financial markets. I could
support such a move, but I realize that that may not be an option
today. In any event, I think that a move of at least 1/4 point is
necessary. The key thing we need to do now is to reaffirm our
disinflationary credentials by reversing the two moves we made last
winter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, news on the economy since our last
meeting has strengthened my view that it would be wise to raise the
federal funds rate at this time. We cut the funds rate in January
because an apparent moderation in growth was reducing inflationary
pressures and because we wanted to guard against the risk that the
expansion might weaken even further. Since then, the economy has
surprised us with its strength. Growth in the first half of this year
appears to have exceeded the trend rate by quite a bit. Indeed, my
concern now has shifted to the substantial risk of rising inflation.
In that situation, whether one is an opportunist or of the deliberate
persuasion, strong action is called for. In my view, these
considerations support a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds
rate. However, given that an increase would represent a change in the
direction of policy and would be a surprise to the market, it may be
prudent to limit ourselves to 25 basis points at this meeting and an
asymmetric directive.
Mr. Chairman, I also would like to comment on your
presentation, which I found very interesting. It highlighted many of
the uncertainties about the analytical framework that we are using to
deal with policy issues. I also thought that the emphasis on the PCE
chain-weighted index was quite instructive. I would recommend that we
put on for a day a principled opportunist's hat and suggest to the
Board staff, and perhaps also to our own staffs at the Banks, that
they look at what would be involved to keep the PCE chain-weighted
index, maybe not at the 2.1 percent that it has averaged over the last
year, but I would be willing to say at 2-1/2 percent. That would be
consistent in my view with containing inflation. It might be very
interesting to see what the policy implications of that would be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I have not heard anybody arguing that the risks
are not on the up side. I agree with the Greenbook and other
forecasts that we are likely to see moderation in growth over the
second half of the year. But even with that, both the Greenbook and
most other forecasts see an uptick in inflation. The Greenbook sees
that measured on a CPI basis and the Bluebook sees that measured on a
PCE basis. Now, it may be that we are measuring inflation
inaccurately. It may be that the trend has been down, not sideways,
and that there is room to move up a bit. But if I took anything out
of yesterday's discussion, it was a desire to hold the line at where
inflation has been, however that is measured.
Our forecast in Boston, like many others, is based on
standard analytical techniques that look at relationships between
overall capacity and pressures on inflation as measured by the CPI.

-87-

7/2-3/96

Our forecast assumes, as do all model forecasts, that the past is a
guide to the future. I do not know how these models work with other
measures of inflation, but I must say that I continue to be
uncomfortable with the assumption that things have changed in a major
way and that, while rising inflation occurred under similar
circumstances in the late 1980s, it will not happen now. I am
attracted to the analytical framework that you set up in your
discussion about moving down in a sense to a different curve and then
starting from there. I find that interesting in the context of all
the discussion about job uncertainty, but I am still a little
uncomfortable with it.
I know we have not seen many signs of rising inflation yet,
and one could argue that, as measured by the PCE, there may have been
a decline in inflation. However, I do not think that we should wait
to see it rise before acting, given the backward-looking nature of any
inflation statistic. Moreover, the feel of the economy, the
availability of credit, the resilience of the housing and auto markets
so far, the possibility that the economies of some of our major
trading partners may be healthier than we thought earlier, and the
ebullience of the stock market even with the modest downturns of late,
all suggest to me that to be appropriately forward-looking we should
move now. That said, I do recognize the special circumstances
surrounding an increase in the federal funds rate when it would be a
turning point. Inflation is not a major concern to the public. In
fact, the concern lies in the opposite direction, as you have so
clearly pointed out, Mr. Chairman.
We are at a watershed, as others have said, and we need to be
careful as we were in 1994 in laying the proper groundwork for the
move that I think we all recognize we probably will have to make
during the latter part of this year. I hope that we can start
conveying to the market and to the public in general that there are
risks and we perceive them to be on the up side. We could make this
communication in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony and in that way lay
the groundwork for what I assume will be a necessary move at the
August meeting. I could be wrong, but as I think you indicated in
your comments, I believe we will have to move at the August meeting.
I accept your recommendation for today. I have had misgivings about
not taking action, as I have said in the past, but I am okay with it
at this time. I would like to see us set the groundwork for a move in
August. Therefore, I would be in favor of an asymmetric directive,
which to me means that if there were a need to move before the next
meeting, there would be a phone call and we would talk about it. My
definition of asymmetry at this point is that it reflects the
direction the Committee sees the economy moving. It is not a
commitment by any means, but it indicates a direction and it will send
a signal when the directive is released to the public. So, I am okay
with your recommendation. I would vote for asymmetry if I had a vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, after listening to you, I have a
better sense of the difficulties in this process--the uncertainty
about the model or analytical framework that we use to assess the
incoming data. I also appreciate Bill McDonough's comment that we
need to have the public's confidence and support. I think, though,
that we ought to be careful before we abandon the model we have been

-88-

7/2-3/96

using, as some members have said already. I would be reluctant to
abandon such a model given our past experience. Our projections
suggest that there will be increases in inflation, although the change
in our inflation measures introduces a confusing element. Given the
upside risks that are associated with the projections and weighing
that against the downside risk of a small tightening move, I think
there is a very good case for moving now. If I were voting, I would
put it in that context. But I probably would say that the asymmetric
directive toward tightening that we have on the table gives us an
appropriate direction for policy and we can wait for increasing
evidence at least until August. I would be willing to wait that long,
but I really think that a small move now would have tremendous
benefits in the long term.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, yesterday I thought Governor
Meyer laid out two issues very well. One of them is how GDP will grow
relative to trend. Your analysis showed exactly how we would respond.
If we saw a rise in inventory accumulation, to use your example, that
suggested a sustained, above-trend rate of economic growth, we would
move right away. That is in fact why you are recommending an
asymmetric directive. I do not think there is any disagreement about
that. The other issue, to simplify it in terms of the labor market,
is where the existing unemployment rate is relative to the natural
rate, the NAIRU. I also have not read Governor Yellen's paper, which
probably has had about the best press so far of any paper in history
for a paper that may not yet be finished. [Laughter]
MS. YELLEN.
MS. MINEHAN.

It is just a little note.
You mean it is short.

MR. LINDSEY. With both religion and economics, we tend to be
schismatic. The Episcopalians can't sing from the Presbyterian
hymnbook, and that is always a problem. But let me see if I can put
what has been said before in an ecumenical sense. Jim Stock had a
very interesting paper earlier this year on the NAIRU in the last
three decades. He observed that it has been highly variable. Yes, if
one had to pick a number and bet on it for 30 years, one would pick
something like 6 percent. But it has been as low as 5-1/2 percent and
as high as 8 percent. Let me talk about the 8 percent number, for
example. It came during an adverse oil shock. What exactly does the
term NAIRU mean? It means the level of unemployment we have to attain
to stop inflation from accelerating. An oil shock produces a lot of
inflationary impetus in the economic system. To prevent an
acceleration of inflation, the unemployment rate has to rise sharply
and put downward pressure on wages to overcome the oil shock and hold
inflation in place. The lesson is that the NAIRU is variable, but
changes in it due to supply shocks are temporary. The NAIRU in his
story came back down again after the oil shock ended.
Mr. Chairman, when I heard you mention the numbers 4-1/4 and
5 percent for the NAIRU, that set off alarm bells. The way I
interpreted what you just said is that given the rate of disinflation
we recently experienced, the current level of unemployment, and the
usual relationship between the amount of disinflation and the
difference between the rate of unemployment and the NAIRU, you backed

-89-

7/2-3/96

out an implied NAIRU. But that is a temporary NAIRU. I do not think
we would gamble policy on the presumption that we have permanently
reduced the natural rate to 4-1/4 or 5 percent. A backlog of fear-this is my word for it--generated by the layoffs and the downsizings
and whatever else in the early 1990s, created what we could think of
as a positive supply shock, and the labor markets temporarily pushed
the natural rate that low. It will not stay that low, and we should
not bet that it will. What does that mean for short-run policy? I
think you have it exactly right. You told us how we are going to
respond to a demand-side shock or surprise, and I think the natural
rate probably is much lower right now than it has been historically.
But it is there only temporarily. The stock of fear that pushed the
natural rate down will wear off. We do not know how fast that will
occur, but we had better be prepared to respond when it does. I think
we have reached the right solution in whatever New Age church
[laughter] it may be that you are describing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, while I recognize that I arrived at
an interesting moment for monetary policy, I must admit nevertheless
that I did not agonize over my position for the monetary policy
directive for this meeting. Although it may still turn out to be a
close call as to whether or not we tighten going forward and as early
as August, I am very comfortable with your recommendation for no
change in policy at this meeting and an asymmetric policy directive.
There are four good reasons for no change in policy at this
time. First, if you accept the staff forecast and take an
opportunistic approach to future disinflation, then I think there are
no strong grounds for tightening today. The staff forecast suggests
that, with the current monetary policy settings, we can sustain an
expansion at a trend near capacity with nearly stable core inflation
through 1997. I fully support an effort to achieve this outcome.
Second, and I think quite importantly, my own perspective on
the outlook reinforces this desire to the very minor extent that my
outlook differs from the staff projections. While the staff
simulations provide a plausible picture of the acceleration of
inflation if the unemployment rate is slightly below the NAIRU, my
normal high confidence in this gap story is undermined by the
extraordinarily well-contained state of core inflation across
virtually all measures. I for one would need to see either a decline
in the unemployment rate below its recent range or an acceleration in
core inflation measures to justify a tightening.
My third argument is a little different, Mr. Chairman. In
recent testimony you presented a compelling discussion of the Federal
Reserve's position vis-a-vis growth. I have, as you might suspect, a
heightened awareness of the political sensitivity of this issue as I
spent several months with little else to think about. [Laughter] As
I understand your position, the Federal Reserve does not have a growth
objective per se. Once we achieve acceptable resource utilization
rates and acceptable inflation readings, at least on a near-term
basis, we will happily accept all the growth the economy will produce.
I accept this logic. Tightening today would contradict that position.
We should not tighten solely on the basis of one quarter of abovetrend growth when utilization rates are not definitively signaling

-90-

7/2-3/96

overheating and when inflation readings suggest inflation remains in
check. This is perfectly consistent with a transition to price
stability over the longer run, albeit by the opportunistic camp's time
schedule.
Fourth, we will have a wealth of additional information at
the August meeting. At that time, we will be in a much better
position to assess the potential that growth will remain above trend.
As we enter the second half we will be better able to determine
whether the strong growth over the first half has depressed the
unemployment rate below its recent range and to judge the degree to
which wage pressures may indeed have intensified and whether or not
there is any pass-through to prices. I am referring here specifically
to the advance report on second-quarter GDP, where the mix will be
very interesting; the next two employment reports; a second-quarter
employment cost report; and a whole variety of monthly data that will
condition our understanding of the economy's momentum heading into the
second half. My first two points make clear that there is little
danger in waiting, and my last point indicates there is great benefit
from doing so.
Now, a word about symmetry versus asymmetry. I had a quite
interesting time reading the transcript of the last FOMC meeting, and
I am somewhat acquainted with the various meanings of the words. But
it really is interesting how symmetry means so many different things
to different people. We are all asymmetric in our policy posture,
deciding here whether we are going to hold or increase the federal
funds rate. Nobody envisions a decline in the rate between this
meeting and the next. Most of us can envision situations where we
would have to raise the rate. All of us recognize that it will be a
tough call at the next meeting, so I would have thought that the tilt
in the directive for this meeting would be an easy call. Personally,
I am asymmetric and would feel more comfortable with an asymmetric
directive. From my reading of the last transcript, it does appear
that some members of this Committee read into the distinction between
symmetry and asymmetry differing degrees of permissiveness with
respect to a move between meetings initiated by the Chairman. This
may be a fair interpretation also. I am confident, Mr. Chairman, that
you would consult with the members of this Committee in the
intermeeting period before initiating a reversal of the direction of
monetary policy. With that caveat, I fully support an asymmetric
directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Based on the
increased upside risks, I think that a tightening of policy is going
to be needed in the next several months, but I am a bit more
optimistic than the Greenbook on inflation. I am not convinced that a
large increase--or a series of increases--in the federal funds rate is
necessary. In that vein, a tightening move could be delayed. I am
generally ambivalent on asymmetric directives, but based on the upside
potential for the economy and the attendant inflation risks, it does
seem to me that the case for tightening has strengthened. Asymmetry
would allow for an intermeeting move. It seems to me that measures of
price inflation and the ECI are particularly important information.
In that regard, I would still urge a phone call.

-91-

7/2-3/96

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

The future usually bears some resemblance to the

past, but the future is almost always different from the past. I
think we are in one of those situations now where we do not know how
much different the future will be. I believe most of us feel as we
talk to people in our Districts that it may be more different, at
least for a while, than we have become accustomed to. That higher
degree of uncertainty ought to make us more cautious about taking
steps at this meeting, and I feel very comfortable about keeping
policy the same.
Looking ahead, clearly the case for tightening and the
probability that we will have to tighten in the coming months would be
fairly high under the old model. That may indeed turn out to be the
case. On the other hand, it may not turn out to be the case because
we may be able to remain on an unchanged policy course longer than we
now anticipate under these conditions without accelerating inflation.
So, while I am prepared to support an asymmetric directive, it does
not automatically mean in my mind that we are setting ourselves up for
a tightening. That may indeed be necessary, and I think we need to be
watchful. Should conditions arise where we have to tighten, I think
we ought to do so and we ought to be decisive about it. But I do not
know when that tightening will need to occur, whether it will be next
month, the month after, or six months down the line. For today, I
agree that we should make no change in policy, be very watchful, and
keep an open mind as to what we ought to do at the next and subsequent
meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. I am very comfortable with your recommendation,
Mr. Chairman. It is extremely hard for us to explain the current set
of facts to ourselves with the models that all of us have been using,
implicitly or explicitly. I am intrigued by your construct, but very
frankly none of us really knows what is happening. It seems to me
that moving now to tighten policy would demonstrate that the Federal
Reserve has a knee-jerk reaction to growth even when we have not seen
any clear evidence of increases in compensation, let alone in prices.
I think it would be a mistake if we were to tighten because the

economy is stronger. It is unclear to me what an asymmetric directive
conveys. I asked several people, including you, and I got very
different and confusing answers and now I do not want to know exactly!
[Laughter] My personal guess is that we will be in the same quandary
in August. We will have more information, but we will still be unsure
about exactly what is happening. But I see no reason not to admit to
ourselves that we could have a shock that would occur in the
intermeeting period that would cause you to do what I assume you would
do anyway, namely get on the phone and say, what do we do now? So, I
would go along happily with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think you focused the
discussion appropriately on the underlying inflationary process and on
the questions of what we know or do not know about it. I certainly
would admit that I do not know as much about it as I would like. The
world may indeed have changed, but even so, if I understood you

-92-

7/2-3/96

correctly, the change involves a transition having to do with concerns
about job security and so on. Some other things that strike me about
the economic environment at the moment are that financial conditions
seem to be what I would describe as generally permissive. Credit is
readily available on attractive terms. Wealth effects stemming from
the run-up in stock prices ought to be sizable. I guess we have been
cautious in terms of how we have built that into our model as have
some other models as well. It seems to me that bond market
participants clearly are not convinced at this point that inflation is
dead or even dying. I think there is still a significant inflation
premium in long-term interest rates. Having said all that and having
looked at the available information, my judgment is that the economy
and its momentum are likely to be relatively strong. My preference
would be to raise the funds rate 1/4 percentage point now. I view
that in part as taking out a little insurance that the old model will
reassert itself more quickly than we expect. Certainly, a 1/4 point
move is not going to trigger any tailspin in economic activity. It
also seems to me that under all the circumstances at the moment, such
a move could be at least a start of a policy to bend inflation down a
bit further, and it may be just the right thing to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. First of all, I think the prospect of rising
inflation is the biggest risk we are facing in the economy in the
coming months. There is no question in my mind about that. I also
think policy is in an accommodative stance from a number of different
perspectives. So, I conclude that we ought to move now, and I would
be inclined when we do move to do so aggressively. By that I mean
that I would raise the federal funds rate by 50 basis points, and I
would combine that with a 50 basis point increase in the discount
rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I indicated in the
earlier go-around, I, like most others, expect the economy to slow in
the coming quarters, leaving us with a rate of growth without
increasing price pressures that perhaps can be achieved with our
current policy stance. I would like to give things a chance to play
out a bit more. Certainly, this position requires that one be of the
view that our current policy position is not accommodative.
Unfortunately, like many of the other issues we have faced and talked
about in the last two days, we cannot demonstrate that categorically.
Based on my review of information from financial markets as well as
competing forecasts, I am not convinced that current policy is adding
fuel to the current inflation environment. As Don reminded us this
morning, it is equally clear that we probably are not reducing general
price pressures at the moment except to the extent that a continued
experience of slow, relatively stable inflation works to temper
concerns about our commitment to a low inflation environment. I would
prefer to see us keep policy unchanged for the moment. I, too, would
be comfortable with an asymmetrical directive as long as it is not an
irreversible leaning, making us feel compelled to move at the next
meeting even if conditions do not seem to support that move. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

7/2-3/96

-93-

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it is very correct to be
suspicious of the notion that this time things have changed. That is
a classic trap. It is frequently a loser's cry, and I find myself
very uncomfortable supporting that notion. By conventional standards
I think the case to move now is somewhere between strong and
compelling. But I also think that there are very strong indications
that things have indeed changed. Maybe the better question--it is at
least for me--is whether this change is temporary and whether it will
turn around very soon. If it does go back toward a more conventional
experience, will it look the same as it did historically? I would
compare this to the recent history of M2 that we discussed earlier
this morning. M2 tracked along very well, very conventionally for
some number of years, went badly off the track for a while for reasons
that were hard to understand at the time, and now seems to be coming
back again. The nature of the M2 episode is beginning to be better
understood. That may be in the process of happening here as well.
But the presumption either that things have not changed or, if they
have, they will immediately return to the traditional relationship,
carries its own dangers and its own uncertainties. The better part of
valor is to try to get as good a reading as we can get as things
progress before we commit one way or the other. As a consequence, I
strongly support your notion of a "B" directive and can support
asymmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I can support your recommendation.
I could also have supported a recommendation for tightening today, had
you made it. On principle, I prefer not to tighten monetary policy on
the basis of strong output and employment growth or even a low
unemployment rate. I know that we should not wait to see the "whites
of inflation's eyes" before acting, but I do think we might well wait
for some leading indicators of rising inflation before we act. That
they are strangely missing does suggest to me that something is
different in 1996. With respect to symmetry, I believe the Baptist
religion prefers symmetry, but I do backslide occasionally [laughter]
and am happy to do so today.
MS. MINEHAN.

Baptists have a point of view on this?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Try to top that, Governor Yellen!

MS. YELLEN. I can't, Mr. Chairman! I agree with your
analysis and many of you have been eloquent in expressing thoughts
that I agree with: the Vice Chairman, Governor Meyer, Governor Rivlin,
President McTeer, and others among you. I can certainly support the
recommendation to leave the funds rate where it is with an asymmetric
directive. I agree that the risks are unbalanced at this stage, and I
certainly can envision a set of data between now and our next meeting
that would justify in my mind a move following a phone call. But I
agree with you that there is a great benefit to waiting and watching a
while longer to decide how things are going. I consider this a period
of great uncertainty. To my mind, the most serious risk at this stage
is that we simply do not know how demand is likely to behave going
forward. I think that if we have significantly underestimated the
continuing robustness of aggregate demand so that we see a significant
reduction in labor market slack in coming months or, alternatively, if
our assumption that something has changed in labor markets is clearly

-94-

7/2-3/96

proving to be incorrect, we will be compelled to move and I will
certainly support those moves. I found the Bluebook policy
simulations and also the Taylor Rule computations useful. To my mind,
they mean that we are roughly correctly positioned at this point; we
are in the neighborhood of the equilibrium real funds rate. So, I do
not feel that our policy stance is way off from where it should be,
and I think we can wait and see how these things materialize. I don't
think we need to jump the gun in order to establish our credibility to
prove to markets that we are prepared to act. All we need to do is
actually to act when we see that the circumstances justify it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I think the risks are clearly on
the up side, as we all have said. The issue is whether the rate of
economic growth will slow in the second half of this year. I think
that it will based on the evidence we have seen. The business people
with whom I have been in contact also sense that the economy is
slowing. The question is whether it is going to slow enough to have
the effect that we will need. Obviously, the people with whom I come
into contact are not a random sample. You mentioned the issue of
inventory accumulation, which I think is very important as we look
through the rest of the year. The Greenbook assumes that appreciable
inventory rebuilding will occur over the second and third quarters and
that subsequent inventory accumulation will be relatively modest. Of
course, that was not the pattern that we saw last year when sizable
accumulation continued for a number of quarters. If such accumulation
does spill over into the fourth quarter, we will not see the secondhalf deceleration in economic growth that will be necessary. So, I
support the asymmetrical directive. I think it is crucial that we
watch carefully. I also support having a phone call before making any
decision between meetings. I think the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony
that you are going to be giving is very important at this particular
stage of the expansion and policy formulation. It would be an
excellent opportunity to alert the Congress and the American people to
our concerns regarding the risks in the economy at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I think the reasons for a change in the
direction of policy have to be even more convincing than for a change
in the same direction as prior moves. Our action in early 1994, which
subsequently was viewed as having been correct by people on the
outside, was very important in that regard. If I were as convinced as
some of the people around the table that the current stance of policy
is too expansionary, I would not only support a 1/4 point change, I
would say, let's move at least 1/2 point to get to where we need to
be. If I were as convinced as my own staff that the reduction in
January of this year was wrong, I would want to reverse it. I am not
convinced of either of those things, and I am not at all convinced
that an action in August will be warranted. If the staff forecast is
anywhere in the right ballpark, we will see in the second half of this
year a lower rate of change in most of the price measures and a lower
rate of growth in most measures of real economic activity: housing,
autos, real GDP, and job growth. An action now at the beginning of a
period when everything will start to show a significantly decelerating
expansion would subsequently look like we came from a different
planet.

-95-

7/2-3/96

The asymmetry issue is troubling to me because, as some
others have mentioned, I have a problem in principle as to what it
means and the message it sends.
I would not want support of asymmetry
to mean a predisposition to tighten policy in August. But I am
concerned about how going asymmetric now and going back to symmetric
in August would be interpreted. It is almost as if, once we adopt an
asymmetric directive, we are forced to go ahead and take the action so
that we can go back to symmetric again. That is troubling. But I
would not dissent if you want to go asymmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should say that there have been
occasions in the past when we have gone asymmetric and withdrawn it.
But the point you make is well taken. I think the broad mode of the
Committee is Alternative B, asymmetric.
I will ask the Secretary to
read the appropriate language for that motion.
MR. BERNARD. This is on page 21 of the Bluebook:
"In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater
reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2
and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would somebody like to move that?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?
MR. LINDSEY.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Boehne
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Meyer
Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin
President Stern
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we can break for coffee.
we will come back to a discussion of swaps and intervention.

Then

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You will recall that we twice postponed
this discussion until we could be joined by our two new colleagues.

7/2-3/96

-96-

That is one more reason I am delighted that they finally came on
Board.
The staff paper prepared by Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Truman
raises a number of interrelated issues. Our objective today should
not be to try to reach firm conclusions on any of those issues, but
rather to have an open, preliminary discussion with a view to having
one or more subsequent discussions aimed at reaching a consensus on
the wisdom of some of these matters. The excellent paper that has
been presented to us focuses on a relatively narrow, nonetheless
complex, set of issues associated with the future of the swap network
and a possible alternative mechanism to deal with the short-term
dollar liquidity needs of foreign central banks. However, in reading
over the staff paper, I was struck by the fact that it does not
address directly the deeper principles that should govern us in our
dealings with other central banks. We have discussed our foreign
exchange transactions at great length in recent years, and we have
endeavored to define a set of operational principles to bridge our
somewhat ambiguous relationship with Treasury as well as with
institutions such as the G-7.
I am not suggesting we go back and review these particular
issues at this point, but we have not recently reviewed our longstanding procedures on RPs and our reluctance to engage in reverse RPs
with other central banks. I gather the latter results from the fact
that when the Committee last focused on these issues, the nature of
central bank bilateral relationships was far less complex, as indeed
was the international financial marketplace.
Last year, we initiated an arrangement with the Bank of Japan
to set up a procedure to liquefy Japanese holdings of U.S. Treasuries.
We also have recently entered a broadened swap facility with Mexico
and Canada. But what is our generic policy in such arrangements? We
have chosen to accept foreign exchange risks with our larger-thanhistoric holdings of foreign currencies, yet we will not accept market
risk on central bank credit transactions. Is this a general principle
we wish to promulgate? Do we wish, however, to lend even without
risk, for example, through reverse RPs, to any central bank that
requests such an accommodation? Are there foreign policy concerns in
this regard that should attract our interest? Does the RP pool of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York as currently operated reflect such
principles?
Finally, does the broader set of issues surrounding our role
in a changing international and political environment, in which new
financial centers are emerging and cross-border financial linkages
have intensified, require our focus before we decide on how best to
deal with future requests to meet the liquidity needs of our sister
central banks? These developments have the potential to change both
the character and the origin of systemic risks compared with what we
experienced in the past. They may have implications as well for the
way we perform our responsibility as the central bank for the U.S.
dollar.
In your comments on the issues raised in the staff paper, you
might touch on these broader issues as well. My sense is that it
would be useful to try to achieve a consensus on the conceptual
framework for our international operations before we try to reach

7/2-3/96

-97-

final decisions on the specific issues raised in the staff paper.
However, in an effort to limit the scope of our discussion somewhat, I
would request that we remember that our purpose today is to have a
free-ranging, but preliminary, discussion. What I hope the Committee
will offer is some guidance about how we can move forward on some of
these issues on the basis of an updated conceptual framework with
which we all are reasonably comfortable. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I do not have any
prepared remarks, but let me make just a few comments if I may. The
approach that the Federal Reserve has to foreign central banks is very
much a product of the rather unusual structure of the Federal Reserve,
with the Board of Governors and the 12 Reserve Banks. The Federal
Reserve Bank of New York historically has played a particularly
important role because we are in the nation's financial center and
because we do the intervening in both the domestic and the foreign
exchange markets. The attitude that foreign central banks have toward
the Federal Reserve is, thank heavens, one of great respect. They
take us immensely seriously, including not only central bankers from
small countries that you might think would take us seriously because
of our being a superpower, but also those from the other G-10 central
banks as well. I think one of our strengths is that we respond to
people in a flexible and unbureaucratic way. For example, some of the
G-10 central bank officials deal very actively with staff at the New
York Bank and the Board and certainly with you personally, Mr.
Chairman, and we never get into a mode of telling them that they
really ought to be talking with Joe instead of me. This approach
works very well because we are rather good at keeping everybody else
informed. The other Reserve Banks, depending on the part of the world
involved and to a degree the personality of the staff or the President
at any given time, play very important roles as well. So, I think
that this customer-oriented view of dealing with foreign central banks
has great merit and should be continued. We should not try to force a
method of dealing with the Federal Reserve System on people, but we
should just let them deal with us as they have in the past in the
context of continued very amicable relationships among the various
parts of the Federal Reserve System and especially among the key staff
members involved as well as the Board members and Bank presidents.
We also, I think, have to be very aware of how the world is
changing. Historically, our very important relationships have been
with the G-10 central banks, basically Europe, Canada, and Japan. In
addition, we have developed very important relationships with the
central banks of our hemisphere, an area in which I particularly get
involved because of the historical accident of speaking Spanish very
fluently. The new area where central bankers are very much interested
in us is Asia. People from that part of the world have very active
relationships with the San Francisco Reserve Bank, especially in the
bank supervision area, very active relationships with Board staff, and
very active relationships with us in New York.
One of the areas that I hope we will concentrate on and
eventually resolve, but not today, relates to developments in the repo
market. When the Committee set up the RP authorization to the Desk,
and really the last time it was looked at in great depth was in the
1970s, the government securities market was very different. The
Committee did not envision in the 1970s that we had to do anything for
the central banks around the world in the way of providing liquidity

7/2-3/96

-98-

other than allowing them to take part in the repo pool at the New York
Bank. For example, at the present time we are somewhat inconvenienced
by having $3 billion of
while they hold $3 billion of
our collateral. The funds are sitting in New York as a pool in case
wants to use them to meet the liquidity needs of
in our time zone.
We cannot deal with them in reverse repos, which
would allow us to take their
holdings of U.S. government
securities and give them money for a day or two, because nobody
thought such a financing arrangement was necessary 20 years ago. So,
the Desk does not have the authority to make reverse repos [with
another central bank].
Leaving aside for the moment whether it is
important in our dealings with foreign central banks to have that
capability, I think it is very important from the standpoint of our
management of bank reserves and to meet our responsibilities to the
U.S. securities market. That's because we are in the awkward position
that, if at a given point in time we wanted to provide liquidity--not
to accommodate their interests but to serve our own--and we wanted to
do so on a temporary basis instead of purchasing the securities
outright to meet a liquidity need that might last for a couple of
days, we would not have the authority to do that. I do not think that
is in our interest in as complex a government securities market as
exists now. It is essentially an anachronism.
When we look at the foreign central bank aspect to it, the
debate on how many angels can fit on the head of a pin is kids' stuff
compared with the debate among lawyers, accountants, and economists on
whether a reverse repo is a securities transaction or an extension of
credit. Since good and decent people can argue it is an extension of
credit, I think we would have to be very careful in how we use that
capability. My own view would be that at some point, when we actually
make a recommendation, it should include the condition that it would
be done only with the previous approval of the Chairman. If the
Chairman were not available, then it would be done with the previous
approval of the Vice Chairman, wearing my hat as Vice Chairman of this
Committee but looking at the convenience that I happen to be in New
York where the Desk is. That, I think, would give us adequate
protection against the Desk ever thinking that this was a tool that
they would use in the normal course of business. Having run the Desk
myself, I know that a Manager takes very seriously ringing up the
Chairman even via the ever loyal Don Kohn and saying, by the way, I
would like to do something that I am supposed to do very infrequently,
but now is the time. A Manager thinks that through a few times before
making that phone call, and I believe that would be appropriate.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just a couple of questions relevant to
this issue: The real danger here, as you imply, is that there are
numerous people who can envisage a reverse repo as an extension of
credit. I can very readily see that there are certain countries with
which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York might engage in a reverse
repo and that transaction would not sit well with various
Congressional committees or a variety of other groupings within this
society. Do you think we should have at least some indication from
the Committee as to the eligible list of countries or some mechanism
for making that sort of judgment other than requiring it to be made by
the Chairman or the Vice Chairman of this Committee?

-99-

7/2-3/96

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I think that has
great merit. The question is the form. Would you want a list or
would you want a sense of the Committee concerning what sorts of
countries might be on the list?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We do not want a published list.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes, and we do not want a leaked
list or somebody trying to obtain it through a FOIA request. A list
cannot be leaked or released if it does not exist. My preference
would be for us to have a discussion to arrive at a sense of the
Committee concerning standards. The latter might include the
requirements that a country should be highly creditworthy and not be
in conflict with the United States of America in some manner. I think
the Committee could give certain guidelines for the Desk and the
Chairman to follow. This is not a firm opinion, but my own working
hypothesis is that we would be better off to have guidelines rather
than a list.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Perhaps they might include such a thing
as the State Department's acquiescence in American citizens visiting
such countries.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, right.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, I would like to take advantage of
your offer to discuss the broader principles bearing on this issue and
to leave some of the details for a subsequent discussion. I think the
fundamental question that underlies the several discussions of swaps
in which I have participated is whether we believe that central banks
should have reserves in foreign currencies that they use either to
support foreign exchange markets or to address payments system
problems or both. My answer to that is that I am in favor of
maintaining balances in foreign currencies. I say that despite the
fact that foreign exchange intervention is tricky and more importantly
it is not suited in some ways to what one might regard as a pure
market philosophy. Foreign currency holdings have been useful in the
past and not having them seems to me to be more risky than maintaining
them despite all the questions that they raise about the size of
holdings, earnings, and related matters.
We have accumulated a lot of foreign exchange holdings,
though I gather mostly in two currencies, over the years. Swap lines,
as I understand them, were put in place to provide currency balances
where none existed. So, having foreign exchange balances and swap
lines at the same time is a lot like having a belt and suspenders,
too. Should we do away with swaps? Over the years, I have come to be
a believer in the desirability of belts and suspenders at the same
time. I think the combination is often a good thing, especially when
the suspenders are quite cheap and are legal as in this case. I also
believe that engaging in foreign exchange intervention and using swaps
in conjunction with the Treasury, rather than compromising our
independence, is highly useful,in providing us with an opportunity to
inform and moderate Treasury actions. Treasury practices in this area
can, of course, bounce back and forth depending on the policies of the

7/2-3/96

-100-

Administration. It is possible that existing balances of foreign
currencies may not be sufficient in some cases like the Mexican
crisis. Swaps are the time-honored way of getting foreign currencies,
and the fact that our swap lines have not been used in recent years
except by Mexico seems fortuitous to me but not especially relevant to
the issue of whether or not they should exist.
The use of repo facilities is, I think, a separable issue.
Repo facilities inherently involve maintaining foreign exchange
balances, as I understand them. At least based on the material
presented in the staff memo, I find it difficult to come to a settled
conclusion on the expansion of repo facilities because I think we need
a fuller treatment and fuller discussion at some point as to exactly
how they are used and in what situations they are used. But based on
what I know about them, I find it hard to imagine that repo facilities
could replace swaps. They do not seem to deal with the issue of a
lack of balances in the affected currency. What happens, for example,
when there is a sterling run on Citibank branches in London? We do
not have a lot of sterling balances. If this repo process is used to
replace swaps, which is the implication of the memo, how does that
help us deal with that? Whether repo agreements are standard or
customized, they could involve a major negotiation process with every
country involved, and this undoubtedly would take a lot of time and
effort.
In short, at least in my own mind--and I could be naive or
wrong about this--it seems to be a little like mixing apples and
oranges to imply that swaps could be replaced by repo arrangements.
It may be that I do not understand this well, but there does seem to
be a bit of a mix here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is a mix. It is not a replacement
for the actual mechanism. It is a political replacement, if I may put
it that way.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes, it certainly seems that way.

MR. PARRY. It is not belts and suspenders.
[Laughter]
and the other is a raincoat.

One is a belt

MS. MINEHAN. I did not use "belt and suspenders" with regard
to the repo facilities. It was with regard to swaps and the
accumulation of foreign exchange balances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
liquidity. [Laughter]

Just remember a raincoat is anti-

MS. MINEHAN. Because we have a December deadline on
approving the swap network for yet another year, my preference at this
point would be to approve the swap network. I think it would be very
useful for us to engage in a more thorough review of alternatives. I
certainly would like to see fewer questions and more strawmen put up
as possible ways that we could deal with the issue. I would like to
have some idea of how people see using a broader range of repo
facilities. If we were to engage in negotiations with our
counterparties, I think it would be rather arduous to get the change
we want. If and when we want that to occur, the paper asks the
question whether that should be linked in some way or another to the

-101-

7/2-3/96

European Monetary Union. I am agnostic enough about that and what it
would mean over the near term that I think we should go ahead with
this reevaluation. We should look at various scenarios, but we should
do it on our own timetable and not the European timetable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the breadth of this
discussion and for my purposes would like to put it in a different
perspective. In my view, the first issue relating to our swap lines
is our attitude toward intervention. That has been the reason for
their existence, why they have been maintained and renewed. My own
preference is for us to intervene on a very limited basis, and I think
that also has been a very strong premise for some time for many on
this Committee. I believe that should continue. We have foreign
currency balances that provide us with a mechanism for intervention
should we choose to use those balances in circumstances that we deem
appropriate. As they have evolved over the years, our swap lines have
been of very limited use, and I think they present a confusing picture
about our role and intentions going forward. We should phase them
out. As far as the timing is concerned, the European Monetary Union
provides us with an opportunity. We may not be in a position to
choose the exact timing, but it is an opportunity to phase out the
swap network in a rational way without raising a lot of questions or
uncertainties. I think we should take advantage of that opportunity.
That brings me to the issue of liquidity, whether we call it
reverse repos or lending to others. I am very uncertain about that
and would not want to indicate my leanings at this time because I
think we need more information and a broader discussion. I know on
the basis of some of the documents that I have seen in the past that
there has been a very strong reluctance to get involved in the
appearance or the reality of lending to another central bank or other
international financial institution. So, I would like to know a
little more about the potential liquidity needs, what countries would
be involved, and how we would set general criteria for providing funds
if we are going to move down that road. I certainly would hesitate to
do it very quickly. Perhaps it is my own ignorance, but I believe we
need more information on the table before we move to a decision. And
I think that

is a separate issue from swaps

in principle.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is. Let us emphasize that it is an
issue that can be discussed on its own merits.
MR. HOENIG.

I think we should do that over time in future

meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I thought there was a general
agreement in our earlier discussions that if we did not already have
swap arrangements, we would not invent them, so the question looking
forward was simply one of tactics for getting rid of them. Cathy in
her remarks raised some question as to whether we should invent them
if we did not already have them. Another issue is who is on the list.
Should we have a swap agreement with Denmark, for example, and under
what circumstances would we use it or allow them to use it?

-102-

7/2-3/96

In one of our discussions last year, Mr. Chairman, you made
reference to the renewals of these swap lines as being like Christmas
cards. I went home after that meeting and cut all foreign central
bankers off my Christmas card list!
[Laughter] A problem with a swap
arrangement, either a current arrangement or any new one, is that it
is expected to be used and the question is under what circumstances
and with what unintended consequences.

I think none of us was happy
with the further temporary increase in our swap line with Mexico and
related decisions a year and a half ago. It was messy; it was
uncomfortable with the U.S. Treasury; it was uncomfortable with the
IMF. It was difficult and uncomfortable with the Mexicans. We would
have been better off if we had not had the swap line. I would hope
that by the time the Mexicans hold their next presidential election we
will not have this reciprocal lending facility. That would be one
criterion I would set up.
Another relates to the fact that there are only a very few
currencies that serve as major standards of value in the world and
every other currency is defined in terms of those currencies. One of
those, the deutsche mark, is slated to go away in a couple of years.
I think the kind of arrangement that we have with other major central
banks whose currency competes with the dollar as an international
standard of value is one thing, and the arrangements that we have with
everybody else is something else again. Central banks are
proliferating all over the world--in Tajikistan and places I can't
even pronounce. I hope that my worst fears about the new European
central bank and the new euro currency prove not to be warranted, but
I believe we need to think very carefully, starting now, about what
kind of arrangements we will want to have with that central bank and
what kind of transactions we will be willing to engage in with it.
There also are questions pertaining to those European countries that
may be subjected to some severe dislocations by not being a part of
the euro club and the European central bank. What kind of
arrangements are they going to want to have with us, and are they
arrangements that we are going to want to have with them? I think
this is an extremely important issue. We do not have a lot of time,
but we ought to put it in that context so that we finish this
millennium with something quite different from what we have today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Rivlin.

MS. RIVLIN. On a very basic level, it seems to me that we
ought to welcome the respect and the leadership role that the world,
as Mr. McDonough pointed out, seems very willing to accord us and we
ought to work as closely as possible with the other major central
banks to keep things on an even keel and avoid financial crises. For
that purpose, it seems to me that, as the world gets more complicated,
we probably are going to need a quite flexible set of instruments and
a quite flexible set of groupings of countries that we deal with in
different ways. I am persuaded by the staff paper that the current
swaps are probably an obsolete instrument, but I would be very worried

7/2-3/96

-103-

about eliminating them before we are much surer about the kind of
structure we want going forward. I think we need to rethink that very
carefully, and we need to do it in the light of a couple sets of
political sensitivities.
One set is the concerns of our friends and allies around the
world who are very worried, as I perceive it, that the United States
may be withdrawing from the world. They believe that we have an
inward-looking, to-hell-with-the-rest-of-the-world stance at the
moment and that we are drawing back on foreign aid and not paying our
bills that are due to international organizations. If we were to get
rid of our swap lines, that might be seen as one more indication that
we are withdrawing from the world. I do not think anybody around this
table wants to do that. The other set of political sensitivities is
exactly the one to which those people are responding--the
Congressional set of fears that somehow we are going to become more
entangled. So, as we structure a new set of relationships, I think we
have to be very careful, first, that they are not seen as foreign aid
but as mutual arrangements among central banks to avoid world crisis.
They must not be viewed as give-aways because that would create some
problem for anything that is an extension of credit. Second, these
arrangements should not be seen as obscure, as the mysterious getting
together of central bankers who might be thought to be up to no good.
Politically, it seems to me that we have a very sensitive set of
issues that we have to work our way through very carefully. I for one
would think the first thing is to do no harm and not overturn the
existing arrangements even though they may not be very modern ones.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I think the history of the swap arrangements
since the early 1980s indicates that there is no need for them.
Somewhat in answer to Governor Rivlin's concerns, it would seem to me
that there may be political reasons for wanting to substitute
something, but I think history has indicated that when it comes to the
economic and financial considerations, a substitute mechanism really
is not required. In addition, the more recent experience that we have
had, I think, is another item on the side of the ledger in support of
the view that we do not need this type of arrangement. So, without
getting into what one perhaps should substitute or just add to it, I
don't see where the case is at all strong that we need our swap lines.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, as you know, I have registered
my discomfort with swap arrangements for some time, beginning with my
votes against the renewal of a number of these arrangements in late
1994. Essentially, I think swap arrangements are undesirable because
their primary purpose is to facilitate foreign exchange intervention,
and I do not like foreign exchange intervention. I believe it
compromises or threatens to compromise the conduct of monetary policy
for reasons I have outlined here before. Just in two brief summary
sentences:
I think intervention undermines the credibility of
monetary policy by introducing some confusion as to what our
fundamental objectives are as between domestic price stability and
exchange rate objectives at particular points in time. Secondly, I
think some foreign exchange operations could over time undermine
public support for the Fed's financial independence, which is the

7/2-3/96

-104-

ultimate foundation for our credibility. So, I would favor
discontinuing the swap network. I was encouraged by the memorandum,
which I also thought was very well done, because I sensed from it that
a number of other central banks may also share these sentiments.
Obviously, if we were to do this, there would be some transition
problems and some technical difficulties and perhaps some perception
difficulties in actually getting it done. I do not want to minimize
those, but I think that if we confront them we can deal with them.
As far as the timing is concerned, I would agree that if we
could in some way tie this in with the EMU, that would be great.
However, Tom Hoenig said it well; we do not know what that timing is
going to be and I would not want to wait for that.
With regard to the question that you raised and that the memo
raises with respect to replacing the swap lines--if we do dismantle
them--with some other kind of credit facility, I do not have answers,
just questions. There are a lot of questions that we would need to
ask and try to get answers to. Let me just highlight the ones that I
believe would be most compelling. If we are going to do something
like this, we need to be very clear as to the reason. There may be a
valid reason, but we as a Committee would need to understand it as
clearly as possible, and that would involve some discussion. Then
there would be the mechanical issues having to do with whether to have
limits on credit extensions either with respect to amount or to whom
the loans might be made, how frequently they might be made, what the
approval process would be, and so forth. I think we would have to
establish those terms very carefully. There also would be questions
about collateral. We would need to decide how what would be
acceptable collateral and how it would be valued. Finally, and I
guess most importantly, if we were to do something like this, we would
need to try to design it in a way where we would not be seen as in any
way misusing our off-budget status to make loans to foreign
governments that could open us up to the kind of charges we got when
we made the Mexican loan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to admit my
general skepticism regarding the effectiveness of intervention as a
means of permanently affecting the value of the dollar. I do think
that there are times when other smaller countries may be able to use
intervention policies appropriately to affect their currencies. So,
it seems to me that the usefulness of swap lines for the United States
may be questionable. But I recognize that we live in a global
environment, and we may need to be able to respond to the needs of
other countries. We also are not the only government institution
making this policy. To the extent that the Treasury, for example,
decides that it is appropriate to intervene, we need to be there and
we need to have the appropriate capabilities. I am not sure that swap
lines are the most efficient means of effecting these kinds of
transactions. I am not even sure that repos or reverse repos are the
only other kinds of financial instruments that we could use. I
suspect that in today's marketplace, there may be a wider range of
instruments that could be used, and before we come to a final
conclusion, we need to be thinking about where we want to go as
opposed to eliminating one procedure and having nothing to replace it.
Whatever adjustments are made, I hope that we would not be seen as

7/2-3/96

-105-

withdrawing from the international arena. I think the Fed should be
an active participant in the formulation of U.S. policy. We should
have a place at the table. I do think that the Fed provides
continuity in the international financial arena on behalf of the
United States.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have never been completely clear
as to exactly what kind of an obligation these swap lines were. What
are we obliged to do? It seems to me that whenever there is a
likelihood that a central bank will want to draw on its swap line,
that involves a full-blown discussion and negotiation anyway. A swap
agreement is not a right to automatic credit as I understand it. As a
consequence, it strikes me that its very existence may tend over time
to be more awkward than helpful if other central banks presume that
there is a right to credit which may turn out not to be desirable from
our perspective at the time the drawing is requested. So, for that
reason and others that have been mentioned here, it seems to me that
it would be a good idea for us to start moving slowly away from our
swap agreements.
An additional dimension that I don't think I heard mentioned
here and that seems relevant to me would be the new level of
participation and capability of the private sector to perform a lot of
these functions. We recently went through an interesting pattern with
the Brady negotiations and the structure that came out of that. Very
recently, there have been interesting negotiations with Mexico that
involved a third-party, private-sector group. I think that that is an
appropriate consideration as well.
I would like to reiterate two things that Governor Rivlin and
others have said. First, we probably should have some idea of where
we want to go before we leave where we are. The second point is that
I believe this is at least as much a political as it is a financial
consideration. As a consequence, as soon as we have our thinking
together, I think we should begin to move very slowly and carefully
out of these arrangements and to do so in the context of a broad range
of considerations and discussions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One possibility is that we could move
this forward if, for example, the Vice Chairman and I at meetings in
Basle unofficially sounded out our counterparts concerning their views
of these swaps agreements. It is very important for us to know if
they think these are useless and obsolete appendages to the
international financial system as distinct from a measure of embrace
by the United States reflecting the United States' view of the moral
superiority of our counterparties.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If we were to assume a world in
which the swap network no longer existed, would any formal mechanism
have to be created to replace it? My own working hypothesis on that
would be "no."
In my view, what would replace it is what in a way
already replaces it. A good many of us spend a fair amount of our
time--I spend essentially 10 percent of my time--attending BIS
meetings. I don't do that because I like the Basle Hilton, I can
assure you, but rather because of the close personal relationships
that come from that activity. What that means is that if we have a

7/2-3/96

-106-

problem with any of the people that the Chairman sees, say, at four
meetings a year and I see at ten meetings a year, we are talking with
someone we know very well. So what replaces the swap network is that
personal relationship. It does not mean that we do them a favor or
they do us a favor. What it does is to make it possible for two
individuals representing their central banks to agree on what is in
the mutual interest of their central banks and more importantly their
countries.
If we ever got into a situation in which it was necessary to
do something, including a reverse repo with, say, Germany, I think
none of us would worry about whether there was a political
consideration or a creditworthiness consideration. Germany is, of
course, a very easy example. We would do the financial transaction
only if it were very clear that it was in the interest of Germany and
in the interest of the United States. As long as we keep a very close
control on it, as has been suggested, then the risk factor is very,
very low. Now, what that kind of approach to the world requires is a
great deal of effort in figuring out which of the central banks of the
world are important enough for us to spend the amount of time needed
to get to know the people who run them as well as we know some of our
best friends in Europe. That is a lot of work. I think one of the
reasons that you, Mr. Chairman, wanted to concentrate on the overall
aspects of this issue is that the people who work on this a lot like
Ted, Peter, and Terry Checki from the New York Bank could perhaps be
thinking of taking a look at whether, because of our rather disparate
organization, we have missed some obvious candidates. I think we were
a bit slow in taking the Southeast Asia central banks seriously. San
Francisco was doing a good job on it; we were a little slow in New
York, no question. I think Board staff was taking an interest in
them. But we certainly have stepped up the degree of time and
attention that we are spending on those people, I think very
appropriately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I start out with some fairly basic views. I
think that we have to be involved in the world and that we have to
provide leadership at times. That means doing all the things
necessary to build personal and institutional relationships to support
our involvement. Whether one views intervention in the foreign
exchange markets as desirable or not, I will guarantee, absolutely
guarantee, that there will come a time when intervention is going to
be something that we need to do. There may be very transitory reasons
for the intervention and its effects may fade away over time, but
there will be circumstances at some point where we will simply have to
engage in intervention operations. As a practical matter, we will
then need to have the ammunition to participate. While we may have
foreign currency reserves now that permit us to do that, we will also
need ways to back up those reserves to get the necessary liquidity.
Whether it is swaps or something else, we will have to be in a
position to do those things that are necessary for us to sit at the
table and be effective players. The view that we can somehow pull
ourselves out of the foreign exchange markets for all time, that we
can somehow let the world go, is just completely at odds with the kind
of financial structure that we have on a global basis and our role in
it. If we are going to play, we need to have the tools.

7/2-3/96

-107-

MR. PARRY.

Do we need the swaps to do that?

MR. BOEHNE. I am not arguing about whether we need
per se. I am just saying that we need the means. If we can
on the swaps mechanism or find other ways, that is fine with
not think we ought to give them up until we are sure we have
else.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

the swaps
improve
me. I do
something

Governor Meyer.

MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, I found a lot on my plate as I
prepared for this meeting, and you were the chef!
[Laughter]
Absorbing the memo on swaps got me very close to a form of
intellectual indigestion. So I am not prepared to take a very firm
position at this time, but I do want to share a few initial
impressions. First, the current swap network certainly appears to be
for the most part an historical relic. In her comments, Cathy said
that this may be fortuitous, and that reminded me of a mutual fund
prospectus stating that past performance is no guarantee of future
returns. That may be the case here. However, the staff memo
certainly left me with the impression that not only have these swaps,
except in the case of Mexico, not been used since 1982, but in the
staff's judgment there was no particular prospect that they would be
used for the foreseeable future. So, eliminating the swaps would be
like paperwork reduction, the 303 streamlining that we are engaged in.
Why do we have to meet every year and renew these arrangements when we
know they are not going to be used?
The main case for retaining them seems to be that it is not
very costly, and there might be some political cost in dismantling
them because we could be perceived as disengaging or not being a
cooperative member of the team. Now, while the topic here is
presumably swaps, that is not really what we are talking about for the
most part. We really are talking about whether or not we believe in
intervention in the exchange markets and how we feel about emergency
actions when there are payments system crises as in the case of
Mexico. That is the real issue despite the fact that the swap
agreements have nothing to do with intervention in foreign exchange
markets, except perhaps as a backup source of foreign currencies at
some point down the road. Even that remains to be seen. I am not
going to reach any judgment at this point about intervention in the
foreign exchange markets. I will say that I start out with a degree
of skepticism, but I am not so skeptical that I would remove this
policy option from the table at this point.
With respect to the situation of Mexico, it is interesting
that their drawing is the only example of the use of our swap line
recently, and it is precisely that use that is the main reason why
some people want to scrap the swap line network. This might have been
an ugly way of dealing with the problem, but it may be that there were
no less ugly options available. Again, I want to withhold judgment on
that.
In terms of RPs and the merits of reverse RPs, I absolutely
withhold any judgment on those issues until I have learned much more
about those instruments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

7/2-3/96

-108-

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I agree that the swap arrangements
are by and large a legacy of times past and may have become something
of an anachronism. But even if these arrangements have become largely
symbolic, they do seem to me to be an important symbol of our
commitment to international cooperation. Here I agree particularly
with Governor Rivlin and President Boehne. I think it would be
dangerous simply to dismantle these arrangements in a way that creates
international tension. I do not really see these arrangements as
dangerous. I understand the principle that President Broaddus has
enunciated as to why they could be dangerous to our ability to conduct
an independent monetary policy, but I think that fear is overblown. I
agree with President Boehne that they could even be helpful on
occasion in the future.
I would support the suggestion that you made, Mr. Chairman,
that it might be wise to look for an opportunity in Basle or elsewhere
to discuss the future of these arrangements quietly with our central
bank partners and to see what their reactions would be. I would not
want to see needless tension created here. I also agree that before
we have those conversations, it would be wise to figure out where we
might want to go in the future to be able to react to suggestions that
we replace these arrangements with something else. With respect to a
system of repo and reverse repo-type arrangements, I think that is a
possibility that is well worth exploring. But I would agree also with
President Broaddus's list of the questions that would need to be
addressed and answered. What do we see as the fundamental purpose?
Is it to guard against systemic risk? Is it a service to our allies?
Is it for our own reserve management needs? Will we do transactions
on demand? Is this a privilege? Is this a right? Are there limits?
With whom do we intend to deal? What criteria will we use to decide
which countries? I think Governor Kelley's question about private
markets and the impact that we might have on private institutions as
we become increasingly large players in this area is a question that
we should explore along with the broad issue of the governance
structure if we proceed. We need to work out who will make the
decisions and what authorization will be required. I think this is a
good opportunity for the staff to go home and do some work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. It seems obvious that the original purpose for
establishing the swap arrangements is no longer as relevant as it once
was. I do not think this necessarily means that we should
unilaterally dismantle the swap lines. They are reciprocal
arrangements. If our counterparts sense that we no longer have any
need for the swap lines, then it might be appropriate to begin the
discussions on how best to proceed with disassembling them without
unnecessary adverse reactions. Mr. Chairman, I think your suggestion
of the informal discussions that you and the Vice Chairman would have
with other central bankers at Basle and elsewhere is a very good
initial step. In the process as we are thinking this through, we
certainly should explore alternative arrangements to see if they are
needed to better reflect the current state of the international
exchange markets, the role we should play, and whether the swaps are
needed at all. There are many issues involved, and I agree with
Governor Yellen that we should send the staff back to do some more
work on this, including the private market aspect that Governor Kelley
mentioned. I think this should be included in the broader study of

7/2-3/96

-109-

intervention and the types of tools that we would use if intervention
is called for in the future. I agree with President Boehne that the
odds are pretty high that we will be called on to do something
sometime in the coming years.
On the EMU point, I do not think we should wait to see if EMU
becomes a reality before we begin this effort, although we clearly
would have an opportunity at that time for implementing any change and
adjustments that we need. I also think this is an area where close
cooperation is going to be needed between the Federal Reserve, the
Treasury, and other affected central banks and governments. It may
be, as someone said, that this is more of a political decision than an
economic decision in some respects. Our independence may be better
enhanced if we take a leadership role on this issue rather than just
unilaterally terminating these swap arrangements. We certainly do not
want to add to the concern that the United States is no longer
exercising leadership in the international community.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.
the world,

Governor Lindsey.

I am certainly no advocate of withdrawing from

Two issues have been raised. The first has to do with what I
would call the dual purposes here, which is concern about withdrawal
from the world versus a domestic political consideration. As some
members have emphasized in this discussion, there certainly will come
a time in the future when we will wish to be in a position to
intervene in foreign exchange markets. I am sure that will happen.
We have managed to intervene in foreign exchange markets quite a bit.
I can't think of any instance since I have been here when we really
had to intervene. It certainly was not because of an emergency or a
financial crisis. As I recall, every time we intervened the reason
really came down to what was in effect a domestic political
consideration. Some major trading partner had too high a currency or
too low a currency or something of that nature and that was the real
motivation. It was not a systemic risk situation. There was no
question about systemic risk. In every instance that we can think of,
except perhaps for some hypothetical developments in the future, we
know why intervention is being used. It has nothing to do with
systemic risk; it is an arm of the domestic political apparatus, and I
do not like that. I do not think that is what we are here for, and I
think there are risks to this institution if we play that game.
We really have to think about two issues. The first, as has
been mentioned, is the list of countries with which we want to conduct
these transactions, and related to that is the question of whether or
not the other currency is a major store of value. Mr. Chairman, you
indicated that we should exclude countries where the State Department
does not want U.S. citizens to travel. I do not think we need a
repurchase agreement with North Korea or Cuba, and I do not know where
else we cannot travel, so I think that is too small a list of excluded
countries.
MS. MINEHAN.

Iran.

7/2-3/96

-110-

MR. LINDSEY. Iran, okay.
agreement with Iran right now.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. LINDSEY.
Chinese renminbi.

They have their own printing press!

[Laughter]

Let us think about the Indian rupee or the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Treasury securities.
MR. LINDSEY.
agreement with China.

We do not need a repurchase

These are repurchases involving U.S.

All right, let us pick the case of a repurchase

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In dollars.

MR. LINDSEY. In dollars. Let us think about the odds that
the transaction would be used to prevent systemic contagion to the
U.S. banking system versus the odds that it would be used for domestic
political considerations because the Chinese are selling us too many
shirts or whatever it is. Do you want to give me the odds on that? I
know which way it is going to come out. The only place where I think
the issue gets really difficult is with the yen, which does serve as a
true world store of value currency. Even in that case, it can still
be used for domestic political considerations. So, I think we have to
draw the net very tightly on countries with which we will undertake to
do these transactions. I believe the way to think of this is in terms
of the probability that we may need to intervene for good reasons
versus purely domestic political considerations.
The second issue is one of duration. I do not remember any
discussion of this although, Bill, you did allude to it. We could
have a two-day reverse repo or a three-day reverse repo, but if we
renew it 100 times, it suddenly becomes what I would call a real
extension of credit. I would suggest that we think hard about that
issue; that would be one of the clearer lines in the sand that we
would have to draw. I remember in our discussion of the Mexican
bailout that we all knew we were going a bit out on a limb for a year.
We viewed that as a long time, and we certainly did not want to go
beyond a year. If we are going to focus on this and we want to avoid
the appearance of an extension of credit, I would think that the
duration has to be a lot less than a year. Maybe it should be a
matter of weeks.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I would be astounded, since you
addressed the question to me, if the duration were more than a few
days. My main motivation for getting the reverse repo capability for
the Desk is that I do not want to deprive us, the FOMC, of a useful
tool for our own purposes. I am not really motivated by the objective
of helping other central banks around the world. A problem that
sometime arises in our dealings with some of the Southeast Asian banks
when they ask if we can do a reverse repo. They understand fully the
nature of that financial instrument. When we say, "No, we can't do
those," they think it implies, because a country competitive with us
is encouraging them to have that view, that we are not a cooperative
central bank. It is not that they are saying they want us to do it.
They are not asking for any kind of an arrangement. It is that they
are thinking: Why in the world would a central bank not be able to do

7/2-3/96

-111-

what would appear to be a completely normal transaction in its own
Treasury securities in its own currency when it can do those any day
of the week with Salomon Brothers? I have constructed answers to such
questions, but in fact it is not very comfortable to have to answer
them. So, I would like to be able to say that we have that technical
capability, but they should not in any way have the view that we
intend to use it. They have access to all those Street firms that
Mike Kelley referred to and they should go and do their business with
them. All kinds of people are eager to do business with those central
banks, and that is where it ought to be done. On the other hand, our
not having that tool available to us is a product of the fact that in
the 1970s, whenever it was, nobody thought we would need it, so we did
not get it. No one can recall a policy decision on this matter, but
rather it appears to have been a case where nobody thought of it as
something that might be needed.
MR. LINDSEY.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I have just a couple of comments. I think swaps
have outlived their usefulness. My recollection is that one of the
problems we have encountered with them is that foreign central banks
have wanted to draw on their swap lines at times we did not think it
was such a good idea. I remember some balance sheet window-dressing
on the part of a country whose name has already been mentioned a
couple of times here. That places us in a dilemma. They come to us
with the expectation that they are going to be able to make the
drawing. Do we want to say no, given that the facility is in place?
It gets to be very difficult. So, I would think that we ought to try
to extricate ourselves, as gracefully as possible, over time from
these arrangements.
In terms of where we might go, I have some sympathy in the
abstract for the flexible approach based on personal relations that
Bill McDonough was talking about. But this is politically sensitive
stuff. There is no escaping, it seems to me, that these arrangements
and transactions are politically sensitive. Where that leads me is to
the view that we need some principles with regard to what we are
prepared to do, under what circumstances, with whom, when, and so on.
It may be that, in extremis, we will need to interpret those
principles flexibly, but I assume those situations would be rare.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I am not a fan of intervention by the United
States in foreign exchange markets, and in any event we probably do
not need swap arrangements for that purpose. However, our swap
partners might have such a need, so I am not sure what we would gain
by giving up the flexibility to accommodate that need before we have
an alternative in mind. I would look for alternatives and keep the
swaps around until we have one.
Just a word on Mexico: Nobody liked the way the Mexican
support package was put together and it was certainly ugly. But I
still believe that we did the right thing, and it appears that it has
worked and is working and will be successful. I would keep the swap
arrangement around so that it will be available in the next crisis.

7/2-3/96

-112-

The idea of hurrying to dismantle it before another crisis occurs
where we might use it does not appeal to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I cannot add anything that has not already
been said on the swaps issue. I do want to say that I have a lot of
sympathy for what Bill McDonough said in terms of how we ought to be
thinking about this issue looking forward. We ought to focus on
making sure that we maintain the U.S. dollar as the principal reserve
currency, and we ought to be thinking of vehicles that support that
objective. That is really how I view what Bill is saying in an
environment where we are apt to have larger and larger cross-border
settlements and the need for liquidity on relatively short notice.
The ability to provide the latter would certainly be in our interest.
People are going to look to us to make sure that dollar settlements
throughout the world are in fact made. We ought to be thinking in
terms of a vehicle that helps facilitate that. So, I think our focus
ought to be shifted away from supporting foreign exchange intervention, and I think swaps are an anachronism in that context in any
event. We should be moving more toward payments system risk aspects
and really supporting the U.S. dollar. That is what this ought to be
about as we think about the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments?

MS. MINEHAN. I just want to reiterate what Gary Stern said
before. For better or for worse, my understanding of the way swaps
work is that there is an activation process of some sort and then an
actual use. There are principles and rules that apply and so on. I
think we need to be very flexible as we move forward, and I think we
ought to be responsive as a central bank. We need to be aware of the
political nature of these transactions, particularly in the reverse
repo situation where there is at least a debate about whether it is
the same kind of extension of credit that ended up being debated.
Accordingly, I think we need to have a fairly firm set of principles
under which we would operate and that would not vary a great deal,
except in extremis, from country to country. Those principles would
be something that we would talk about in advance of actually providing
dollars. I am a little nervous about extreme flexibility because I
think it could lead into difficulty for us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further remarks or questions? If not
unless I hear an objection, I think we probably ought to move forward
and see whether we can get some responses on this general issue from
our counterparties and bring those observations back to the Committee
the next time we discuss this operation. Is that okay with everybody?
MR. PRELL.

Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. Could I remind Committee members that there is an
opportunity to submit revisions of their forecasts? It would be very
helpful to us if those could be sent to me by close of business on
Monday to give us time to incorporate them in our draft of the
Humphrey-Hawkins report.

-113-

7/2-3/96

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If I could just add a remark that
is probably gratuitous and unnecessary, but I will make it anyway.
There were many references to the tremendous importance of the
upcoming Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, and that testimony is going to be
infinitely more meaningful if all of us maintain a very studied
silence in the meantime.
MR. STERN.

Do you have a date for that testimony?

Mr. COYNE.

It's scheduled for Thursday, July 18.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
will adjourn for lunch.

The next meeting is August 20th.

END OF MEETING

We

