August 10, 2004

1 of 103

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
August 10, 2004
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday,
August 10, 2004. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Poole
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guynn, Lacker, and Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Richmond, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Hakkio, Howard, Madigan, Rasche, Sniderman, Slifman, Tracy,
and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. English, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

August 10, 2004

2 of 103

Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
of Governors
Messrs. Goodfriend and Rudebusch and Ms. Mester, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, San Francisco, and Philadelphia,
respectively
Messrs. Cunningham, Hilton, Marshall, Tootell, and Wynne, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Chicago, Boston, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

August 10, 2004

3 of 103

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
August 10, 2004
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes of June 29 and 30?
MS. MINEHAN. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Will somebody move the election of
Scott Alvarez to serve as General Counsel until the election of a successor at the first meeting of the
Committee after December 31, 2004?
MR. FERGUSON. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second?
SPEAKER(?). Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, so ordered. Dino Kos, you’re on.
MR. KOS.1 Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the charts that
Carol Low circulated a short time ago. During the intermeeting period, market
participants scaled back their forecasts for U.S. economic growth—in part because of
rising oil prices—and the effects were reflected in expectations of a more gently
rising trajectory for short-term rates, in lower bond yields, and in lower stock prices.
The top panel graphs the three-month deposit rate in black and the three-month
deposit rate three, six, and nine months forward in the dashed red lines. The threemonth cash deposit rate (the black line) had been rising and continued to rise in the
intermeeting period, as expectations solidified that the Committee would tighten
policy at this meeting. But forward rates (the dashed red lines) traded in a range and
then declined sharply on Friday, as the employment report led market participants to
reassess their expectations for the pace of future tightening beyond today’s meeting.
The six- and nine-month forward rates have both declined about 50 basis points since
late July.
The yields on two- and ten-year Treasuries, shown in the middle panels, both fell
in recent weeks and especially on Friday. The two-year yield is about 40 basis points
lower than when the Committee last met. The ten-year yield is about 60 basis points
lower than it was in early June, and with yields at this level, the market is again
discussing the possibility of a mortgage-induced wave of buying that would send
yields still lower—but I’ll come back to that point shortly. With the outperformance
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

August 10, 2004

4 of 103

of the ten-year note, the yield curve has continued to flatten, as shown in the bottom
panel.
Several weeks ago bond traders were worried that the sharp rise in bond yields
might set off a wave of selling by MBS investors facing extension risk. With the
move down in yields those worries have reversed. The top left panel on page 2
graphs the duration of the thirty-year MBS index, which has narrowed sharply since
early June and now stands at just above 3½ years. On Friday alone that index
contracted by about six months. The level of MBS-related buying in recent days is
hard to track, but anecdotally it has not been a prominent feature of recent trading. A
further move in the MBS yield toward 4 percent could trigger hedge-related buying
by accounts positioning for a new wave of refinancing.
As shown in the top right panel, the spread between MBS and Treasuries has
narrowed from 55 basis points in early June to about 40 basis points. Part of that
outperformance by MBS is probably due to a reach for yield in an environment where
the market believed it had comfort about the pace of tightening going forward. An
alternative way of looking at MBS spreads is to measure the level of the implied
volatility of the embedded option. With volatilities generally low across a range of
securities and instruments, the value of the short option embedded in MBS is worth
less, and the MBS itself becomes worth more. That vols in MBS are low is a bit
puzzling given the shortening of duration, which increases the likelihood that the
options will move into the money. A side effect of this narrowing of spreads is that at
least one housing GSE has already signaled that it will scale back MBS purchases,
given the reduced value it perceives in current spreads.
Other credit markets performed well. Spreads on investment-grade corporate debt
were little changed and appeared nonplussed by the June tightening, as shown in the
middle left panel. Swap spreads were also little changed. The high-yield market—
shown in the middle right panel—performed well in the aftermath of the tightening
but widened more recently as the equity markets sold off. Interestingly, spreads on
emerging-market bonds—where there had been perhaps the most anxiety about the
tightening cycle—also narrowed slightly. Ironically, the equity markets hit their
recent peaks just about the time of the Committee’s last meeting and have struggled
since, as shown in the bottom panel. The list of reported ailments for equities is
lengthy: oil prices approaching $45, weaker macro data, terror alerts, and earnings
outlooks for the next few quarters that are far less favorable than the generally strong
Q2 results. According to several equity strategists, operating earnings growth
probably peaked in Q2 and is expected to decelerate in coming quarters. Given
higher oil prices and higher short-term interest rates, the recent sluggishness in equity
prices becomes perhaps a bit more understandable.
The picture of moderating economic outlooks and range-bound markets is visible
overseas as well. The top panel on page 3 graphs the euro area three-month deposit
rate and the three-month rates three, six, and nine months forward. Forward rates had
generally fluctuated in a well-defined range, and the ECB was thought to be on hold

August 10, 2004

5 of 103

for the rest of the year. But forward rates fell in the last two weeks as the weaker
U.S. data and continued sluggish data in core Europe took a toll. By late last week
even the modest tightening for early next year began to be priced out.
The euro has traded mostly in a 1.20 to 1.24 range for the past three months,
though it appreciated sharply on Friday after the employment report. The dollar–yen
exchange rate has been similarly in a range buffeted by events on both sides of the
Pacific. Through the middle of June the yen (in the middle right panel) and JGB
yields (in the bottom left panel) both had upward pressure coincident with several
months of strong Japanese data, improved business sentiment, a movement by some
price indexes away from deflation, and generally increased optimism from investors
that the long period of economic underperformance in Japan was at an end. Since
mid-June, however, the value of the yen, JGB yields, and Japanese stock prices have
all fallen, as investors have tempered their optimism with the latest batch of macro
numbers. Those numbers have been almost uniformly weaker than investors’
expectations and have caused some reassessment of how strong the Japanese recovery
really is.
Let me change gears just a bit. In the past several months, quite a few traders
have bemoaned the low level of volatility across a range of asset markets and the
absence of perceived trading opportunities. Indeed, according to public reports by
consultants who track the performance of hedge funds, the last few months have been
difficult ones. Page 4 graphs the option-implied volatility since 1999 for a sampling
of the major asset markets. The top panel graphs the S&P 500 volatility index; the
major dollar currency pairs are in the middle panel; and two- and ten-year swaptions
are shown in the bottom panel. In general, implied volatility has been toward the low
end of historical averages for these assets, but a quick look at other markets not
shown here suggests that volatility is low in markets as diverse as the Mexican peso
and the Korean stock market.
Given the list of potential worries out there, including the upcoming election, high
and rising oil prices, terrorist threats and other geopolitical issues, the onset of a
tightening cycle, and the usual concerns about the durability of the recovery, one
could reasonably make the case that vols are on the low side. Since options are a
form of financial insurance, one explanation could be that investors are shrugging off
the list of possible concerns and that there’s no apparent mispricing of assets that
investors want to protect against. A more intriguing explanation some have offered
centers on the supply side of the volatility market and particularly on the behavior of
the speculative community. This explanation posits that, with the flood of money
moving into hedge funds recently, the best trade ideas have been picked over pretty
well. But the pressure to make absolute returns persists; and the suggestion is that, in
lieu of adding to traditional carry trades, hedge funds have been selling options to
generate premium. That flow of selling is in turn putting downward pressure on
volatilities in a range of markets.

August 10, 2004

6 of 103

As long as volatilities stay low, that is a winning strategy. If volatilities should
rise, then those with short vol positions would have to rush to cover their positions.
Data limitations do not allow this explanation to be validated, but the possibility of
large short vol positions spread out over many institutions cannot be ruled out.
Finally, note that selling volatility is in effect very similar to a traditional carry trade:
both need stability of prices or rates or both in order to work. If this strategy is being
used in size, then our traditional measures of the size of the carry trade would be
underestimated.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations in this period. I will need a vote
to approve domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is it possible that the presumption in the market that the
federal funds rate will follow a certain pattern—prior, let’s say, to the market’s move last Friday
after the employment report—has created an anchor to the structure of rates that, by its very nature,
delimits the extent of volatility? That could be an explanation of the low volatility. The issue really
gets down to whether the market believes that is exactly what is going to happen and it is taking that
presumed pattern for the funds rate as a given. And they believe that because we’re telling them
that. That automatically will lower the volatility, which raises another obvious problem—that the
system is less resilient to shocks from unexpected events. That makes me a little nervous if that is
indeed the explanation.
Second, on the issue of potential endeavors to adjust duration in the mortgage market, I have
the impression that the last big waves of refinancing took out a very big chunk of moderate interest
coupon mortgages. While it may very well be true that, when interest rates fall or duration falls
back, there would be inclinations to hedge—essentially buy fixed-rate mortgages. But if you clean
out the whole base, there’s nothing left. There’s a very delimited amount of potential hedging
activity that becomes required, except for the idiosyncratic shift in duration that has nothing to do
with refinancings. This is not a convexity issue so much; it’s more an endeavor to judge where
there is potential for refinancing. Do we have a judgment on this?

August 10, 2004

7 of 103

MR. KOS. Let me answer that in two ways. First, guessing where convexity-related
hedging might kick in is as much an art as it is science. What some of the dealers are talking about
is that at a rate of about 4 percent we might see some kind of buying or hedging kick in. On the
second aspect—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer is that that’s likely. Obviously, if the duration is
falling, investors would be getting increasingly uncomfortable. But that’s not where the big change
is obviously.
MR. KOS. No. On the second point of where the rate might need to be to trigger a
refinancing wave, the universe is pretty limited, as you say. In the spring, when the ten-year rate got
to about 3.9 percent, a good deal of refinancing occurred. So, really, the candidates for refinancing
are the mortgages that were originated over the last few months at higher rates; those now might
become attractive candidates for refinancing. As for how many of those there are outstanding, I
don’t have the data here, but I agree with you that it’s probably not a huge number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Those are the only candidates.
MR. KOS. Yes, exactly. And the number is probably not huge; it’s nowhere near as large
as what we saw, say, in late ’02 and the spring of ’03.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Home purchase originations have been high, but they haven’t
been high long enough to make a big difference.
MR. KOS. Again, might it have some effect? Yes. Would it have the same kind of effect
that we saw in those earlier periods? Probably not.
MR. REINHART. Another way of putting it, Mr. Chairman, is that the wave of refinancing
has made the distribution of mortgages more concentrated, and it isn’t until rates get down to the
levels they were a year or so ago that we would really hit the mass of that distribution. While it is

August 10, 2004

8 of 103

true that the amount of new financing in the last year hasn’t been all that great, a lot of it has been in
ARMs. And if rates were to decline some, we might see refinancing out of variable-rate and into
fixed-rate products. So, there is some scope for refinancing.
With regard to the first point you made about the anchoring of the term structure made
possible by the Committee’s measured pace of policy action, I’d note—and this is something
you’ve noted in the past—that the term structure is also anchored at the long end. The ten-yearahead one-year-forward rate has moved in a very narrow range, and that has very powerfully
lowered the volatility of the longer-term instruments that Dino showed. I think we have other
manifestations of a sense of lower volatility—perhaps also bearing on risk aversion. The equity
premium is in the middle of its historical range, and risk-neutral bond spreads also seem to be in
their typical range. And while volatility is low, the market reaction to news has been rather high.
Just think of what happened in response to the employment reports and the CPI.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s true. You know, on the chart where Dino has those
red dots in the regression, the latest observation was right on the new curve.
MR. REINHART. It really does look as if that line has rotated. So although volatilities are
low, that isn’t preventing the market from repricing when news comes out. That may say
something about market functioning, and that would be a more favorable interpretation than the
lesson you took away.
MR. KOS. Also it’s a difference between historical observed volatility and the implied
volatility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. On this same subject though, Vincent, isn’t it true that
the distribution, derived from options, about the expectations for the fed funds path doesn’t appear

August 10, 2004

9 of 103

to have narrowed substantially? There’s still a fairly broad distribution in expectations, a fair
amount of uncertainty still priced in around the path. I don’t think it’s true, just looking at how
that’s changed over the past nine months or so, that the band of uncertainty is narrower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the slope going forward has not changed.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. No, that has not changed. I’m just talking about
whatever concerns some people here may have about market participants displaying excessive
reassurance. If market participants feel reassured, it hasn’t produced substantially more confidence
around that band. I think that, combined with the fact that expectations are moving around in
response to the data is, again, good countervailing—
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman? In fact, there’s a chart in the Bluebook that shows that
uncertainty about near-term policy has risen over the last few months. It has not risen a lot, and the
uncertainty is still pretty low, I think, but chart 1 shows that it has gone up; it hasn’t gone down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. An interesting point is that the implied volatility on the
S&P 500 is really startling. Whenever we see things of that nature, we say, well, what goes down
must go up—the inverse law of gravity.
MR. BERNANKE. But that’s much more pronounced in the sustained interest rate—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The interest rate is essentially anchoring the equity premium.
What we’re really saying is that there can be an element of too much good news. I think that’s
where we have to be careful. Further questions for Dino? Would somebody like to move approval
of the Desk’s transactions?
MR. FERGUSON. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. We’re now at the staff
reports. Dave Wilcox and Karen Johnson.

August 10, 2004

10 of 103

MR. WILCOX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A lot has changed since the June
Greenbook forecast was put to bed. Unfortunately, a lot has changed since the
August Greenbook was put to bed, too. [Laughter] In particular, in the June
Greenbook, we forecasted that payroll employment gains would average about
300,000 per month in the second and third quarters of this year against a backdrop of
GDP growth averaging about 5 percent at an annual rate. By the end of this year, we
expected that the GDP gap would have narrowed to just ½ percent. By the time we
published the August Greenbook last week, we had tempered our growth assessment
substantially and had marked up our expectation for the GDP gap at the end of this
year to a full 1 percent. But we were still interpreting the June employment report
essentially as a one-time hiccup and were looking for employment gains going
forward only slightly smaller than we had projected in the June Greenbook. Then
came last Friday’s employment report, with its news of only a 32,000 advance in
private nonfarm payrolls, a downward revision to June employment of 51,000, and
only a 0.1 hour increase in the average workweek. Our misery over coming up short
nearly 300,000 jobs was only slightly alleviated by having so much company.
So, as I said, a lot has changed. On the other hand, I should also underscore that a
lot has stayed the same. Even in the wake of Friday’s report, we still see overall
macroeconomic conditions as likely to support a return to above-trend growth—in
other words, growth that is sufficiently rapid to narrow the gap in resource utilization
over the next six quarters, even if only slowly and incompletely. While we have
taken quite a bit out of our forecasts for payroll employment increases in August and
September, we still have those increases tracking into the neighborhood of 300,000 in
the fourth quarter of this year. And in response to the employment report, we
trimmed our forecast for third-quarter GDP growth only 0.6 percentage point, from
3.9 percent in the Greenbook to 3.3 percent currently, on the theory that the deficit in
hours relative to our expectation informed us mainly about productivity in the current
quarter rather than output.
In this connection, I should note there was one bright spot in Friday’s report,
namely that employment in the manufacturing sector looked, if anything, a little
better than we had expected. This is particularly encouraging in light of the fact that
manufacturing over the decades has been a fairly sensitive and reliable bellwether of
cyclical conditions. If a pronounced cyclical softening truly were under way, we
would have expected to see it in manufacturing employment, but it simply was not
evident in the numbers for July.
Our outlook for inflation also falls in the category of “not much changed since the
June Greenbook.” The most recent CPI report was quite reassuring that the type of
moderation we were looking for seems to be in train. Indeed, the news was good
enough to cause us to shave our projection for core CPI inflation by a tenth both this
year and next. Because the BEA penciled in a faster pace of inflation in the so-called
non-market-based prices, we did not revise down our forecast for core PCE inflation
in line with the core CPI. Even so, however, we have core PCE inflation slowing
from 1¾ percent this year to 1½ percent next year, reflecting smaller contributions

August 10, 2004

11 of 103

from import, energy, and other commodity prices and now a slightly greater amount
of restraint from slack in resource utilization.
But while a lot is still the same, enough has changed to make it more than fair to
ask, What on earth is going on? Lest I spark any hope on your part that I’m about to
produce a fully satisfying explanation, let me assure you to the contrary. In point of
fact, we do not claim to suddenly understand everything that has happened in the last
few months; if we were that smart now, we probably would have been a little smarter
last week; and if we had been that smart last week, we certainly wouldn’t have hid it
so well from the Committee. [Laughter] Unfortunately, the large-scale econometric
model that we often consult for insight on such issues shares our incomplete
understanding of the current situation. Indeed, that model, left to its own devices,
would have wanted to see an additional 2 percentage points of real GDP growth in the
second quarter, with much of it in PCE. Evidently, in order to provide a full
accounting of the recent weakness in aggregate demand, we will have to appeal to
some factor not captured by our conventional models. In light of the weakness of
consumer spending, factors bearing on the household sector will have special
standing. Let me list some of the possibilities.
Hypothesis #1: Maybe it’s just noise. This hypothesis actually comes in two
variants. The first variant takes the view that the data may simply be sending the
wrong signal, not truly representative of macroeconomic reality. I certainly cannot
rule out this variant, and indeed, we had discounted the first disappointing report on
payroll employment, given the relatively encouraging recent readings on initial
claims for unemployment insurance and improving household perceptions of labor
market conditions. On the other hand, this variant seems less plausible in light of a
second consecutive disappointing labor market report as well as the June readings on
retail sales, motor vehicle sales, and industrial production, all suggesting that
something real happened toward the end of the second quarter. A second variant of
the noise hypothesis accepts the accuracy of the incoming data but questions the
persistence of the softness: Maybe we are just on a temporary detour away from
above-trend growth and shrinking margins of resource slack. We put some stock in
this variant as well, in part because we have been impressed by a number of the other
relatively encouraging indicators of demand in the third quarter, including the
rebound in motor vehicle sales, the strength in orders and shipments of capital goods,
and the relatively upbeat anecdotal information that we continue to receive from the
ISM and other business surveys, from the Beige Book, and from our own business
contacts. In addition, we continue to view the fundamental determinants of growth,
especially the stance of monetary policy—and, in the near term, the stance of fiscal
policy—as consistent with above-trend growth. On the other hand, we are operating
in an environment of considerable uncertainty, and a key possibility that we must
entertain is that something more fundamental is going on than just a temporary blip—
something we don’t understand and that may persist.
Hypothesis #2: Maybe it’s energy prices. Since June, the spot price of West
Texas intermediate has increased about $6 per barrel. Moreover, prices on long-dated

August 10, 2004

12 of 103

futures have undergone a stunning nearly vertical takeoff in the last few weeks.
Certainly the hypothesis that higher energy prices are having a much more
pronounced restraining effect on activity than we had anticipated has to figure
prominently on our list of possibilities. Maybe the second surge in gasoline prices in
May and June caused households to reassess the outlook for energy prices and
suddenly to take on board a much larger hit to their purchasing power.
To be sure, the timing of the most recent energy price spike is incriminating. But
how much of the recent shortfall in aggregate activity can we really lay at its
doorstep? In a memo that we delivered to the Committee just before the June
meeting, we estimated that, all else being equal, the run-up in oil prices between
December and June might lop ½ percentage point off the growth of GDP this year
and a further tenth off growth next year. At that time, the spot price had risen about
$10 per barrel from its late-December level. Since June the spot price has increased
another $6 or so, suggesting that the total oil-related deduction from the growth of
GDP this year might amount to about ¾ percentage point—or roughly two-thirds of
the total downward revision to our GDP projection over that time.
But while the price of oil is crucial for understanding the revision since the
December Greenbook to our projection for GDP growth this year, can it account for
the steep downward revision to GDP growth since the June Greenbook? Here the
answer is murkier. By June, roughly two-thirds of the increase in oil prices had
already occurred and so should have been taken on board in the forecast we delivered
to the FOMC just before your two-day meeting. That suggests that the increase in oil
prices since then might account for a downward revision to our estimate of growth
this year of only about ¼ percentage point—only a fraction of the nearly 1 percentage
point revision that we have put through since the June Greenbook. On the other hand,
a number of factors counsel against drawing sharp conclusions. For one, our ability
to pinpoint the timing of an adjustment to higher oil prices probably is very limited.
For another, we may not have sufficiently adjusted the June Greenbook projection to
the oil prices then already in view. And for a third, there is little doubt that our
formal econometric models omit potential channels of influence from oil to real
activity, and whether we have adequately compensated for those omissions in our
judgmental projection is not clear.
All that said, the coincidence between the spike in oil prices and the air pocket in
spending seems too striking to write off to mere chance. So at this point, we are
thinking that energy prices almost surely are part of the explanation; we’re just not
sure how big a part.
Hypothesis #3: Faltering fiscal stimulus. In the baseline projection, we have
been assuming that the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts are still supporting the growth of
consumer spending this year but by a gradually diminishing amount. On our
assumptions, these tax cuts boosted the growth of real PCE ¾ percentage point in the
first half of this year but will lift the growth of PCE in the second half by less than
½ percentage point and will be essentially neutral for PCE growth in 2005. But here,

August 10, 2004

13 of 103

too, we have only limited ability to pinpoint the timing of adjustment, and this
hypothesis suggests the possibility that we should have attributed a larger fraction of
the strength in consumer spending earlier this year to short-lived tax-induced stimulus
and a smaller fraction to an underlying fundamentals-based thrust.
In sum, we think these hypotheses contain some of the seeds of an explanation.
Whether they constitute a full or only a partial explanation, whether we need to add to
our list, or whether we need to subtract from it, all remain to be seen. But as usual,
we will have to remain alert in coming months for clues that may shed further light on
the nature of the recent step-down in the growth of real activity. Karen will now
continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. As David has discussed, it now appears that the pace of U.S.
economic activity in the second and third quarters has been and likely remains
somewhat less robust than we thought in June. Such a development naturally leads us
to question whether we should reduce our forecast for activity abroad, as the strength
of demand arising in the United States is an important factor for many regions of the
global economy. However, the data we have in hand for the second quarter and the
indicators we have received for activity abroad this quarter do not suggest any major
revisions to our outlook, and our projection for foreign economic growth is little
changed this time from that in the June Greenbook. The possibility of some spillover
from the softness in U.S. activity remains a risk, however.
The view that the foreign expansion remains moderately vigorous is consistent
with the fact that we were surprised on the upside by real growth of U.S. exports in
the second quarter. Although we still lack monthly nominal trade data for June,
stronger-than-expected exports in May and positive revisions to April have led us to
project that exports of real goods and services expanded almost 12½ percent at an
annual rate in the second quarter—a full 5 percentage points higher than we were
forecasting in June. The nominal data show strength across most categories,
particularly capital goods and industrial supplies. By destination, they reflect the
second-quarter weakness in economic activity in China, with nominal exports to
China plus Hong Kong declining from the first quarter. We expect that real GDP
growth abroad, particularly in the major foreign industrial countries, will moderate on
average over the remainder of this year and, accordingly, that real exports will
decelerate some through next year.
Our story is a bit less satisfactory with respect to real imports of goods and
services. Although U.S. real GDP growth for the second quarter came in below our
expectations, real imports of goods and services also surprised us on the upside. A
higher figure than anticipated for May and an upward revision to April imply secondquarter real import growth of about 9½ percent, about 4 percentage points above our
projection in the June Greenbook. The strength in imports is widespread across
categories. For the second half of this year, when we incorporate the weaker outlook
for U.S. GDP growth including the information from last Friday’s employment
report, we now expect real import growth to slow some, to an annual rate of

August 10, 2004

14 of 103

9 percent, about ¾ percentage point weaker than the figure in the current Greenbook.
For 2005, we expect further deceleration in imports, to an annual growth rate a bit
less than 8 percent.
With our outlook for import growth slightly diminished, we see the arithmetic
contribution of net exports to real GDP growth as moving to about minus
⅓ percentage point in the second half of this year and averaging about that much in
2005. We have also shaved a bit off our projection for the current account deficit and
expect it to average 5½ percent of GDP next year.
In addition to the less positive near-term news about the U.S. economy, the other
major global economic development over the intermeeting period was a further rise in
oil prices. In line with futures prices at the time, we had expected the spot price of
WTI to begin moving down; and for the few days between the Greenbook release and
the June FOMC meeting it did just that. However, since June 29, the spot price has
moved up nearly $9 per barrel, to close above $44 yesterday. Our forecast for the
average spot price of WTI this quarter has been revised up $5 per barrel. Although
we and the futures markets still expect the price of oil to move down over the forecast
period, our projected path shows a decline of only $4 per barrel from the current
quarter to the fourth quarter of next year.
Sorting the mix of demand and supply effects is made difficult by the limited
availability of very current data. OPEC raised its production target 2 million barrels a
day for July and an additional 0.5 million b/d for August and has continued to
produce above its announced quotas. Excluding Iraq, OPEC produced 26.9 million
b/d in June, an increase of about 1½ million b/d from April. Much of that increase is
due to Saudi Arabia and the Emirates; and other than Iraq, no OPEC member reduced
production significantly over the last few months. On August 4, Saudi authorities
announced that they had started production from two new fields three months ahead
of schedule.
Nevertheless, there have been some negative supply factors over the intermeeting
period. The most important has been the Russian government’s virtual attack on
Yukos. In the guise of taking steps to collect unpaid taxes, the Russian government
has taken actions that seem intended to gain control of Yukos production assets. Both
the rapid reversals of some decisions made in the past several weeks and the
ambiguity of whether production will be disrupted in the near future have heightened
uncertainty in oil markets. In Iraq, intensified violence in recent days has threatened
oil exports from the southern ports on the Persian Gulf. Other sources of supply
concerns have been conditions in Nigeria and Venezuela plus questions about
refinery capacity and short-term refinery disruptions. These developments have
combined to put upward pressure on prices and to increase volatility.
With spot prices rising even as reported supply has increased, it seems clear that
strong global demand for oil has contributed importantly to the run-up in prices. In
early July, the International Energy Association (IEA) revised up its estimates of

August 10, 2004

15 of 103

world oil consumption in the first and second quarters. For the first half of the year,
world oil consumption is estimated at 81 million b/d, up 3 million from the same
period last year. Global consumption is expected to rise slightly further during the
second half of the year. U.S. demand for oil has risen over the past year, but much of
the increase in global demand is attributable to China, where demand has moved up
noticeably both last year and so far this year. IEA estimates put global production in
excess of global consumption in the second quarter, implying a considerable build in
inventories—more than is normal for that quarter. Such a development is only partly
evident in data on OECD inventories, which have increased but remain at low levels.
If IEA data are correct and no supply disruption emerges, then inventories should
build further in the current quarter, with downward pressure on prices a likely result.
This expectation seems to be priced, at least in part, into the futures market, which, as
mentioned earlier, yet again calls for prices to move down from their current highs.
The current IEA data may be misleading, however. Recent upward revisions to
estimates of demand raise the possibility that demand is even stronger than now
estimated. The elevated level of the entire current path of futures prices suggests that,
in response to the intermeeting developments such as the Yukos events, traders have
become less sanguine that production will meet or exceed consumption going
forward.
With strong global demand for oil a major factor in explaining the high spot
prices, the implications of the higher prices for our outlook for foreign growth are
complex. For individual countries, the consequences of high global oil prices might
be the same whether those prices result from supply restrictions or from demand
arising elsewhere. But on average, absent significant disruption, we judge that only if
global economic expansion remains strong will these prices be sustained. The data do
not suggest that we are reaching a global supply constraint. Accordingly, with no
major supply disruption yet occurring in oil markets or assumed in our forecast, we
have adjusted the growth and inflation forecasts for individual countries, but we
continue to project a sustained expansion abroad at a pace close to, but slightly below,
that experienced in the first half of this year. Dave and I will be happy to answer any
questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In evaluating the oil price impact in the United States, we
tend to look at the issue from the crude price; essentially a change in the value of crude imports is
viewed as a tax effect. But I wonder if there is not something a little different going on at the
moment, or at least through the spring, with the very significant rise in refinery and marketing
margins. That drove the gasoline price up the equivalent of an additional $5 per barrel on the price
of oil. The reason we talk in terms of net imports only is the presumption that domestic energy
earnings are recycled with a propensity to spend not significantly different from consumer spending.

August 10, 2004

16 of 103

But that clearly has not been the case here because, despite the huge rise in refinery marketing
margins during the second quarter and indeed partly through the first quarter, there has been no
evident pickup in capital investment on the part of oil companies based in the United States. So in a
sense, the tax so far as households are concerned—or if you want to put it this way, the propensity
to save—has risen. And hence the multipliers have changed. I wonder whether that doesn’t put a
slightly different timing configuration on this because in the last several weeks we’ve observed that,
as crude prices have risen, gasoline prices have come down. Essentially that gap has now been
restored to where it was. If that is indeed the case, the impact of the oil effect on the third quarter is
not going to parallel the actual change in the price of crude. But how much different it will be is
hard to judge. Also, with respect to the question of the large inventory accumulation going on
worldwide, in one sense, I guess we don’t really care whether there is excess unused capacity or
capacity used to increase inventories above normal. We add the two of them; it’s the combination
of the two that’s really involved here.
MS. JOHNSON. But it matters if demand is being underestimated.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. And that’s where this missing barrel question comes
from. It seems extraordinarily odd that after remarkably flat world consumption—at a little over
80 million barrels a day for a long period—suddenly demand has just taken off. We didn’t see that
during the 1990s, as I recall.
MS. JOHNSON. That is where all the anecdotes about China come in, I think. Our
information about what is really going on in China is poor, at best. We know, for example, that the
electricity grid in that country is not up to the task of meeting current demands, and China’s
economy is growing rapidly. And we know that, in response to that, many manufacturers or other
producer units—or for that matter households, for all we know—have purchased generators. But

August 10, 2004

17 of 103

the use of numerous small generators burning kerosene or heavy fuel oil or whatever they burn is a
very inefficient way to supply electricity. Their use is lowering, if you will, the average efficiency
of producing electricity to support economic growth in China, perhaps in an important way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hasn’t their oil consumption gone from 4 million to 6 million
barrels a day in a couple of years, or something like that?
MS. JOHNSON. The story, though, is that to build capacity you need to stock it with an
original endowment and some of that is happening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s the in-process inventories that are building up. If that is
indeed the case, then it’s not consumption.
MS. JOHNSON. Right, but we don’t know. All these anecdotes are out there, but no one
has real data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In large measure they don’t have room to store more oil. In
fact, they’re behind schedule on building their strategic reserve because they don’t have storage
capacity. Where is it all going? Maybe there’s a big hole in the ground that they’re filling in.
MR. WILCOX. Mr. Chairman, another uncertainty that I’d highlight with respect to the
timing of how this plays out is that the sources of the increase in the price of oil may have a
different profile recently than was the case over the first half of the year. My sense qualitatively is
that strong world demand was perhaps more a front-loaded story in the first part of the year and that
supply concerns maybe have emerged as an issue later.
MS. JOHNSON. Well, certainly in the intermeeting period, not only the spot price but I
think the farther-out futures have reacted enormously to the Yukos story, which is not really about
production today. Actually, it might be about production today because overnight the Russian
authorities seized control of a big production unit of Yukos, which only added credence to the view

August 10, 2004

18 of 103

that the Russian government was trying to re-establish control over those assets or wanted to gain
some perceived political benefit by selling them at below true value to favored purchasers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any credible scenario in which the Russians would
allow that oil production to decline at these prices?
MS. JOHNSON. It is hard to imagine that they would allow that to happen for any period
of time, but I’m sufficiently skeptical about their business competence that I wouldn’t assume that
they can do all this shifting and achieve their political aims and not disrupt supply temporarily. But
there is certainly no incentive for them to cut back production.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think they have an incentive to make believe they are
cutting back to get the price up but to keep selling the oil.
MS. JOHNSON. To exert some leverage over the rest of the oil producers or for a host of
reasons.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. WILCOX. May I just finish the thought? The consequences for U.S. activity could be
quite different, depending on the mix of supply and demand factors. If that mix changed over the
first and second halves of the year, it could add to the uncertainty about the timing that you were
highlighting in your comment, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that’s a good point to make.
MR. MOSKOW. I also wanted to follow on this discussion about oil prices. It seems that
every time I’ve looked at this futures market for oil—and I don’t look at it on a regular basis—when
the spot price is in the 30s or 40s, the price of oil is always shown as coming down in the future.
Now it is projected to be coming down, but not by very much—only about $4 or $5 a barrel—by
the end of 2005. I was just wondering if you view this market now as typical. Does it look the way

August 10, 2004

19 of 103

it always does, or has it changed because of terrorism in Russia and all the other things that are
going on? And does it change at different levels, as the level of the spot price varies?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, you’re asking someone whose expertise in this matter is more
limited than I wish it were. It’s normal for this curve to display a downward slope, but it’s not
always the case that it does. There have been times when the front portion of the futures curve has
sloped up; that would not be considered an unprecedented event by any means. Oil is costly to
store. So that figures into the value of buying now to meet a future demand versus buying it in the
future.
I’ve expressed to the people who study this market in great detail my frustration about the
fact that this curve slopes down all the time and rides up to the actual spot price. I’ve asked why it
is that the people in the futures market always continue to believe that the oil price is going to start
coming down “tomorrow” despite six months’ worth of evidence that that hasn’t happened. Those
who analyze the oil market confront me with this supply and demand story: They say that as best
they—and I assume all the people trading in the real markets—can tell, the data they have available
suggest that the current supply exceeds consumption. Now, we may someday learn that these data
were just wholly inaccurate, and that may explain what was misleading all of us. But the people
trading in the futures markets have the same data, and they, too, believe that current production
exceeds consumption by a comfortable margin. So they are always expecting that supply–demand
imbalance to show through to the oil prices.
Now, these people have become a bit battle scarred. And the curve, at least to my eyes, has
flattened a little from some of its previous shapes. I think that’s because, even though the
production data, taken literally, suggest that production exceeds global consumption, people are
pricing in either some expectation of a Russian foul-up of one sort or another, or a terrorist event, or

August 10, 2004

20 of 103

the Venezuelan situation getting ugly, or something of that sort. So either they are attaching some
probability to supply being below global capacity in the future, or they have come to believe that the
data aren’t entirely reliable. Something, however, has caused them to bid up the far futures more
than a straight reading of what the market’s knowledge of demand and supply would create but not
so much as to take away completely this notion that inventories must be building somewhat and that
it’s going to show through to prices at some point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There’s an interesting history here. Incidentally, there have
been significant periods of a so-called contango curve.
MS. JOHNSON. Pickup, yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In 1985, for example, the curve sloped up. Something
unusual happened about three to four years ago. Prior to then, the far distant six- to seven-year
futures huddled around $18 to $20 a barrel, which appeared to be the general judgment of what the
marginal supply price was in the long term outside of OPEC. And the six- to seven-year futures
price held in a very narrow range as the spot price went up and down very sharply. Indeed, the spot
price went well below $18 a barrel for a while, and at that point the longer-term futures were still
$18 to $20 a barrel.
Sometime just a few years ago the long-term futures price started to move up, and it’s now
at $30 a barrel. The argument essentially being made by some—and I think it has some validity—is
that, prior to this recent period, the general world price was determined among commercial buyers
and sellers, or producers and users of oil, largely by the level of world inventories. Starting first
with the Intifada and the problems emerging gradually in the Middle East, the general assumption
that OPEC crude supply was secure began to deteriorate, and the situation has obviously gotten
significantly worse. What has happened is that a whole group of noncommercial interests, seeing

August 10, 2004

21 of 103

the geopolitical arbitrage, have decided that they want inventories of oil and that the best way to get
those inventories is to buy long-term futures. Now, the only people who can sell to noncommercial
interests are commercial interests. So those who own all the liquid barrels by definition have been
selling net claims to noncommercial interests, thereby reducing their supply. Or another way of
looking at it is that they are increasing the demand versus supply.
The way to pick up these data is in the CFTC’s net position on the NYMEX. The
noncommercial interest is now net long; it has been long for some time and has been rising for quite
a while. It has gone up and down recently, but it still is net long. That means, in effect, that we
have a whole new set of buyers out there, but without changes occurring in the underlying general
level of the inventories.
If this is the case, questions are being raised about what would happen if 4 or 5 million
barrels a day got knocked out of the Saudi crude supply because of some uprising or something like
that. That premium is in the market, and I think it’s a very interesting question as to how rapidly it
will disappear short of enough inventories actually being accumulated worldwide to satisfy the
needs of both commercial interests and the net speculative interests of those who have a sense of
geopolitical risk that they want to hedge. At some point, the latter group is going to get enough oil,
at which time they will stop their hedge buying. And at that point I think the price will come down.
MS. JOHNSON. Or it will come down just with the passage of time. If among those
purchasers are people who envision some reason for using oil, they don’t need to buy in the spot
market because they will have already bought forward. If they are just speculating, as it gets close
to the time when they’re going to get delivery of this oil that they don’t really want, they’re going to
sell it spot. Ultimately, it’s only the people who actually consume the oil who can sustain the price.

August 10, 2004

22 of 103

That’s what makes this global demand story have to be the context in which this trading is taking
place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the best way of visualizing it is this: When what I’d
call the OPEC premium rises, the underlying ex-ante demand to hold inventories worldwide rises.
If supply exceeds consumption, inventories will rise to the level at which that demand is sated, and
at some point it will be sated. The only issue is, Where is that number?
MS. JOHNSON. And somewhere out there are alternative energy sources—tar sands, other
kinds of materials, or whatever. They often used to be cited as putting a limit on how high the oil
price could be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If oil goes to $80 a barrel you’ll be surprised at what—
MS. JOHNSON. Even ethanol looks good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess the staff’s estimates are that the supply of oil is close
to unitary elasticity over the long run in the United States and that it’s very inelastic in the short run.
But with enough time, we just price ourselves out of the market.
MS. JOHNSON. But if one imagines that the citizens of India and China, which would total
about 3 billion people, raise their per capita consumption of energy to, say, half the average of that
in industrial countries—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s a very important point.
MS. JOHNSON. That would result in an altogether different picture of the long-term
energy supply–demand balance in the world. And the effect of that has to feed back at some point.
Now, if that were really what was driving everything, one might think that investment in the energy
sector would just be taking off, and I don’t see that either. And part of it is because this miserable
curve slopes down all the time. In the short run it always seems as if the price of oil is going to fall

August 10, 2004

23 of 103

any day and, therefore, that such investment is not really going to pay off. There’s a certain
inconsistency in that, I realize.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. I don’t want to prolong this discussion too much. The Chairman made
the point I wanted to make—that how the marginal cost of energy is determined has moved from a
secure low-risk environment to a very high-risk environment. One of the things I think we’re seeing
with the news regarding Yukos and other developments that are moving the market around is that
many people in the market—in a situation where I believe supply and demand are actually pretty
closely in balance now—are looking to Russia or Venezuela or other places as the marginal
producers and no longer to Saudi Arabia, for example. The latter always has a lower cost of
production but a higher risk profile. Is that a possible explanation?
MS. JOHNSON. It’s certainly true that the role of Saudi Arabia as the swing producer was
a deliberate and explicit policy adopted by the Saudis. They would restrict production or they
would expand production in an attempt to set a sort of horizontal supply curve for oil at a specified
price. That has just broken down. It has broken down for a variety of reasons. What I think we’re
seeing is the transition to some new structural pattern in global oil and related sources of energy that
hasn’t really settled out yet. And it’s not clear exactly how it is going to settle out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for our colleagues? If not, who would like
to start the Committee discussion? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The two big questions facing us are whether
the recent soft patch in economic activity is temporary and to what degree underlying inflation has
picked up. On the first question, we get a sense from our Seventh District contacts that their
business is good but apparently not robust enough to generate substantial hiring. We have received

August 10, 2004

24 of 103

mixed reports on employment. Our contacts at temporary-help firms say that they are placing
temporary workers across a wide range of industries. In addition, they are increasing their
placement of workers in permanent jobs. Some of our more general business contacts even report
scattered labor shortages in a few specialized areas. Nevertheless, few say that they are
permanently increasing their head counts even though business is pretty good.
In terms of spending, some sectors that had weak activity in June showed improvement in
July. In particular, retailers told us that they saw something of a bounceback; and looking ahead,
merchants sound quite bullish about the upcoming holiday season and are planning to build their
inventories accordingly. As you know, light vehicle sales also bounced back in July. So far, reports
suggest that sales in the first week of August continued to be strong. One manufacturer even told us
that they are looking for sales in the month to be about 18½ million units.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me—was that for light vehicle or total sales?
MR. MOSKOW. Light. Automakers will need a good August and September to clear
dealer lots of their ’04 model year cars; otherwise, they will need to reduce production schedules for
their ’05 models. Other sectors never really experienced much of a slowdown in June, and their
activity remains strong. This pattern has been evident in new orders for construction, agricultural,
mining, and some IT equipment as well as in demand for advertising. Air travel has continued to
move higher during the summer, with bookings solid for the fall. In contrast, information we have
heard about IT services suggests weakness.
On the second question, the outlook for inflation, our District contacts continue to talk about
cost pressures, but there are few indications of pass-through to prices so far. There’s not much news
on wages, but rising health care costs remain a major concern. And costs for some material inputs,
notably construction materials, steel, and energy remain elevated. Our contacts still expect these

August 10, 2004

25 of 103

costs to ease, but it is taking longer than they had anticipated. Similarly, the supply chain
bottlenecks that I discussed last time are also taking longer to resolve. Capacity constraints are
particularly severe in transportation, and there are concerns that these could persist and cause
substantial problems during the peak fall shipping season. As I noted, despite all these cost
pressures, we’re hearing only limited reports of price increases downstream.
Turning to the national outlook, we think that the economy’s soft patch is temporary. The
July employment report makes us nervous but doesn’t change this assessment. Assuming that the
recent payroll data are not spurious, what risks do they suggest? One possibility is that we’re back
to an environment similar to last year, when uncertainty held back hiring even though growth
continued. Of course, there are reasons to think that uncertainty might have risen; we’ve just talked
about the oil prices, terrorist threats, and so on. However, our business contacts have not talked
explicitly about increased uncertainty holding back their hiring, and we know that indications of
spending showed activity picking up again in July. Moreover, we think the fundamentals continue
to be strong: Real income growth has been maintained despite the weak employment growth and
higher energy prices, we still have strong underlying productivity growth, and monetary policy
remains very accommodative. We are concerned about the persistently high oil prices. Their
movements seem to be driven largely by geopolitical concerns, as Karen was discussing, so oil is a
wild card both for growth and for inflation. We all know that these sorts of supply shocks make for
difficult policy decisions. Still, with regard to prices, the data suggest that core inflation remains
well contained. So at this time continuing to remove policy accommodation at a measured pace
seems appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.

August 10, 2004

26 of 103

MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Almost all my contacts said that they had nothing
new to report; essentially the story was the same as last time. I would mention two things that are
perhaps a little different. My Wal-Mart contact said that the pace of sales in August has definitely
downshifted. The Wal-Mart public story is an expectation of 2 to 4 percent growth in same-store
sales, but apparently internal estimates are much closer to 2 percent than 4 percent. Wal-Mart
officials were very reluctant to revise their estimates publicly to 1 to 3 percent, which is what they
might otherwise do, because they thought that might give too pessimistic a picture. They are
expecting some pickup in September and October, more to the 3 to 5 percent growth range.
Several of my contacts spoke about the rail congestion. There seems to be a real bottleneck
in U.S. railroads these days, and the congestion has actually reduced capacity. Because the average
train speed is down, that means that the capacity to move freight is down. My contacts expect the
problem to continue through this year because, of course, as we move into the fall more goods are
moving on the rails. So the situation really won’t get straightened out until the early part of next
year.
I think the staff outlook for the economy makes good sense; I agree that interpreting current
developments as temporary is right. As for the employment report, the back-of-the-envelope
calculations I’ve done on the seasonal factors suggest that, if we had used last year’s seasonals, the
number of jobs created in July would have been 80,000 higher than reported. I’ll just throw that out
as something to think about. Obviously, that doesn’t fundamentally change the picture, but if we
had gotten 110,000 new jobs instead of 32,000, the picture would have looked a little different.
That’s all I want to report. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.

August 10, 2004

27 of 103

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The pace of economic activity in the Fourth
District, although sound, has been slower this summer than in late winter and early spring. My
conversations with business persons throughout the District have reinforced my view that the region
is still poised for solid economic growth for the remainder of this year, although at a pace somewhat
slower than I had expected in the spring. During the past few months, I had thought that current
economic conditions in my District were lagging those in the rest of the country. However, national
economic statistics and the Beige Book reports indicate that the recent slowdown is more broadly
based than I had thought. Going into our June meeting, the business people I talked to were
expressing a growing sense of confidence in the economy, and at that point I thought that was
helping to dispel some of the lingering caution about restraining capital investment and hiring plans.
But those expressions of confidence have dissipated somewhat, and this change in attitude came
before the July employment report.
The balance of comments from the people I talk to has shifted from enthusiasm to renewed
concerns about the pace of the expansion. And this shift in attitude is not confined to those
businesses that are under stress. I had a conversation with an executive from a global
manufacturing company, whose growth in orders is matching the peak levels of the late 1990s. But
despite his strong order book, even this individual confided that this pace of business would not last.
When I pressed him about the reasons he was saying that, he couldn’t cite any specific reasons. He
just had a gut feeling that it could not last.
So this return of greater caution about the outlook is reinforcing the desire on the part of
firms to expand production and to meet the growing orders via productivity gains. And as I have
been reporting for some time, companies indicate that they intend to remain disciplined about their
hiring. Wage pressures don’t appear to be restraining the hiring, but high and rising health care

August 10, 2004

28 of 103

costs are. I’ve been accustomed to hearing complaints about the rise in health care costs whenever
inflation is mentioned, but lately business persons have raised this issue in the context of their hiring
strategies; from their perspective, labor is becoming more expensive. And companies that have
already enjoyed significant productivity gains continue to assert that there are plenty of
opportunities to become even more efficient. That might be a factor in the weak demand for labor
that we are seeing in the data.
I find the inflation picture somewhat complicated. When we talk about inflation as the
twelve-month change in the market-based core PCE price index, we’re many steps removed from
the experiences that most people have in their local grocery stores and at the gas pumps. Even my
directors, who have become accustomed to talking about the nuances of inflation measurement,
have been very concerned about the steady stream of big headline CPI numbers this year. They
point out that people might begin to lose their patience with the idea that these large increases are
transitory. Furthermore, a number of my directors and other District contacts tell me that some of
the previous spikes in commodity and energy prices have not been fully priced into final goods.
Some of my contacts in the manufacturing sector say that they still have contracts, especially with
steel producers; but those contracts will be expiring in the fall, so we might see some additional
pass-through later on this year.
Fortunately, despite these reports, I have not been hearing anything that would lead me to
believe that substantial inflationary pressures are building across a wide range of final goods prices.
It still seems to me that the Greenbook inflation projection is the most likely outcome. Headline
inflation rates should start to moderate in the next several quarters, but I do see some risks in the
inflation outlook. Over the course of this year, I have thought that dominant forces in the economy
were producing a higher equilibrium real rate of interest and that monetary policy needed to adjust

August 10, 2004

29 of 103

to that situation in a timely fashion. I still believe that this is so and that we should continue to
move the fed funds rate toward a more neutral stance. At the same time, I was concerned at our last
meeting that we might be falling behind the curve. But after listening to the growing caution that I
am hearing from my business contacts and after last Friday’s employment report, I’m wondering
whether the economy hasn’t shifted to a somewhat slower growth track than I expected six weeks
ago. If that is the case, then today’s fed funds rate would be closer to neutral as well. I do not think,
however, that it is so much closer that I would not want to move today. Recent developments
obviously highlight the difficulties that we face in communicating our future actions, and I’d like to
have maximum flexibility with respect to policy going forward. I would want the flexibility to
gauge the timing of future actions as economic circumstances warrant. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In contrast to the nation and my next door
neighbor, economic activity in the Third District is expanding a little faster now than it was at the
beginning of the year. Job growth in our region had been lagging that in the nation, but it has
strengthened in recent months, at least through June, which is the latest month for which we have
state employment numbers. Payrolls in our three states grew at a 0.7 percent rate in the second
quarter, after being flat in the first quarter. Each of the states had employment gains, and these
gains were widespread across industries. Job growth in the region was strongest in New Jersey,
especially the southern part of the state. Payroll employment is now above its pre-recession levels
in New Jersey. It remains 1 percent below the pre-recession level in Delaware and 1¼ percent
below in Pennsylvania. The tri-state unemployment rate edged down to 5.1 percent in the second
quarter, and we continue to receive reports that some firms are having difficulty finding qualified
workers.

August 10, 2004

30 of 103

Responses to special questions about wages in our business outlook survey of manufacturers
and our South Jersey business survey—which includes manufacturers, retailers, and service firms—
suggest that growing demand for workers is leading to wage increases. Thirty-eight percent of the
BOS respondents and 50 percent of the South Jersey respondents said that they have raised wages to
retain or attract workers in the past three months. Among those who reported raising wages, the
modal increase was in the 2 to 4 percent range, and these survey results seem consistent with the
BLS data indicating that wages and salaries and total worker compensation in our region have been
rising at a faster pace than in the nation as a whole.
The other sectors in our District continue to perform well. Although retail sales moderated a
bit in June, our contacts attribute the slower sales to unusually cool weather, and they reported some
rebound in July. In addition, retailers in our region expect strong back-to-school sales, although we
don’t have hard data on whether that is happening yet. Commercial real estate markets in the region
remain soft. Residential construction activity remains at a high level, although its growth eased
back a bit in June. Manufacturing activity in the region continues to expand and has outperformed
the nation in recent months. Our business outlook survey index of general activity rose to 36.1 in
July, up from 28.9 in June, and the index has been in positive territory for the last fourteen months.
The more forward-looking indexes on new orders and shipments improved considerably in July,
and a historically large share of respondents also reported increases in unfilled orders and delivery
times. And some firms commented that they were reaching capacity. Service-sector activity in the
region has strengthened, with payroll employment in that sector expanding briskly in the past few
months. Over the first half of the year, professional and business service employment grew the
fastest among the service-sector industries in our region.

August 10, 2004

31 of 103

We continue to get readings of rising prices in our region, although the pace of increase is
slightly less than a few months ago. The prices-paid index in our manufacturing survey declined in
the past two months but remains at a high level. Firms seem better able to pass on some of the price
increases to their customers. The prices-received index in our survey rose to a fifteen-year high in
July. In summary, the outlook in our region is positive. Our staff’s leading indicators of economic
activity are signaling steady growth in all three states in our District over the next three quarters, and
our business contacts appear optimistic.
On the national level, real GDP growth slowed somewhat more than expected in the second
quarter. First-quarter growth, as reported here, was revised up at the same time. Most of the
second-quarter deceleration reflected sharply lower growth in consumer spending, which was not
totally unexpected, but the size of the decline was greater than most had anticipated. At the same
time, most of the new monthly data have been coming in on the positive side. Auto sales rebounded
in July. Housing remains strong, and new orders for nondefense capital goods continue to trend up.
So at least until Friday, I tended to agree with the Greenbook’s earlier interpretation of the second
quarter as a temporary lull in activity, and I expected GDP growth to be somewhat faster in the third
quarter than in the second.
Then the July employment report was released last Friday. We know what the job gains
were, so I will skip over the details. Still, a number of other indicators of the report showed
improvement in the labor market. The unemployment rate fell a tenth to 5.5 percent, and the
household employment number grew by an implausibly large 629,000. I am still puzzled by that
latter number. The labor force participation rate moved up. And the average and median duration
of unemployment moved down significantly; the weekly hours worked held about steady. In
addition, we note that initial claims for unemployment insurance have been trending down, and

August 10, 2004

32 of 103

many business surveys indicate that firms are hiring and expect to continue hiring. Given the
weight of all this evidence, I continue to expect a rebound in employment growth in the coming
months, and I’ll be watching these data carefully.
At our last meeting, Governor Bernanke reminded us of Larry Meyer’s rules of forecasting.
I found myself thinking about those rules over the past few weeks, as the weaker-than-expected
output was announced and, more recently, last Friday when the employment data were released. I
asked myself, Is it time to apply rule 2 and make a fundamentally new forecast? My answer is,
“No, at least not yet.” High oil prices do pose a risk to the economy, not only to growth but also to
inflation and inflation expectations. That said, I note that the core PCE has moderated in recent
months.
In my view, the FOMC should remain on the course we began at our last meeting and
should continue to remove policy accommodation at a measured pace. Despite the recent softness
in output and in the employment data, my outlook for the economy has not changed enough to merit
our taking a pause. I think the risk of maintaining the current degree of policy accommodation
outweighs the risk of a continued transition to a more neutral stance. The real fed funds rate will
remain negative even after we move today, and thus monetary policy will remain expansionary as
we continue to help the economy out of this temporary lull. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like many others coming into this meeting, I
have been trying to understand why some of the wind seems to have gone out of the sails of
consumer spending and employment. Consumer spending has been such an important anchor both
during the recession and during the recovery, as other sectors one by one healed and began to
contribute to the expansion. Of course, we’ve been counting on some solid employment growth,

August 10, 2004

33 of 103

and the new income and spending power that comes with it will offset the individual spending that
will wane at the margin as we remove our extraordinary policy accommodation. Like others, I think
I am comfortable concluding that some combination of the sapping effect of high energy prices,
heightened concerns about a terrorist act associated with our election season, the Olympics, or some
other target of opportunity served to chill consumers. However, more-recent data such as auto
sales, which have already been cited by several people, suggest that consumer spending has not
dried up.
Employment developments are also interesting, to say the least. I take some comfort in
looking back at the monthly data of the boom period of the 1990s, which remind us of the volatility
of monthly employment data. It is not all that unusual to have two or even three not so strong
months within a period of strong employment growth. At the same time, I certainly think the mood
among the business leaders I talk with about new hiring is still one of squeezing out the last ounce
from existing staff and of achieving the maximum amount of staff cuts possible from technology,
mergers, and acquisitions. That mindset seems to argue for the kind of more-moderate, but still
good, job growth reflected in the staff’s latest estimates. Perhaps more importantly, I do not see any
obvious loss of momentum in other sectors. By most measures, manufacturing seems to be holding
its gains. Homebuilding and sales are holding up remarkably well. Investment spending continues
at a good pace. Exports are growing nicely. We’re even seeing some first signs of a stirring in
commercial construction, or at least some planning and financing for future construction.
As always, I’ve tried to ascertain how our regional data and anecdotal reports either confirm
or contradict the broader national developments. Since our last meeting, my regional insight
suggests that there is still broad and sustained underlying strength in the expansion. Reports from
our region’s tourist destinations are quite upbeat. Air travel is strong. We’re seeing some new

August 10, 2004

34 of 103

commercial construction cranes on the horizon and are hearing of projects in the pipeline. So on the
output side, I remain reasonably confident and encouraged that a good expansion continues to be in
train. Even 3½ percent GDP growth estimates sound pretty good, unless one had come to believe
that we really had returned to the high spots of the 1990s.
On the inflation front, I agree that we do not seem to face any near-term threat of
measurably higher and uncomfortable inflation rates. At the same time, I am less willing than some
to conclude that most of the price pressures we have seen and talked about here at our meetings are
going to turn out to be transitory. While many of the increases associated with higher oil and other
commodity prices should be reversed in time, I continue to be struck by the degree to which we still
are getting cost pass-throughs. We’re being reminded that, in those areas where demand is strong
and building, price increases are sticking. When one decomposes the contributions, positive and
negative, to core PCE prices over recent quarters, it is clear that, were it not for the downward drag
of core goods prices, the increase in core service prices would feel more threatening.
Our regional data and insights continue to remind me that there are continuing price
pressures and more pricing power than we have seen in some time. Since the last meeting, several
trucking companies have told us that they are about to announce 5 to 6 percent price increases. A
senior UPS executive director reported that there is very little pushback in fuel surcharges. Truck
driver wages are on the rise, and several Southeast trucking companies say that they have raised
starting pay twice already in 2004 and are expecting another increase in the current quarter. A
national temporary employment service company reports that they have raised their rates for the
first time in a couple of years. So I am not as ready as some to move inflation concerns completely
to the back burner.

August 10, 2004

35 of 103

Putting all this together and looking ahead just a bit to the policy discussion, I would
conclude that, while the error bands of confidence intervals around our forecasts are probably now
wider, given recent developments the risks now seem more honestly balanced than they were at the
time of our last meeting. I think we can and should stay on the path of removing our extraordinary
policy accommodation. Thinking in Olympic terms, we should continue to cut back on the dosage
of our performance-enhancing policy drug! [Laughter] And finally, not knowing how much
opportunity we will have to discuss our post-meeting statement, I would suggest—while I am still
among those who wish to have a fundamental discussion of our communication practices, perhaps
at our January meeting—that today is not a good time to be tinkering again with that statement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, conditions in our District reflect much of what I’ve heard so
far around the table today, but I think a couple of developments are worth noting. Our labor
markets have shown further signs of improvement, actually. Employment rose in June for the
fourth straight month. Major hiring announcements stayed at a high level in June and July, and
local labor market surveys indicated an increase in hiring plans for the rest of this year. Layoff
announcements did turn up a little in July but remained lower than the hiring announcements and
were largely confined to our telecommunications firms, which are continuing to cut staff.
Manufacturing activity in our region continued to grow solidly in July. Production and new orders
rose further, and employment and hiring continued to expand according to all our survey results.
Firms remain highly optimistic about future activity and still plan moderate increases in hiring and
capital spending. Consumer spending is flat in our area, as others have noted for their regions.
Energy activity continued to expand in response obviously to the price environment. As before,

August 10, 2004

36 of 103

though, some of the individuals we talked with on the producer side say that they are being
constrained to some degree by shortages of labor and equipment and difficulty in obtaining permits
for some of the drilling activities they would like to pursue.
I would say that on the national level the question we are struggling with is whether this
recent news is a pause or a more systemic issue. I am unable to tell that for sure, but I’m inclined to
suggest that it’s a pause and not something fundamental. But given the uncertainties around energy,
I think continued high or rising energy prices pose some risks on that front. One thing that does
concern me is that, based on my conversations with some of our business people—even those in the
manufacturing sector—the news that has come out recently has surprised them as well. So they are
rethinking how they are looking at the situation going forward, and that is a bit of an issue for us.
But I do believe that the economy is fundamentally strong, and I think our current monetary policy
stance is consistent with that moving forward, as is fiscal policy as well. So I think that the lull is
temporary and that we will see activity continue to increase through the remainder of this year.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. New England seems to be experiencing what
we hope is the same summer lull as the rest of the country. The job market didn’t improve from
May to June, and some companies—most notably in the technology and consumer product
sectors—saw weaker demand than expected. As one director put it, “technology spending stopped
to take a breath in June and July.” Still, overall the regional economy continues to expand and in
many areas, such as heavy equipment, paper and packaging, and medical products, growth remains
strong. Consumer and business confidence remain at high levels, and coincident indicators of
economic activity remain positive. High energy prices, expectations of higher interest rates, not to

August 10, 2004

37 of 103

mention the security surrounding the Democratic National Convention, certainly took a bite out of
local demand, but we think it is a temporary one. So far, no one expects that bite out of demand to
derail what continues to appear to be a self-sustaining recovery.
Similarly, incoming data on the national economy have been soft lately, especially when
compared with the growth rates needed to eat into excess capacity in a significant way over the next
year to year and a half. Indeed, the baseline Greenbook forecast, and ours in Boston as well, sees
excess capacity remaining at the end of 2005, and this was expected prior to the surprise in the
employment data of last Friday and the latest revision of the Greenbook. Despite the relative
softness, at least compared with forecasts, the absolute state of the economy doesn’t seem that bad.
Housing markets are still strong. Indeed, as the Greenbook points out, recent readings on business
spending and profits remain positive—not ebullient, to be sure, but solid. In particular, I, too, find
the increase in spending on nonresidential structures and the recent implied increases in
manufacturing activity and manufacturing employment interesting. It is too early to draw a
conclusion on this, I suppose, but it may be that businesses took the June falloff in consumption
with a grain of salt in July. Perhaps they aren’t hiring until things become clearer, but they may also
be relatively comfortable in spending as they and the rest of us continue to believe that this lull in
activity will be short lived.
In that regard, outside of the payroll jobs data, the consumer does seem well equipped to
continue spending. Readings on overall confidence are good, employment claims are down, hours
worked are up a little, layoffs are down, and surveys both of consumer attitudes toward the labor
market and of business hiring plans are positive. In addition, for whatever reason, jobs as measured
by the household survey have surged lately, and the unemployment rate recently dropped a bit. It is
hard to know exactly how to figure in the household survey or what to make of it. It may, in fact, be

August 10, 2004

38 of 103

noise. As Dave suggested, one of the reasons for not knowing how to interpret the latest report is
that it may be noise, but my interpretation is that at least this is positive noise. [Laughter]
The big question going forward is whether the lull in activity, as most prominently
represented in the payroll employment picture and data on June consumption, will be transient or
whether it portends a much slower pace of economic growth going forward. Higher oil and
gasoline prices, higher steel and copper costs, the rising cost of health care, and required
contributions to underfunded retirement plans probably have been the proximate causes of the
decline in consumption and the moderation in wage growth and in business spending. Some of
these factors have begun to ease off. Certainly, the three-month rates of annual change in overall
measures of inflation, whether for the CPI or PCE, have subsided from their first-quarter surge.
Core measures have also pulled back to a pace of less than 2 percent—plus or minus depending on
the series one is looking at.
Strong global demand and geopolitical uncertainty in Russia and the Middle East have
driven up oil and other commodity costs, especially metals. And oil prices seem more likely than
not to stay high. But productivity growth remains solid, business profits are healthy, and markups
are higher than trend. Fiscal policy remains stimulative, and monetary policy accommodation is
significant as well. So it is not a bad bet that growth at a pace of 3½ percent or better will resume
and that inflation pressures will continue to ebb. It’s the bet the Greenbook is making, and it’s the
bet we are making in Boston as well, though I should say that our GDP forecast, particularly as it
relates to consumption in the near term, is a bit less optimistic than the Greenbook’s. There are
risks to that forecast, to be sure, but I still tend to see the risks as relatively balanced.
Is the current level of policy accommodation correct for a U.S. economy growing at trend,
give or take a bit? As I noted earlier, both the Greenbook and our Boston forecast expect excess

August 10, 2004

39 of 103

capacity to remain by the end of 2005, and if anything, the anticipated level of excess capacity has
gotten larger since our last meeting. But a great deal of uncertainty surrounds that calculation.
Relatively less uncertainty surrounds the current stance of policy. Real federal funds rates are
negative and will remain so even if we make a move of 25 basis points today. Highly
accommodative policy was appropriate as we faced the recession and the low probability event of
serious deflation. In my view, such accommodation is no longer appropriate for the U.S. economy
even as it experiences what I assume is a hiccup on an otherwise solid growth path. Thus, I believe
that, absent signs of a major prolonged slowdown, we should continue to adjust policy gradually
upward. I’m not sure where we need to pause along the way or even whether such a pause might be
helpful, but I don’t think that’s the question at this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has been little change in the District
economy recently; that is, a broad-based expansion is under way and is continuing. Labor demand
appears to be strengthening. Manufacturing has been a particularly bright spot recently, especially
for larger firms that operate and sell internationally. We have seen the anticipated improvement in
tourism activity. In talking to contacts in the hospitality industry, including some people who
operate a chain of upscale, upper-end hotels around the country, they say they’ve seen steady
improvement throughout the year. Finally, I would reiterate Bill Poole’s comment about
bottlenecks in the railroad industry and, for that matter, in other forms of transportation as well.
That is something that was called to my attention some time ago, and it apparently persists today.
As far as the national economy is concerned, there are two issues on my mind. One is
energy prices. The other is equity prices, although my concern about equity prices is offset at least
to a degree by the decline in intermediate- and longer-term interest rates that we’ve seen. But the

August 10, 2004

40 of 103

primary question to me is, have recent developments fundamentally altered the economic outlook?
Or put another way, would I disagree substantially with the Greenbook forecast? My tentative
answer to that question is, no, I wouldn’t. I’m fairly comfortable with the fundamental outlook
expressed there, and for reasons that have already been cited here—the expansionary stance of both
monetary and fiscal policies, the persistence of a significant advance in productivity, and improving
economies around the world. All those factors continue to give me some confidence that the U.S.
economy will continue to perform reasonably well.
Let me make one further comment about energy prices. At least according to the anecdotes
that I’ve been getting, higher oil and gasoline prices seem to be having mostly what I would call
“second-order” effects. That is, nobody is saying that they have laid off people or ended a second
shift or something like that because of higher energy prices. The effects are all showing up in either
explicit surcharges or, more implicitly, through pass-throughs. So whatever effects those higher
prices are having are coming through those channels.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth District economy has expanded at
a solid pace in recent months. After a pause in June and early July, District consumers appear to
have opened their wallets again—spending more on entertainment, travel, and a range of services.
Even with higher fuel prices, District tourist destinations are well booked, and industry contacts say
that they are having a good summer. Housing markets remain vibrant, but higher materials costs
and anticipated interest rate increases have begun to temper the pace of new building.
On the business side, firms remain focused on containing costs and improving efficiency.
Contacts note that almost no decision gets made without asking how it will affect productivity over
the next five years or so. After the long decline in the District’s IT sector, signs of improvement are

August 10, 2004

41 of 103

emerging. Production capacity is up, employees are working more hours, and firms have begun to
add jobs. In some areas, demand for employees with technical training or experience has risen so
sharply that it is outstripping supply, and businesses are responding by poaching from other firms,
producing sizable wage payments in these IT-focused areas. So far, however, rapid productivity
growth has held unit labor costs in check. Improved labor markets and rising wages have begun to
attract job seekers and, after falling for several years, labor force participation has picked up
somewhat in many District states and the fraction of the unemployed that were either new or
returning entrants has increased.
Turning to the national outlook, disappointing data for June and the July employment report
have caused us to revise down our real GDP forecast and have elevated our concern about downside
risks to the outlook. Recent weakness in personal consumption expenditures is particularly
worrisome. Growth in consumer spending was probably affected by weather, a temporary dip in
auto sales that was reversed in July, and of course, higher energy prices. But as David mentioned,
standard model estimates suggest that the quantitative impact of the oil price hikes we have seen this
year should have depressed PCE by only a few tenths of a percent. So, in my view we should
therefore consider the possibility, as David did, that other factors may also be at work. For
example, the level of mortgage refinancings in recent months has plummeted, and conceivably—I
have no evidence to this effect, but conceivably—equity withdrawals for cash-out refinancings had
provided a greater boost to spending than was commonly recognized.
In addition, the saving rate is at a very low level. Consumers kept up their spending
throughout the recession and recovery despite only modest income growth. With interest rates
rising and equity prices declining notably since our last meeting, households might try to get their
finances in order and bring the saving rate up to more normal levels. An alternative scenario in the

August 10, 2004

42 of 103

Greenbook suggests that an increase in the saving rate to 1 percentage point higher than the baseline
would lower real GDP growth about a percentage point, to a sluggish 2½ percent in 2005—and it
would be even less given the revised staff forecast. With consumer confidence strong and
disposable income likely growing at a solid rate, even with weak job growth in July, I agree that the
odds are good that the economy will soon rebound from the late spring and early summer doldrums.
I don’t think we should overreact to a brief lull, but the downside risk to the Committee’s forecast of
sustainable growth has clearly risen, in my opinion.
Turning to inflation, I’ve been encouraged by data from May and June showing a
moderation of core consumer inflation. Recent ECI readings also reveal that wage and salary
growth remains very well contained, although overall compensation growth has been elevated by
large increases in health and pension benefits. On balance, these developments support the view
that the recent run-up in inflation mainly reflects temporary factors. I continue to see large risks to
the inflation outlook on both the upside and downside. Of course, we have been, as you have,
continually surprised by increases in oil prices over the past year or so; and the possibility that this
pattern will continue represents an upside risk for inflation at the same time that it represents a
downside risk to demand. But a downside risk for inflation is the exceptionally high markup of
goods prices over unit labor costs. And if the adjustment to a more normal markup is shared in a
typical way by goods prices and labor compensation, this could depress inflation by a noticeable
amount.
Looking forward to our policy discussion, the recent moderation in core consumer inflation
coupled with doubts about the robustness of the expansion suggests to me that we should tighten the
stance of policy at this meeting in line with market expectations of a 25 basis point increase in the
federal funds rate. Going forward, my hope is that we will follow a wait-and-see approach,

August 10, 2004

43 of 103

adjusting the pace at which policy accommodation is removed to the ebb and flow of data
concerning both labor markets and inflation developments. In view of the recent weakness in the
economic data and the downgrading of the forecast, I would favor modifying the final sentence in
our statement to indicate that we intend to fulfill our obligations to promote both price stability and
sustainable growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. For the national economy, the underlying pace of growth
seems to have moderated since our last meeting, as have inflation risks. On the assumption that
monetary policy follows roughly the path now priced into markets, we foresee a somewhat softer
path for the expansion than we had in June, with growth moving back to a pace modestly above
potential— perhaps under 4 percent—for the balance of ’04 and for ’05 and the core PCE staying
just under 2 percent. We view the risks as roughly balanced around this trajectory but with a bit
more uncertainty and caution about the growth outlook and somewhat more comfort with the
inflation outlook.
We are broadly comfortable with the Greenbook forecast. Relative to that forecast and with
a slightly steeper path to monetary policy, we expect somewhat less growth in consumption than the
Greenbook, somewhat stronger productivity growth, somewhat weaker employment growth, and
somewhat less moderation in the core PCE, but these differences are relatively small. We believe
the fundamentals of the expansion remain favorable even if the breadth of the recent deceleration in
spending is somewhat troubling. The productivity numbers seem to be holding up quite well.
Income growth is reasonably strong. Corporate balance sheets, profit margins, and cash flow are
very strong. These factors combined with reasonably good confidence numbers among consumers
and establishments suggest that growth should move back to a level somewhat above potential. Our

August 10, 2004

44 of 103

forthcoming Empire survey, for what it’s worth, shows a significant moderation in the overall
outlook—a greater moderation than we’ve seen in the national surveys of business confidence. But
the overall numbers are still at a level that suggests continued expansion, and the six-months-ahead
numbers we look at fell by much less than those relating to the present.
The risks to this outlook lie principally in the possibility of a shock that causes a very large
sustained further rise in energy prices, a substantial terrorist event in the United States, or some
abrupt change in the willingness of nonresidents to acquire U.S. assets. But even without those
events, we could still see a new wave of caution induced by the threat of their occurrence, by
concern that demand may stay soft and employment growth remain weak and erratic, or by a further
rise in the saving rate. In a sense, our forecast requires a modest leap of faith that households and
enterprises will look through this latest softness and the increased uncertainty.
On inflation, with monetary policy moving back to neutrality, we’re reasonably confident
that the core PCE will stay just below 2 percent. The recent moderation in the data helps support
this view, but we haven’t had that much confirmation of a downward trend yet. This follows what
had been a sustained large, unanticipated, and still-not-well-understood rise of underlying inflation
that should give us a bit of humility as we go forward. If monetary policy were not to continue to
adjust toward a more neutral position, then we would face the risk that the elevation in near-term
inflation expectations would feed through to a higher rate of underlying inflation. Back to our
Empire survey for a moment, it may be worth noting that the respondents report some moderation in
cost pressures and pricing power and a more substantial reduction in expected pricing power six
months out.
I think it is encouraging that market expectations about the path of the fed funds rate are
proving so responsive to the data and that, despite concerns that we’ve provided too much assurance

August 10, 2004

45 of 103

about that path, there’s a fair amount of uncertainty reflected in those prices in terms of how far and
how fast we will move. I think it is hard to argue with the path now priced in. Or to put it
differently, given the thicker fog surrounding the near-term outlook, I don’t think we know enough
to want to use our statement today to try to induce a change to that path either by steepening or
softening it. Nor should we do anything to alter the presumption that now exists that we’ll be
moving toward neutrality at an appropriate pace and that the pace of that adjustment will depend on
the data and what they do to our forecast. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At our last meeting, many, myself included, were
concerned about possible upside risks to inflation, even if policy tightened at a measured pace.
Although the staff forecast for core inflation hasn’t changed materially, I see a number of reasons to
be less concerned about those upside risks now, despite the further increase in energy prices.
Incoming data have shown core inflation to be restrained and labor compensation growth to be
fairly flat, despite rising pension contributions and an expected catch-up with past productivity
increases. This should increase our confidence in the analysis that suggests that core price increases
earlier this year were significantly influenced by one-time factors and that appreciable slack has
been present in labor and product markets. Inflation expectations have been well behaved. Shortterm expectations and the Michigan survey have moved lower. The long-end survey measures of
inflation expectations have been virtually constant. The long-run inflation compensation in the
TIPS market is 50 basis points below its peak in early May, which would seem to provide a little
extra assurance that, even if rising energy prices boost short-term inflation expectations again, longterm expectations are likely to remain firmly anchored. And, finally, activity has been softer, and

August 10, 2004

46 of 103

the output gap has turned out to be larger than anticipated, and that should continue to restrain
inflation in the future.
Smoothing through the quarterly revisions, final sales rose 1½ percentage points less rapidly
in the first half of the year than was estimated in the forecast in late June. The weakening
apparently was greatest near the end of the period; investment as well as consumption turned out to
grow noticeably less rapidly in the second quarter than had been anticipated. The July employment
report raised enough questions about the trajectory in the third quarter to cause the staff to write
down third-quarter growth even further. If the staff is right, the output gap will have closed very
little, if at all, since late last year, given the still strong productivity growth.
Obviously, rising oil and energy prices are playing an important role both through the direct
import tax effects on domestic personal incomes and profits and by elevating uncertainty about the
future. Those effects are probably being accentuated by the persistence of the higher prices and the
substantial upward revisions to prices in more-distant months. With inflation expectations
anchored, rising oil prices seem likely to affect output more than inflation. That is the interpretation
that the financial markets have put on recent oil price increases, and those increases have tended to
be associated with decreases in intermediate-term interest rates. Nonetheless, it is hard to believe
that oil prices account for all of the shortfall in output relative to expectations and the apparent
inability of fiscal and financial stimulus to close the output gap.
And it’s not just that models or rules of thumbs don’t see that large an impact. We don’t see
the sorts of developments, such as the drop in consumer confidence we saw in 1990, that in the past
have been associated with an outsized response to oil prices. Moreover, foreign economies don’t
seem to have been affected very much. I recognize that many foreign economies are less energydependent than we are. Some of them are energy exporters. But if higher energy prices are

August 10, 2004

47 of 103

damping demand, I still would expect to see some imprint on industrial economies, and estimates of
their growth in the first half of the year have been marked up over the intermeeting period.
Perhaps the upward movement in interest rates this spring is having an outsized but
temporary effect, coming as it did after such a long period of very low rates, which encouraged
people to accelerate spending. And uncertainty certainly has risen on many fronts in addition to the
energy market. It will be interesting to get a read this Friday in the Michigan survey as to whether
terrorism alerts and difficult domestic and international political situations are taking their toll on
sentiment. But interest rates have come down. Higher levels of uncertainty about energy prices
ought to be primarily affecting the level of output, not so much its growth rate, unless oil prices or
uncertainty rise further.
I think the greatest downside risk to growth is the behavior of the household sector, and the
worrisome signal there is the jump in the saving rate in the second quarter. A gentle upward incline
in this rate would be consistent with good economic performance in the near term as well as over
the longer run, as investment and government spending strengthen. But we are unlikely to have
enough strength in those other sectors if saving rises more rapidly. The risk is that households are
undertaking a more fundamental evaluation of the long-run prospects for wealth and income,
reacting not only to higher interest rates, energy prices, and uncertainty but also to persistent
sluggishness in real wages and salaries, a less optimistic view of future equity prices, and shortfalls
and defaults in defined-benefit plans.
Still, I see a rapid increase in saving as a downside risk rather than the most likely outcome.
Interest rates remain low, and credit is readily available. This should support expansion above the
growth rate of potential. Households and businesses still seem confident enough to respond fairly
normally to these stimuli, with businesses having postponed enough investment in recent years to

August 10, 2004

48 of 103

fill in for a modest flattening in the upward trajectory of household spending. And as many of you
have pointed out, a number of pieces of recent data—initial claims, household perceptions of
improving labor market conditions, and various surveys—are consistent with continued good
growth in jobs and output. If I had a better understanding of the recent shortfall, however, I’d have
a lot more confidence that stronger growth will resume once energy prices level out.
On balance, I think the incoming data have left us with less upward risk on inflation, a larger
output gap that is probably closing more slowly than most of us anticipated, more uncertainty, and
puzzles about the strength of the expansion. Moreover, those uncertainties are skewed at least a
little in the direction of the possibility that the gap might close even more gradually, if at all, in the
present configuration of expected Federal Reserve action. And that is due only in part to the
possibility of further increases in energy prices. All this probably is not enough to deflect us from
the course of removing policy accommodation. But it would argue for an even more measured
approach and a great deal of caution and flexibility in how we think about and characterize in
announcements and speeches what we might do in the future—a subject I assume we’ll come back
to in the next part of the meeting. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I normally speak after the break, so I was
intending to pass out a chart.2 Let me quickly do that. Just when it looked as though everything
was on track for a gradual tightening of policy, an energy shock seems to have hit the economy.
How does this change our calculus? We’ve talked a lot about oil this morning already, so let me
just hit the high points. The spot price for oil has risen from about $25 a barrel throughout 2002 to
$45 a barrel now. The far futures price, a better indicator of whether this price shock is likely to be
temporary or permanent, has risen from its long-term average of about $20 a barrel throughout 2002
2

The materials used by Mr. Gramlich are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

August 10, 2004

49 of 103

to about $35 a barrel now. Similar upward movements are occurring in the markets for natural gas
and gasoline. Supply margins in these markets have tightened, and markets are now much more
susceptible to further shocks in price increases. All things together, this looks pretty much like a
permanent energy price shock.
The first question is, how serious are these energy price shocks to the macroeconomy?
That’s what the chart I’m distributing addresses. An analytical approach that focuses on reduced
form correlations, an example of which is being passed around, shows pretty strong effects. Since
1975, every upward spike in real oil prices has been followed by a recession, though some of the
recessions seem far deeper than could be accounted for by oil prices alone and there does not seem
to be a symmetrical effect for downward price shocks. But this result is still pretty impressive since
most of the oil price shocks have been temporary, at least as measured by the difference between the
spot price and far futures price. Presumably, the macroeconomic impact would have been even
more powerful for permanent shocks.
The staff has analyzed both temporary and permanent shocks through structural model
simulations. These are alluded to briefly in the Greenbook this time and in more depth in the
French, Horvath, and Mauskopf memo we got for the last meeting. If we take the far futures price
difference of about $15 a barrel as our measure of the permanent price shock, the implicit energy tax
comes to about $75 billion—definitely not chicken feed. The model works in empirically estimated
effects of price changes and lags on consumers and businesses and finds effects on next year’s
unemployment rate of more than ½ percentage point—say, for an unemployment rate of 5½ to
6 percent. The effect on core inflation is ⅓ percentage point and, in what seems to me to be a
separate calculation, that on long-run aggregate supply is about 1½ percent. It is often said that the

August 10, 2004

50 of 103

reduced form effects that I have circulated are bigger than the model effects, and that may be so; it’s
hard to compare exactly, but even these model effects look pretty big to me.
If there are extra-model effects, that should be considered. One obvious place to look is
consumer confidence. Historically there does seem to be a slight correlation between oil price
spikes and drops in consumer confidence. But whatever the past correlation, this chain of events
does not seem to be occurring now. Consumer confidence is bumping along but hasn’t really
dropped since the oil market worsened. Another place to look is in business scrappage of capital
equipment that has been made uneconomic by the assumed permanently higher prices of energy.
Understanding this chain of events involves a highly detailed analysis of capital use, which I’m not
going to give today. But if such a factor were important, it could have either positive or negative
effects on investment demand but presumably negative effects on employment demand. Possibly
that is occurring now but, frankly, if this factor were important, I think we’d hear more about it
anecdotally than we are. There are other such uncertainties. One that was mentioned by the
Chairman this morning relates to the recycling point. But I tentatively conclude that none of these
extra-model effects seems as though it is particularly important right now.
Assuming then that the model does have the basic story right, what should the Fed do in
general about a permanent energy price shock? To me, the optimal strategy—again, laid out in the
staff memo for last time—is to keep the real funds rate constant. Keeping the real funds rate
constant implies permitting the nominal funds rate to rise on the order of 40 basis points for a
$15 permanent oil shock. Compared with the base case of no shock, unemployment would
temporarily increase approximately ½ point and core inflation about the same amount, for about a
year, but both would then revert to their initial values. There doesn’t seem to be much way to
improve on this outcome. A supply shock will force us to accept some combination of temporarily

August 10, 2004

51 of 103

higher unemployment and temporarily higher core inflation. But there is a way to make this
outcome dramatically worse, and that is by not letting the funds rate rise, letting inflationary
expectations become unmoored, and permitting the relative price shock to be translated into
permanently higher inflation. This is the outcome we should try to avoid at all costs.
Turning to our present situation, before we got into this energy price shock, the plan was to
let the nominal funds rate rise gradually to equilibrium as the expansion proceeded. With the added
bumpiness of an energy price shock factored in, there is much market commentary that we might
have to change our approach to policy at this meeting or the next. While conceding that the
expansion path is likely to be much bumpier than we thought because of the energy price shock, it is
interesting to note that the policy strategy for dealing with energy price shocks is essentially the
same as before. We should let the nominal funds rate rise now, with or without energy price shocks.
Of course, nothing is certain in life, and there is a scenario under which we ought to suspend
our policy of gradual rises in rates. This would be the case if two conditions were fulfilled—if the
present weakness in aggregate demand were really persistent and if it were in fact due to some cause
other than energy. The obvious candidate for fulfilling those two conditions that we’ve heard about
this morning is the consumer saving rate, though there would be others. However, at this point, I
don’t consider either possibility very likely, but obviously we have to keep our eyes open. So even
though a lot has changed in the last month, I’m still in favor of going with the program. We are
likely to be in the midst of an energy price shock. These shocks are not pretty, and they are likely to
worsen economic outcomes over the next year or two, but they don’t change what I think we ought
to be doing—certainly at this meeting. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s break for coffee and return in ten or fifteen minutes.
[Coffee break]

August 10, 2004

52 of 103

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy appears to have lost some
momentum, and unfortunately the recent slowdown may be more pronounced than can be
accounted for by the rise in energy prices alone. For example, we would normally expect
households confronted with higher energy prices to reduce their saving in order to smooth the
impact of higher energy costs on non-energy consumption. Instead, the household saving rate has
recently risen, hinting perhaps at a more urgently felt need to rebuild wealth in the face of a flat or
declining stock market. Likewise, firms appear to be investing less and, especially, hiring less than
would seem justified by their order backlogs, raising the possibility that the excessive business
caution we saw last year is surfacing again. Some support for the business caution hypothesis is
provided by the estimates of second-quarter productivity growth released this morning—2.9 percent
in the nonforeign business sector and 7.5 percent in manufacturing—which account for a large part
of second-quarter growth and suggest that firms are still focused on cutting costs.
Overall, our plan to tighten at a measured pace looks pretty good right now. The gradualist
approach moves us predictably toward rate neutrality yet leaves the economy some breathing space
and gives us some time to observe economic developments. One complication for policy, noted by
President Pianalto, has been the divergence this year between core and headline measures of
inflation. The Committee tends to focus on the core measures on the grounds that they are better
indicators of the underlying inflation trend and more likely to influence long-term inflation
expectations. But Committee members have also warned that headline inflation should not be
ignored.
I would like to report very briefly on some work I’ve done with the staff that attempts to
address the relative importance of core and headline inflation measures as influences on long-term

August 10, 2004

53 of 103

inflation expectations. We did two exercises. First, staff member Jeremy Rudd and I ran a battery
of regressions relating alternative measures of expected inflation to current and lagged measures of
actual inflation. The idea was to determine which measures of inflation have the greatest influence
on inflation expectations. Our measures of long-term inflation expectations included the ten-year
inflation forecast from a survey of professional forecasters and the median expectation of inflation
five to ten years out in the Michigan survey of consumers. For comparison, we also looked at the
short-term year-ahead inflation expectations from the Michigan survey. Inflation measures whose
predictive power was tested included the total CPI, core CPI, total PCE inflation, core PCE
inflation, and market-based core PCE inflation. We examined a variety of specifications and
sample periods and used both quarterly and monthly data, as available. Many details aside, the
regression analysis suggests that core measures of inflation do seem to be better predictors of longterm inflation expectations, as anticipated, although their advantage is not in all cases large.
Moreover, in the regression analysis, core inflation measures outperformed not only headline
inflation as predictors but also real-side indicators such as industrial production and payroll
employment. In contrast, as expected, short-term inflation expectations are much better predicted
by headline inflation rather than by core inflation.
The second exercise, done with Refet Gurkaynak and Andrew Levin, used high-frequency
data from financial markets. Here we measured long-term inflation expectations by TIPS inflation
compensation at the five-to-ten-year horizon, and we investigated how the market-based measure
responds within the day to various types of macroeconomic news announcements. Consistent with
both the regression results and market lore, we found again that news about core inflation has a
considerably greater effect on long-horizon inflation compensation than does news about headline
inflation. Indeed, the noncore part of inflation has a zero or even slightly negative effect on long-

August 10, 2004

54 of 103

horizon inflation compensation. Overall, these results provide support for our focus on core
inflation measures in making monetary policy.
In contrast to the regression analysis, the TIPS event study also found that long-horizon
inflation compensation responds strongly not only to inflation indicators but also to real variables,
such as the advance GDP release, the ISM survey, and new home sales—a result consistent with
recent work by Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson at the Board and by Kliesen and Schmid of the
St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank. Further analysis of all these results would be worthwhile.
However, at face value, the finding that long-horizon inflation expectations appear to respond to
short-term economic developments, whether real or nominal, raises the possibility that long-term
inflation expectations in the United States are not as firmly anchored as we would like. This brings
me back to the current situation.
If inflation expectations are, indeed, imperfectly anchored, it is very important that we
continue to demonstrate in word and deed our commitment to price stability. I earlier indicated my
support for continuing with our plan to tighten at a measured pace. If the economy continues to
weaken, we may find ourselves considering whether slowing or stopping this process is warranted.
I think we would be best advised not to deviate materially from our current plan unless we are fully
persuaded that both core inflation and long-term inflation expectations are well contained. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. The economy of the Eleventh District continues to improve, although the
pause that was apparent at the national level in June was also evident there. We also saw some
deceleration of price pressures that had built up. We still expect the Texas economy to expand over
the course of the year, and our regional economists are forecasting job growth of around 1.8 percent,

August 10, 2004

55 of 103

which is slightly below normal and much below normal for a recovery period. We’ve seen steady
employment growth in Texas since last December. However, the employment gains have been
unevenly distributed, and job growth did slow over the second quarter. Since the upturn began,
education and health services have seen the biggest employment gains. Our manufacturing sector
continues to shed jobs, and there has been no job growth in construction. Construction employment
fell in June, which was the wettest month on record in Texas.
As we’ve discussed this morning, the persistence of high energy costs is an increasing
concern for many industries. And along the lines that Jack mentioned, in the trucking industry we,
too, have seen a few signs that higher energy prices are being passed on. Not so with airlines,
however. They are being squeezed by higher fuel costs offsetting the boost they’ve been getting
from solid summer traffic. American Airlines recently tried to recoup some of its higher fuel costs
with a modest fare increase but had to quickly withdraw it. The protracted bankruptcies of some
airlines appear to be delaying a much-needed restructuring of the industry. High energy prices have
not prompted any increase in drilling activity in Texas, primarily because of limited in-state
prospects. Texas, I think, may have been sucked dry by now. Nor has there been any increase in
international drilling, as most of the oil prospects at present seem to be concentrated in politically
unstable regions—and also probably because of Karen’s awful downward-sloping futures!
[Laughter]
Finally, the Mexican economy continues to show signs of strong growth. Exports to the
United States have risen as the recovery here gained momentum, but domestic consumption also has
been growing, helped by strong remittances from the United States.
On the national economy, I was also surprised by last Friday’s employment report, and it
makes me wonder about the duration of the soft patch. I do take some comfort from the huge gains

August 10, 2004

56 of 103

of the household survey number—even if it is positive noise—from accelerating activity in the
economies of many of our trading partners, and from a continuation of the recent strength in
business spending on capital equipment. That said, what is going on in energy markets merits close
attention. All the attention that has been given to the recent volatility of spot prices may have
distracted us from the more worrisome long-term developments in the futures markets, with
disturbing implications for the possible duration of higher energy prices.
Higher oil prices have already pushed headline inflation numbers to uncomfortable levels
and are having a detrimental effect on consumer spending. The recent string of disappointing
employment reports notwithstanding, monetary policy remains very accommodative. Inflation risks
remain skewed toward the upside in my opinion, and a modest increase in the funds rate today
seems warranted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the last meeting, I expressed some
concerns about the uncertain outlook, and unfortunately, most of the incoming data have verified
those concerns. At this meeting, I think President Moskow opened by asking the right two
questions. The first is, Are we witnessing an emergence of another period of subpar growth that is
likely to last for several quarters, or are we watching a soft patch that in all probability has come to
an end or will do so very soon? While obviously the answer is not clear, for this purpose I am
willing to buy into the most recent staff forecast. However, I must admit that I put much greater
weight on the downside risks than on the upside risks. I do that even knowing that some recent
anecdotal data, some survey data, and even some high-frequency data suggest that perhaps things
are turning.

August 10, 2004

57 of 103

So why do I put greater emphasis on the downside risks, even against the new downwardly
revised forecast? There are three reasons. First, I find that for this entire year the trend in all of the
forecasts we look at—both those of the staff and those in the private sector—has been downward.
Forecasters have been confronting a great deal of fog and uncertainty and almost every time have
been forced to revise down their forecasts. If one goes back to the January Greenbook, the most
negative scenario called for growth in the first half of 2004 of 4.6 percent, and it ended up being
almost a full percentage point below that, at around 3.8 percent. The staff was, I think, close to
correct at the beginning of the year on the employment call, projecting an unemployment rate of
5.7 percent at the end of the first half, which was not far off. And as we know, the inflation forecast
at that time called for a core PCE inflation rate of about 1 percent, but we’ve had a number of
upside surprises there. On balance, I’d say that this has been a very, very difficult economy to call,
and since even some of the more negative outcomes have turned out to have understated the
downside, I think we still need to put some weight on the downside risks.
The second reason is that, in periods when we have a great deal of uncertainty and difficulty
in forecasting activity, it’s obviously instructive to look at business signals and at financial market
and credit conditions, which are all meant to be forward-looking. On balance, I think that
businesses, and consequently markets, are indicating at least some skepticism regarding the
consensus forecast of a pickup that may be emerging now or will emerge shortly.
Looking backward, as we saw in the staff presentation here at the Board on Monday,
second-quarter earnings per share did continue to rise, which should be taken as good news—and it
was. However, the bad news is that momentum in earnings growth appears to be slowing. In the
second quarter, the difference in positive surprises and negative surprises was markedly smaller
than for earlier quarters. In addition, a number of high-profile firms provided a more cautious

August 10, 2004

58 of 103

outlook for further earnings growth than investors had been expecting. Taking all of this on board,
financial markets have become less positioned for—and I think show less foreshadowing of—
robust growth. Every major domestic stock market index has been down from year-end 2003 and
from the last FOMC meeting. The drops range from about 5¼ percent to 12½ percent.
Financing conditions suggest some softness as well. As one example, real interest rates for
Moody’s A-rated corporate bonds have fallen, depending on how we adjust them, either to
2.96 percent if we use the Michigan five- to ten-year survey or to about 3.5 percent if we use the
Philadelphia Fed’s ten-year survey. In either case, those are numbers that we have not seen for
about a decade or so. This suggests to me that there is clearly slack demand for financing, as
companies’ investment needs have not kept pace with productivity-enhanced cash flow.
It is true on the other side that C&I lending has moved up somewhat, but that seems to be
due as much to easier terms and conditions as it does to rising financing needs for accounts
receivable, inventories, and capital expenditures. Reflecting the weakness in consumer spending,
the growth of consumer credit also slowed noticeably in June, although I’ve received some
anecdotal evidence from major credit card issuers that suggests that at least revolving credit demand
may have increased at a more rapid pace in July. On balance, I see all of these financial market and
credit indicators, while they are not free from contradiction, as suggestive of some uncertainty that a
near-term rebound is in train and perhaps more consistent with a very extended soft patch—in fact,
a longer period of subpar growth.
The final reason I have for siding more strongly with the downside scenarios is that I find
the conditions required for a return to more sustained near-term and longer-term growth not yet
convincingly in place. First, the forecasted turnaround in the near-term outlook is driven heavily by
the expectation that sales of automobiles will support higher production in that key industry, and I

August 10, 2004

59 of 103

noted with interest President Moskow’s commentary on the August motor vehicle numbers.
However, President Moskow also pointed out that auto manufacturers have an inventory overhang,
and it is quite possible that incentive-induced sales may not achieve their goals.
The staff also points to brisk IP outside motor vehicles to support the baseline forecast. But
I worry that, as has been the case for capacity utilization, much of that increase in IP will be in socalled upstream industries that reflect a few special situations and not a broad-gauged pickup that is
consistent with a fully self-reinforcing positive dynamic in the economy. The inventory situation
and earnings guidance from major high-tech firms suggest that some caution is indeed in order for
industries other than automobiles.
The longer-term outlook depends on an increase in the pace of consumer spending, which
may well be challenged by a number of factors. First, the energy prices that consumers face may
not decline, as assumed in the baseline. Second, we may see weaker wealth creation, as the rise
both in housing prices and in equity wealth slow. Third, and this has been addressed by others, we
may have a return to a more normal saving rate. And fourth, the effects of prior tax cuts are waning.
The longer-term outlook for business investment must also be questioned, to a degree, by the lack of
a very strong response to date to the partial-expensing tax provisions, which are due to expire at
year-end. The ongoing increases in productivity gains and the state of the financing gap both
suggest that perhaps businesses are still finding opportunities to use more fully the current stock of
capital, without investing heavily in new capital. All these downside concerns are only intensified
by the interaction effects among rapidly rising energy prices, heightened geopolitical turmoil, and
cautious consumer and business behavior. We have seen often in the past that the macroeconomic
implications of that combination can be outside the smooth adjustment process that is built into the
models.

August 10, 2004

60 of 103

I realize that I have spent most of my time discussing growth. Obviously, we have a dual
mandate in which keeping inflation low and stable is certainly the major component. The upside
risk to inflationary pressures that we feared earlier does seem to be abating. All scenarios in the
Greenbook recognize this and point to inflation that remains subdued; and at least in my reading,
market-based indicators of inflation and inflation expectations corroborate that expectation. With
economic slack if anything slightly increased and with unit labor costs and productivity still
performing well, it seems to me that a significant upside outbreak of inflation from this level is
unlikely. Finally, we also recognize that the impact of oil prices has tended to be somewhat
asymmetric. So I think those prices are unlikely to be the major source of an inflationary impact as
opposed to an output impact.
The implications of all this for policy it seems to me are pretty clear. If a so-called
measured move was proper at the last meeting, it is certainly proper at this meeting. As to future
meetings, I know only that markets expect us to pause at some point. It is far too early to assume
that outcome, but I think it is also far too early to reject the possibility of a pause going forward.
Obviously, the data will help us to decide. Given the uncertainties that we confront, I hope that at
this time we do not limit, either implicitly or explicitly, our options.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In preparation for today’s meeting, I surveyed a
major regional bank and two large community banks, one in the Southeast and one in the Midwest.
Based on those conversations, I have both some general and some specific observations. In general,
commercial lending activity has increased, although the reason for the borrowing is more for
acquisition purposes than for capital purchases. When I probed as to why increased orders would
not have generated increased demand for capital loans, one of the reasons suggested was that, with

August 10, 2004

61 of 103

excess capacity, the incremental sales dollar goes largely to the bottom line and as a result improves
both profitability and debt service capacity. That, along with the existing liquidity of corporate
America, has meant that the demand for C&I loans hasn’t been as strong as we would see in other
environments.
Demand for mortgages to purchase both new and existing housing remains strong, but one
notable change in the mortgage market is that there is a flattening of demand for home equity loans,
which I think dovetails with what President Yellen suggested. Given the ease with which
homeowners can acquire a home equity loan and the minimal cost and obligation that goes with the
acquisition, the implication is that the availability of home equity as collateral may have reached a
saturation point— particularly the increase in home equity resulting from rising valuations. The
other across-the-board change I noted is that banks apparently are cutting back on, or at least
looking much more carefully at, their commercial real estate lending.
In a more specific sense, one of the more interesting anecdotes came from a banker who is
also a director of a major gasoline retailer. He said that this company had found that a price of
$1.80 per gallon at the pump is the point at which they see a flattening, if not a cutback, in gasoline
purchases. In their judgment, $1.80 is the point at which the price of gasoline triggers changes in
driving patterns. For their purposes, of course, they are looking at the elasticity of demand, so they
don’t go beyond that. For our purposes, the question might be whether or not that change would
also suggest a broader change in consumer behavior. But it was interesting that that was the cut line
they found in their analysis of same store sales. I’m starting to hear for the first time a little concern
among my banking contacts about what may be an over-extension in consumer lending. There was
heightened concern about the number of bankruptcies and just a slight indication that there might be
some softness in that market.

August 10, 2004

62 of 103

Overall, I would say that banking activity does not reflect the current softness that we’ve
seen elsewhere. On the other hand, the information I’ve received over the two years that I’ve been
doing this kind of survey has often lagged the indicators we get from other sources. That would
suggest some limits in sight on the consumer side that may in turn point to the need for caution, but
it would not seem to suggest that we should alter our monetary policy direction at this point. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Many of you have already talked about this soft
patch that we’re going through, and as I prepared my notes for today my main concern was how
long this soft patch is actually going to last. As President Guynn said earlier, the consumer really
has kept the economy moving through this overall business expansion, in terms of getting it back on
the right path. One of the questions today is what is happening to the consumer. I am concerned
about the soft retail sales we’ve seen in the last few months, though obviously the slowing is from
elevated levels. I’m hearing, too, that it’s not just energy prices that are a concern for consumers but
food prices as well. A couple of retailers mentioned to me that when the price of a gallon of milk
and a gallon of gas both go up, it raises questions about how much people have left for discretionary
spending. If those prices start to moderate and level off, then we may have reached the end of this
soft spot.
Home sales, which probably are the most bullish indicator of real intentions, continue to be
very strong, though. While such sales have plateaued, they’ve done so at record levels. The
purchase of a home is clearly a long-term commitment, and the housing market indicates a degree
of optimism that isn’t evident in the retail sales sector. So based on that, I feel more optimistic that
the economy will get through this soft patch in the next few months.

August 10, 2004

63 of 103

One other comment that I heard from some retailers was a reminder to me to be careful
when I look at year-over-year comparisons of sales in the third quarter. Last year, consumers were
getting tax rebate checks, and they went out and spent those funds, especially on lower-end types of
retail sales. So we need to be mindful of that unusual boost to sales a year ago.
The jobs numbers, as many of you have indicated already, clearly created a lot of confusion
when they came out on Friday. That made two very weak employment reports in a row, especially
with the revisions factored in. As we’ve always said, these data can be volatile. And if we look at
other indicators of jobs, we have different signals. As was discussed in our Board meeting
yesterday, initial claims are fairly stable, which suggests that it’s new jobs that are not being created.
But the household survey points to more optimism on the part of households because it indicated
substantial growth in employment; and usually if the labor force is growing, that’s another signal of
consumer optimism. So, again, we have mixed information about what is happening in the
employment data.
The inflation numbers, I find, also have moderated in the last couple of months from the
very rapid rates that we saw in the first half, whether we look at the total inflation or the core
inflation measures that we use. So both of these factors—the likely reasons for the soft patch and
the moderation of inflation—make me want to stay with the “measured pace” language that we have
in our latest statement. And given that the data since our last meeting have clearly provided some
surprises, I want to reemphasize that our commitment to removing policy accommodation at a
measured pace is dependent on the data as they evolve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Fifth District economy expanded at a
somewhat slower pace in July, as manufacturing and retail sales softened but services strengthened.

August 10, 2004

64 of 103

In manufacturing, our diffusion index for shipments, just released today, fell last month but remains
in positive territory. The manufacturing employment index was also in the positive range,
consistent with anecdotal reports from the Carolinas, where much of our manufacturing industry is
concentrated. Job losses due to plant closings in textiles and furniture continue but have been offset
recently by job gains at new plants and plant expansions in other manufacturing industries. Our
new orders index for manufacturing picked up in July, though, suggesting some improvement
ahead. And manufacturers tell us that prices paid accelerated in July; they complained about price
increases for raw materials, particularly for steel and copper.
Turning to our index for service firms, revenue was strongly positive again in July,
indicating continued strong growth in the Fifth District service sector in recent weeks. In contrast,
our survey indicated that retail sales revenue slowed, and many store managers are reporting slack
sales. A senior officer at a large bank in our District reported strong demand for credit in the
midlevel corporate market and positive consumer credit quality trends. Contacts in the D.C. area
noted that the commercial real estate market here has gone from “good to white hot.” An executive
at a national media company reported extremely strong TV ad revenues for the first half of the year,
even excluding political advertising, which is very strong this year. Last week, though, she reported
a pause in forward momentum for the third quarter, but she said that the industry remains optimistic
for the fourth quarter.
Turning to the national economy, I was disappointed, too, by the weakness in the payroll
employment reports. Those data, along with the softness in consumer spending, have elevated my
concern about the downside risks going forward. At this point, though, I share the Greenbook’s
view that these negative developments are likely to be reversed before too long, for reasons that
many people have gone into around the table and I won’t repeat here. Moreover, the change in the

August 10, 2004

65 of 103

corporate profit numbers due to the annual NIPA revisions suggests that markups are less elevated
than we once thought. As a result, the risk of disinflation due to a more-rapid-than-expected decline
in markups now seems lower.
Furthermore, the moderation in core inflation measures of late suggests a diminished risk of
a protracted rise in inflation. Consumer inflation has continued to increase, given higher food and
energy prices, but the fact that inflation expectations have fallen somewhat since the spring, in spite
of the rise in overall inflation, supports the view that inflation will remain contained. All in all, I
think there’s good reason to believe that the economy will work through this difficult period and
move toward a balanced expansion in product and labor markets with stable prices.
On the whole, I still think the most dangerous risk that we’ve faced so far this year has been
the apprehension of financial markets about the Fed’s falling behind in raising the funds rate. I
believe the Committee was correct last spring to keep financial markets calm by communicating its
intentions to lift the funds rate target this year and next. That message showed markets that we
recognized the risk of inflation and that we would give appropriate priority to price stability. I also
think that our follow-through in raising the funds rate in June and in indicating our intention to take
another step today were necessary to sustain the credibility of that commitment.
It was always possible that we might receive some disappointing data after we began raising
the funds rate, and it turned out we did, but I think we should follow through today for several
reasons. First, the market has already eased policy for us by reducing the speed at which it expects
us to raise the funds rate. Second, not to follow through would risk undermining the credibility
against inflation we have been working to maintain. Given that credibility, we can always ease
policy quickly and substantially—should the weakness in the economy develop into something

August 10, 2004

66 of 103

more serious—by signaling our intention to draw out the pace of the funds rate increase. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s turn now to Brian Madigan.
MR. MADIGAN.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the material that
was passed out at the break labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy
Alternatives.” As shown in the top panels of exhibit 1, the incoming indications of
softer-than-expected economic growth—especially Friday’s employment report—
have had a pronounced effect on financial markets. Over the intermeeting period, the
yield on nominal ten-year Treasuries, the solid black line in the left-hand panel,
dropped nearly 45 basis points, to about 4.4 percent—its lowest level since early
spring. At the same time, equity prices, shown in the right-hand panel, dove sharply
lower, as investors reacted to the sluggish data, rising energy prices, and corporate
guidance suggesting a less robust outlook for earnings. The S&P 500 index fell more
than 6 percent, while the Nasdaq plunged nearly 13 percent. But with business
balance sheets perceived as mostly being in excellent condition, credit spreads on
investment-grade issues were about unchanged; and yields on such securities, the
dotted red line in the top left panel, declined virtually point for point with those on
Treasury bonds. Spreads on speculative-grade issues (not shown) widened a little but
stayed relatively narrow.
As is evident in the middle left-hand panel, the signs of persistent sluggishness in
the economy prompted a significant tilt down in market expectations for the path of
the federal funds rate. The blue line, showing quotes for last night’s close, suggests
that market participants now fully subscribe to the FOMC’s view that policy can be
tightened at a measured pace. Investors apparently have come to believe that two
years will elapse before the funds rate will reach 3½ percent. In other words, they
now see you moving ¼ point at roughly every other meeting. At the same time,
though, market participants appear to have read your recent policy announcements, as
well as your public statements that the flagging in growth is likely to be temporary, as
implying that policy will be tightened another notch at this meeting. As illustrated by
the blue bars in the chart to the right, options on federal funds futures point to very
high odds among investors that you will firm policy 25 basis points today. As shown
in the bottom left-hand panel, the Desk’s survey of primary dealers, which was
updated on Friday following the labor market report, indicates that dealers
unanimously share the expectation of another ¼ point move today. All of the dealers
also think that you will again characterize the risks to growth and inflation as
balanced, and most expect that you will retain the “measured pace” language or some
variant of it. The solid blue line in the bottom right-hand panel again shows the
current path for the expected funds rate derived from futures contracts but focuses on
just the next few months and assumes that policy moves will be made only at
meetings. The expected value of 1.61 percent for the September 21 meeting suggests
that market participants see only about a 2 in 5 chance that you will boost the funds
3

The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).

August 10, 2004

67 of 103

rate another ¼ point six weeks from now. And the value of 1.89 percent for the
December 14 meeting indicates that markets have built in only two and one-half
tightenings of 25 basis points over the four meetings remaining this year. By
contrast, at the time of the June meeting, investors anticipated an average of a ¼ point
move at each of the remaining five meetings.
The same factors that have spurred market participants to ratchet down their
expectations for the pace of tightening might lead you to contemplate leaving policy
unchanged at this meeting, as discussed in exhibit 2. As portrayed in the top left
panel, the surge in payrolls earlier this year has tailed off sharply in the past three
months. And incoming NIPA data for the first half of the year (the second line of the
right-hand panel) revealed that economic growth was ¾ percentage point slower than
had been estimated by the staff in the June Greenbook. In response to the weak
employment data for June and July as well as to other indicators, the staff has revised
down appreciably its forecast for economic growth in the second half of this year (the
third line) from 5 percent in June to about 4 percent currently. As reviewed in the
middle panel, the staff forecast suggests that a considerable amount of economic
slack will linger over coming quarters. The output gap is projected to shrink slowly
and still be around 1 percent at the end of next year. Partly reflecting that slack, both
core inflation and overall inflation are forecast to move lower over the second half of
this year and during 2005 (the bottom left-hand panel), with the rate of core PCE
inflation edging back below 1½ percent by the end of next year. Particularly with this
price forecast, the Committee may not be satisfied with a prospect for continued slack
and may wish to foster increased resource utilization by pursuing a slightly easier
path than in the staff forecast, starting with an unchanged stance of policy at this
meeting.
Market expectations for inflation could be read as giving the Committee some
latitude in the timing of its policy tightening. As shown by the black and blue dashed
lines in the bottom right-hand panel, the difference between yields on nominal and
indexed Treasury securities suggests that inflation expectations in financial markets
have reversed course over the past few months, declining significantly from their
recent peaks, while the solid red line indicates that households’ longer-term inflation
expectations have remained fairly stable at a level just under 3 percent.
At the same time, though, the Committee might find the persistent relatively high
level of inflation expectations to be troubling and one of a number of factors that
incline it toward the continued tightening of policy at this meeting that is discussed in
exhibit 3. With the economic expansion now apparently well established, even if its
pace is somewhat below earlier expectations, the Committee may still believe that the
dominant policy consideration is the need to reduce the existing degree of monetary
accommodation. As shown by the solid line in the top panel, the real federal funds
rate is not only low but negative, and it has edged down on balance over the past year
as inflation has increased. Moreover, it is noticeably below even the lower edge of a
range of estimates of its equilibrium value. The 25 basis point firming of
alternative B would move the real rate toward zero, whereas a 50 basis point action

August 10, 2004

68 of 103

would leave it at about zero and just within the range of estimates of its equilibrium.
In addition, as shown in the middle panel, a firming would be consistent with results
from a range of monetary policy rules that are reported in each Bluebook.
As indicated in the bottom left-hand panel, the Committee may be attracted to the
50 basis point increase in the funds rate at this meeting of alternative C if it is
especially concerned about the highly accommodative posture of monetary policy
implied by a negative real federal funds rate. The Committee might also feel that the
staff has read too much into the recent run of weak economic indicators. By many
measures, financial conditions remain quite supportive of growth, and the Committee
may judge that it is just a matter of time before very low real rates of interest, if
maintained much longer, show through in accelerating economic growth and,
possibly, higher inflationary expectations and actual inflation.
In view of the spate of soft indicators, though, the Committee may judge that the
25 basis point firming of alternative B is appropriate for this meeting. As noted
previously, inflation expectations, for now, appear to be well contained. And while
the Committee may feel that the existing degree of monetary accommodation needs to
be reduced over time, it may also believe that incoming data have tended to confirm
its previous judgment that policy can be tightened at a measured pace. Assuming a
gradual tightening of policy, the staff forecasts a moderate economic rebound,
persisting resource slack, and a resumption next year of some net downward
pressures on core inflation. Moreover, market participants have come to believe that
policy will be firmed at a gradual pace, and a larger move at this time would likely
prompt a sharp adjustment in market prices and could provoke considerable
uncertainty about the Committee’s motivations and intended policy path.
Should the Committee choose to move by 25 basis points at this meeting, the
remaining issues have to do with the language of your announcement. These issues
are addressed in your final exhibit—the third revision of Bluebook table 1.
[Laughter] The second revision, which was circulated to the Committee yesterday,
responded further to the weak employment report and in particular to the suggestions
of several policymakers. This third revision is substantively similar to the second,
with the change in wording intended primarily to simplify the language. As shown in
rows 3 and 4 of alternative B, the rationale section of this version reads as follows:
“In recent months, output growth has moderated and the pace of improvement in
labor market conditions has slowed. This softness likely owes importantly to the
substantial rise in energy prices. The economy nevertheless appears poised to resume
a stronger pace of expansion going forward. Inflation has been somewhat elevated
this year, though a portion of the rise in prices seems to reflect transitory factors.”
Here I ask that you note a slight fourth revision—“seems to reflect” rather than
“evidently reflects” transitory factors. As shown in rows 5 and 6 under alternative B,
June’s assessment of continued balanced risks to both sustainable growth and price
stability would be retained today, together with the indication of the Committee’s
judgment that policy accommodation can be removed at a measured pace. Certainly,
both upside and downside risks to growth as well as inflation can be identified, and

August 10, 2004

69 of 103

recent developments would seem to support a continued belief about proceeding at a
measured pace.
In a memorandum distributed to the Committee last week, Vincent Reinhart
discussed alternative wording that could eventually supplant the current risks
assessment and facilitate the deletion of the “measured pace” language. That wording
is shown in row 5 of alternative C. In brief, it would separately characterize the risks
to sustainable growth and to price stability—and potentially the overall risks—on the
explicit assumption that the stance of policy was maintained for several quarters. In
current circumstances, with the real funds rate estimated to be well below
equilibrium, those risks would most likely be viewed as to the upside. That new
wording could conceivably be used for a time simultaneously with the existing
“measured pace” sentences or be substituted for them immediately. Although the
Committee may see advantages to moving to the new formulation over time, one
consideration in a contemplation of adopting it today is that any change in the form of
the risk assessment is, at present, completely unanticipated by the markets. Without
the ability in the announcement to explain in detail the conditionality of the
forecasting exercise in the alternative wording, yields could back up somewhat if an
assessment of upside risks were introduced without warning at this time.
By contrast, it seems likely that a choice of alternative B today, accompanied by
an announcement that included an assessment of balanced risks, that continued to
suggest that policy can be firmed at a measured pace, and that took note of the recent
moderation in growth and in the improvement in labor market conditions would elicit
little immediate reaction in financial markets. That concludes my prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Brian? If not, let me get started. I think one of
the problems we run into is that monthly estimates of employment have an exceptionally wide
potential variance. Remember, we’re dealing with 130 million workers, and 1 percent of that is still
a huge number. It is readily ascertainable that if we have significant volatility, as we also do in the
case of changes in productivity, we can get some remarkable statistical changes in the employment
data without all that much change in the growth pattern of overall economic activity. And, indeed, I
suspect that’s part of the problem we are running into.
There is, however, a more general question that we have discussed in the past but that is
perhaps worthwhile reiterating. It relates to what is lacking in this recovery—namely, a degree of
enthusiasm on the part of the business community to move in advance of the numbers and expand

August 10, 2004

70 of 103

capital spending and hire employees before they are needed in an endeavor to be positioned to
accommodate anticipated growth in demand and perhaps improve market share at that time. In the
past, anticipatory business spending was reinforced by the fact that recessions were not as shallow
as the most recent recession or the one before that. As a consequence, the current cyclical rebound
does not have the momentum that one typically sees in an economic upswing, especially in terms of
an inventory turnaround that feeds on itself and induces a degree of aggressive activity on the part
of the business community. The latter shows up in surges in new orders, further inventory
accumulation, increased production, very significant hiring, and a slowdown in output per hour if
not in underlying structural productivity.
What we are seeing in the data, as has been commented on previously, is a level of capital
investment and inventory investment that is falling significantly short of cash flows, a highly
untypical development. Why that is occurring is not all that difficult to hypothesize. Clearly, it
stems from the shallowness of the recent recession and the limited momentum of the resulting
rebound. But as we can perceive in detail at the micro level, we are also witnessing an unusual type
of concern that is not classifiable as business optimism or pessimism. It takes the form of a high
degree of caution stemming from the corporate scandals, the consequent aversion to risk-taking by
boards of directors, and the very clear rise in the hurdle rate of return in the last couple of years. We
can’t measure that readily on a macro level, but we can do so by listening to corporate executives
who say, with some exaggeration admittedly, that they spend a disproportionate amount of their
time with their general counsels. That means that when they go into the boardroom for a decision
on a capital project, which in the past typically used to be a pro forma activity, there is considerable
trepidation as to whether the final resolution will be that somebody will ask for the resignation of
the CEO.

August 10, 2004

71 of 103

Now, all this may seem in some degree apocryphal, but in one sense it is not. To the extent
that we find a good deal more sluggishness in this recovery than can be accounted for by rising
energy prices, there have to be other reasons aside from the shallowness of the recent recession.
Human concerns, if I may put it that way, do explain some of the sluggishness. In any event, what I
hear in talking to business executives is that the absence of the very significant surge in business
hiring and other spending that we ordinarily see is associated with widespread efforts to get the last
modicum of efficiency out of a company before a single new worker is hired. That’s what’s
happening. And, clearly, this has been an extraordinary period because, in all the history that I can
remember, we have not been through a surge in productivity of this nature in an environment of
considerable softness. This makes the jobs number a highly unstable number. It also makes it a far
less significant indicator of economic activity than I think we tend to regard it.
We are usually of the view that the employment data released on the first Friday of every
month are the first real indication of economic activity that we see in that month. That was largely
true when productivity growth was 1½ percent and it didn’t vary all that much. Indeed, the hours
figure was as good a proxy for real GDP as we could get. But when we have the wide variances of
output per hour that we have been observing, we have to ask ourselves what, in fact, the
employment data contribute to our estimate of actual GDP. In a technical sense, the answer is
nothing. That’s the denominator of the productivity number. It’s not the numerator.
If we assume that we already have data on GDP for July, which we have built up from the
product side, would we even advert to the employment figure to determine the GDP number? The
only reason we do it is that we believe productivity growth is relatively stable. That was the case in
the past, but it’s highly questionable whether that’s the case today. What we do know is that what
determines the level of consumption is effectively income, and income is the mirror image of the

August 10, 2004

72 of 103

nominal GDP or of cash flow if you want to put it that way. To be sure, it does matter whether
consumer expenditures are being made by people who are employed or unemployed, but not all that
much. The propensity to spend out of cash flows is not evidently that different between the
employed and the unemployed. Therefore, the particular rate of productivity growth that distributes
income between the employed and the unemployed is not as critical an issue as I think analysts tend
to think it ought to be. This means that it doesn’t matter all that much what employment is. What
matters is income. And income in and of itself is a function of GDP.
Now, we obviously use the employment data because they are so current, but we use them
in the context of the presumption that for any particular quarter there is a limit to GDP growth.
How we behave with regard to the nth revision of the Greenbook forecast when new employment
data become available is that much of the change in employment ends up, as indeed it should, in the
productivity numbers and not in the level of GDP. Therefore, the emphasis we are putting on these
monthly employment changes is misplaced in my view.
In any event, there does appear to be some pickup in the data for the third quarter,
fragmentary as they are. We clearly saw a significant rise in motor vehicle sales in July. Moreover,
Mike Moskow’s contacts at some of the motor vehicle companies are reporting that early August
sales suggest, if anything, an increase from the significantly elevated level of light vehicle sales in
July. If that turns out to be the case, we may start to get more widespread spending surprises on the
upside. The latter might not have an immediate effect on GDP, largely because they would be
offset by inventory reductions, but they would have such an effect down the road. We also have
seen chain store sales move up fairly consistently for the last number of weeks.
The hesitancy in corporate borrowing, which has been associated in part with the excess
cash flows of recent quarters, may be coming to an end. Corporate borrowing has clearly picked up

August 10, 2004

73 of 103

in recent weeks. We’ve seen the largest numbers in some time on the issuance of bonds, extensions
of short-term debt, and even equity offerings. As a consequence, what we probably are observing is
a flattening of profit margins, and perhaps even some retrenchment; but clearly we are seeing the
beginnings of the type of pressure consistent with the financing gap exhibited in the Greenbook for
the fourth quarter. Remember, we are only about seven weeks away from the fourth quarter, and
something seems to be in the process of changing.
In sum, it strikes me that the softness that was very evident in May and June is difficult to
find in the July numbers. I must admit that I find initial claims to be an important statistic because
the error rate variance in those numbers is very low. To be sure, the data on new hiring implicit in
the payroll figures, if you take them at face value, show a fairly pronounced decline in the rate of
new hiring. That seems odd because other data for recent months point to a significant pickup in the
turnover of jobs in that the number of employed people who are shifting jobs has gone up quite
significantly, at least in the household data. That is usually indicative of increased confidence in the
job market. In addition, no one has mentioned the quite strong consumer survey indications that
jobs are becoming increasingly plentiful. The Conference Board’s latest measure shows continued
strength in that regard. I have a healthy skepticism about the 629,000 employment increase in the
household data for July, but if we put June and July together the average is still quite large. The
variance, unfortunately, is also very large. While we have to be cautious about the employment
data, the markets in my judgment responded far more negatively to the release of the latest numbers
on Friday than I thought the underlying evidence warranted.
This leads me to what I think policy ought to be, which—if you’ll excuse the expression—
I’ve termed “opportunistic disaccommodation.” [Laughter]
MR. STERN. It has a nice ring.

August 10, 2004

74 of 103

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What that essentially means is that, given an unbiased
balance of risks at this stage, we should be choosing to raise rates, and we should endeavor to get
back to a neutral policy stance as quickly as we can. The more successful we are in doing so, the
better policy will be. I am a little concerned about leaving gaps in the timing of our moves largely
because that assumes that we can see into the future with some degree of accuracy. We have been
very fortunate with our announcements and our guidance to the markets in the last year or so. It’s
not something that we can repeat consistently. We will not be able to make statements that
somehow imply that we have great discretion on what it is we can choose to do, even as we say we
will be guided by the data. The problem is that we may be overwhelmed by the data and our policy
discretion may be completely lost in the process.
Consequently, the sooner we can get back to neutral, the better positioned we will be. We
were required to ease very aggressively to offset the events of 2000 and 2001, and we took the funds
rate down to extraordinarily low levels with the thought in the back of our minds, and often said
around this table, that we could always reverse our actions. Well, reversing is not all that easy.
That’s the reason why, when we have a chance to reverse as I think we do in this period, we should
take advantage of it. Moreover, anything other than moving at every meeting strikes me as
something that requires a hurdle of evidence greater than usual. I don’t deny that, if we suddenly
are confronted with exceptionally weak data or oil prices spike to $80 a barrel and we begin to see
some significant weakening in the economy, continuing to increase the federal funds rate in the face
of such developments would be a risky operation, even though I agree with Governor Gramlich,
who said that persistent tightening would in general be the appropriate course for policy. I can
conceive of developments that may argue against raising rates further at some point. In my
judgment, they would have to be very significant to stop us from getting back to a neutral policy

August 10, 2004

75 of 103

position and in a position to move in either direction. At that point, our balance of risks assessment
will truly guide the direction in which we will ultimately go.
We’ve often discussed that ideally we’d like to be in a position where, when we move as we
did on June 30 and I hope today, the markets respond with a shrug. What that means is that the
adjustment process is gradual and does not create discontinuous problems with respect to balance
sheets and asset values. That is not something we’re going to be able to accomplish very often. I
think we are able to do it in this period, and we should try as best we can to continue the tightening
process until we reach our objective. That would be the optimal outcome. But I frankly don’t
anticipate that we are going to be able to wend our way back to neutrality, wherever that ends up
being, without having any market disruptions as a consequence of moves that we make at meetings.
This is an exceptionally difficult thing to do. Yet it’s the type of thing we ought to reach for and see
whether we can manage it, recognizing that if we succeed we should not say, “Well, we have now
solved the problem of monetary policy.” All we will have succeeded in doing is to have worked our
way out of a very difficult policy scenario that occurred as a consequence of the bubble economy
that emerged in the latter part of the last decade and the subsequent events. Therefore, what I’d like
to put on the table is that we move 25 basis points and make a statement equivalent to whatever
version is the revision that Brian was talking about. Would somebody like to comment? President
Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation completely. I think, as Ben
put it, that we need to stay on track. The only suggestion I would have in terms of the statement is
that I think there a number of things besides energy prices that may be responsible for what we’re
seeing in the data. I have a whole list of them written down here. Therefore, I would strike the
sentence that says “this softness likely owes importantly to the substantial rise in energy prices.” In

August 10, 2004

76 of 103

my view there’s a laundry list of things including, for example, uncertainties about the situation in
Iraq. Of course, that’s tied up with energy prices, but it goes beyond just energy. My only other
comment would be that it wasn’t clear to me from what you said what happens to the language
under the assessment of risks in alternative A, which adds the phrase “and sustainable economic
growth” at the end of the last sentence. Were you proposing to include that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would argue against it.
MR. POOLE. Okay. I have a preference for including it on the grounds that, if we get
another employment report and perhaps other data of the sort that we’ve already had, we might
want to pause in September.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There’s nothing that prevents us from doing that.
MR. POOLE. I understand that. But my preference would be to condition the market to
that possibility and read that as it stands. I don’t feel strongly about it, but I’m explaining my
preference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, it’s another side, but there is an interesting reason for
my position. If we’re going to make the statement that accommodation can be removed at a
measured pace and then we say, “Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed,” that is clearly related to price stability on the upside. It makes no sense to talk
about putting both price stability and maximum sustainable growth in that particular context. If
you’re going to do that, you might as well just take that sentence out completely. The internal
coherence of that, in my judgment, is questionable.
In any event, to be sure, there are lots of different things that could be causing the softness,
but at least in my judgment, the major one is very clearly energy. Not to acknowledge energy as an
issue in this statement, with all the events that are going on, suggests that we’re working on a

August 10, 2004

77 of 103

different planet than the one on which we live. That is not to say, though, that there aren’t other
factors involved. In fact, the word “importantly” qualifies the role of energy prices; the statement
doesn’t say they are the “sole” reason for the softness we’re seeing. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Number one, I support your approach. I
agree also with the notion that, at least this time, we should not fiddle with this statement very
much. We are on track to have a more thorough discussion of the language in our statements in the
near future, and I think the minor adjustment approach is the right decision for this meeting.
Second, I agree with you very much in that I, too, would be reluctant to leave gaps in our moves
toward policy neutrality. I think almost methodically raising the funds rate is the right thing to do.
If we do it at some meetings and not at other meetings, that’s just going to cause a lot of attention.
Of course we have to look at the data, but as long as we’re in a position where the level of the funds
rate is so highly accommodative, in general I would lean toward the methodical approach of taking
baby steps at each meeting unless we get some jarring new information. Third, I would keep in the
reference to energy prices, as my remarks indicated. I think they are important. In my view you are
right that, if we don’t mention them at all, it will look as if we’re vaguely out of touch.
On the statement itself, you may be right on the employment side. Essentially, the way I’m
interpreting what you say is that you’re criticizing employment in the first difference sense because
the 32,000 is a number that is estimated with error on the base of millions of people being
employed. I still look at employment a lot for output gap purposes, just to see how far the
expansion has to run. Our statement focuses on the first differences part of employment, not on the
levels. Maybe we ought to commission our drafting committee to think about a different way of
referring to the employment picture. I wouldn’t do it this time, but in general we might want the
statement to focus more on levels of employment and not so much on recent changes, for the reason

August 10, 2004

78 of 103

you suggested. That’s one of the things I’d put on the agenda to deal with in the statement as time
goes on, but for this meeting I would go right down the line with alternative B.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I certainly agree that your proposal is the right thing to do at this time. I
like your concept of “opportunistic disaccommodation.” I don’t know exactly what it means, but I
like that concept! We are in a position to move now, and a move today will be well understood.
It’s well priced into the market. It won’t have a big market effect, and it takes us in the direction we
want to go. You mentioned toward the end of your remarks “going to neutral,” wherever that might
be. That’s a really interesting question right now. Where is neutral? I find the chart in the
Bluebook, with the wiggly shaded area that goes up and down again on the estimated ranges of
equilibrium rates of interest, somewhat of a puzzle. I know I need to think about that more, but it
doesn’t affect how I feel about the policy decision today. I think a ¼ point increase in the funds rate
target is the right thing to do.
I don’t know what to do about the statement. I have some sympathy for trying to get out of
giving the market too much confidence about what we’re doing. You seemed to reflect a bit of
concern about that in your questions earlier. I’m worried about that because I think we need to look
at the data as they come in and we need to have some flexibility in how we assess conditions
moving forward. I worry about the market continually believing that it knows exactly how we’re
going to act. But at this stage of the game, maybe it’s okay that the market knows what to expect in
terms of our policy. So I guess I’d go with your recommendations on the alternative B formulation.
I certainly hope that we can get ourselves to a situation in which Vincent’s recommended language,
or something like it, is where we end our statements. I’d prefer to leave people hanging a little as

August 10, 2004

79 of 103

we go forward and not be quite so confident about what we’re going to do. But for now this
approach is good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I agree completely with your recommendation. I think the
sooner we get back to neutral, the better off we are, and I agree that we should have a high hurdle
for not raising rates at meetings while we’re in this period of removing accommodation at a
measured pace. And I think it’s important not to leave gaps in the timing of our policy moves.
Also, I believe it’s important for us to mention energy prices in this statement.
There is one point that I just want to mention. I agree with the statement as written, but in
section 3 of Brian’s table, the rationale sentence says, “The economy nevertheless appears poised to
resume a stronger pace of expansion going forward.” That is a little different from what we’ve done
before. I agree with the sentence, but it is forward-looking, and I don’t think we’ve had forwardlooking sentences before in the rationale section of the statement. I don’t disagree with it, but I
think we should recognize that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that thought is implicit. If we don’t believe that, why
are we moving the funds rate up 25 basis points? So, essentially, it is implicit in our actions.
MR. MOSKOW. As I said, I don’t disagree with it, but I think it is different from what we
have been saying in the past.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, absolutely, it is. And one of the things that I think we
are finding with the statement is that the increased flexibility we have created for ourselves by
working through the phraseology in the Bluebook gives us greater latitude to do these statements in
ways in which each meeting is handled idiosyncratically. From an exposition point of view, I think
that is essential.

August 10, 2004

80 of 103

MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, I might just point out that the sentence before that—
where we say that a portion of the rise in inflation is transitory—is itself predictive. So, it isn’t
unprecedented to be giving some sense of an outlook in the rationale part of the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I think we might
encounter circumstances under which we’d want to skip a meeting in our measured pace of
removing policy accommodation—perhaps to “undisaccommodate.” [Laughter] But I agree with
Governor Gramlich that a moderate rise in energy prices would not be a rationale for doing that.
That’s a circumstance in which it’s important to maintain the anti-inflationary dimension of this
Committee’s policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I like the basic
strategy of keeping the pressure on to try to get us back to neutral. In answer to President
Minehan’s question of where is neutral, my answer has always been “north of here,” so I’d keep
going in that direction. Neutral may not mean a single number, and the definition of neutral may
not be fixed. But as long as we’re moving north of where we are currently, I think it’s a good idea.
On the wording, I know four versions of this matrix have been handed out. Ordinarily, that
would be problematic. I think each actually improved the statement. I like the wording of the last
version and the reference to energy. The way it is posed here actually fits better my way of seeing
the situation, so I’m comfortable with the wording as it is presented.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I think it is appropriate
that we maintain a high hurdle as we go forward before skipping a beat. I believe this measured

August 10, 2004

81 of 103

approach is important, as Governor Bernanke said, to maintain the credibility of our commitment
against inflation. Even with a few more soft patches as we go forward, I think that’s going to be the
ever-present danger in the near term.
I also share your opposition to including the phrase “sustainable growth” in the last
sentence, but for a slightly different reason. The way it is worded there makes it sort of a twin pillar
of our obligations. We have moved over the last few years to recognizing a difference between our
desire for price stability and our desire for sustainable growth, and I wouldn’t like that difference to
be eroded or fuzzed up in the public’s mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I think we should move toward neutral, and I find the
rationale for doing so as stated here pretty good, so I’m fine with that. I would like to leave in the
sentence about energy prices because energy is the elephant in the room and I think we should
acknowledge it. And I don’t think we need to modify the statement any further than that. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I have one question and
one observation. I think I got confused in the course of your exchange with Bill Poole. Is the last
phrase under the assessment of risk in or out? I thought there was some question about putting a
period after “needed.” What is the proposition on the table? Does the wording remain as written
here?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean the very last statement under “assessment of
risk”?
MR. GUYNN. Yes.

August 10, 2004

82 of 103

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It reads, “Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.”
MR. GUYNN. Okay. Now for my observation. I may have not followed your discussion
about the labor market and how we deal with it—and maybe this is what Ned was talking about. As
I read the statement, it seemed to me that we may have contributed to the emphasis that people are
putting on our judgment about labor market conditions by having pointed to the employment
situation in almost all of our recent statements, including this one. I don’t know how to translate
what you said into better words, but maybe I misunderstood what you were saying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, there’s nothing wrong with discussing the condition of
labor markets. It is part of our overall evaluation of what is going on in the economy. But the
argument that I was making is that we are overemphasizing the importance of employment as an
economic activity issue. In other words, one often hears that the purpose of the economy is to create
jobs. Well, every economy creates jobs, and the economies that create them more often than not are
subsistence economies—where the incentive to work in one way or another is complete. You don’t
have unemployment in subsistence economies. So, it is a question of getting a notion of the
sequence of events in terms of what causes what. That’s the only issue that I was addressing.
MR. GUYNN. That’s helpful. Thank you, sir.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, support the ¼ point increase in the funds
rate at this stage. Also, I think that the “measured pace” language and the conditional clause have
served us remarkably well so far. I believe that people in the marketplace pretty much understand
what we’re trying to do and where we’re going. The question for me was whether we wanted to
expand that last conditional phrase. There may be some value to doing it, but I agree that it isn’t

August 10, 2004

83 of 103

essential. I don’t think it unduly constrains us. My guess is that we would pause only if the
economy seemed to be going substantially off course.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I agree with your proposal, including no diddling with the language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I agree with your proposal, Mr. Chairman, in all its particulars, including the
language. I think it is most likely that economic growth will pick up and that the output gap will
begin to close again, and therefore, we should continue with our measured pace of tightening. I do
think that I would put a little more emphasis on the employment data than you seem to be doing. I
agree that, when productivity is moving around, employment is not a good indicator of economic
activity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s not as good an indicator as when productivity is not
moving around.
MR. KOHN. Right, but it is something of an indicator of whether we’re putting people
back to work. In fact, it’s a very good indicator of that. [Laughter] And there is slack in the
economy, so I wouldn’t ignore it entirely. I agree that we need to get back to neutral as soon as we
can, but I would say as soon as we can consistent with achieving maximum employment, which is a
directive in the Federal Reserve Act along with keeping prices stable. I agree that the default option
is to keep moving toward neutral, but my sense is that I’d be a little more data-dependent on how
fast we can get there than I think you were suggesting. The important thing is not so much the
current federal funds rate but what people in the market expect. It may be that, if economic activity
keeps softening, we will need to change expectations in the market by skipping an action at a

August 10, 2004

84 of 103

meeting at some point. So I agree with the general tenor of what you say; I’m trying to change it
just a bit around the edges.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, you’re raising the issue that Governor Gramlich
raised, which is the level of employment as distinct from the change and the level of the
unemployment rate. These are other indicators and goals of policy. I’m talking mainly about
working off the employment statistics in our analytic evaluation of how the economy is doing as
distinct from raising the question of whether full employment, however we define it, is a desirable
goal in the same sense that full utilization of resources is a desirable goal. I should hope it is.
Indeed, that’s what we are mandated by statute to adhere to as a goal. But that is not the first
difference question, which I think Governor Gramlich very appropriately pointed out. Governor
Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with your recommendation for this
meeting and with your defense of the statement as outlined in alternative B. I won’t go into all the
issues about energy prices, et cetera.
To some extent I am both following Governor Kohn in sequence and agreeing in intellectual
approach here. I agree with you that the principle should be a desire to move toward neutral, but I
worry about setting up a hurdle that is uniformly higher now based on nothing in particular other
than the desire to move to neutral. I do think, as you said at one point, that each meeting should be
handled idiosyncratically. And to me that means that we really have to continue to be driven by the
data and forecasts. From my perspective, given the unusual nature of the slowdown—the range of
shocks that the economy has faced and may continue to face and the fact that the forces holding
back consistent above-potential growth that will close the output gap are all rather mysterious to
us—I’d be a little cautious about a willy-nilly declaration that the hurdle rate for a pause in

August 10, 2004

85 of 103

removing policy accommodation has become much higher. And as I noted in my earlier statements,
whether or not we pause at some point has to depend very much on the data; but I think the market
also has given us some signals that a pause would not be completely unexpected, so we shouldn’t
worry too much.
Finally, without piling it on, I don’t think it’s appropriate for us at this meeting just to decide
that part of our dual mandate is unimportant. I’m not sure we have the right or the authority to do
that, and I’m not sure that—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are we doing that?
MR. FERGUSON. No, I’m not suggesting that we are. I’m saying that a few members
have suggested that perhaps we are. But I know you would not tolerate that! [Laughter] I am
doing what a Board member should do, which is supporting the Chairman in reinforcing the law.
People have laughed about it, but to me it’s pretty clear that we have to be relatively symmetric in
our concern about both sides of the mandate. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I’m comfortable with the statement and with your
recommendation. I just want to raise a question about your “no surprises” rule. That’s not quite the
way you framed it. I’m a little uncomfortable being in a regime where we never surprise—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s not what I said.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. No, no, I’m not trying to say that you did.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, we purposely surprised the market in January 2001.
We structured our announcement so that the market would truly be surprised, as you may recall, by
moving the date up on when we actually made a move. So I’m not arguing that surprise has no

August 10, 2004

86 of 103

value. I’m basically saying that, if we have to surprise the market, by definition we are behind the
curve.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Well, with that qualification, I’m fine. I just say this
because we’re in a situation where the market is now pricing in moves of somewhat less than
25 basis points a meeting for the next two quarters, but we want to make sure that we have the
capacity to move at that pace, if not faster, without creating the risk of adverse surprise. We have
the tension of that. Maybe the data will save us from that problem because the markets may react to
the data by pricing in a somewhat steeper path than is priced in now. But we shouldn’t be in a
position, if on the eve of the next meeting we have a somewhat greater distribution of views about
the outcome for that meeting and there has been some fundamental change in our forecast, where
we’re constrained to move another 25 basis points. So I just offer that slight qualification on an
extreme version of the no-surprise doctrine. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have on occasion run into situations where there was a
50 percent probability of our moving one way or the other, which meant that no matter what we did,
it would be a significant surprise. That has not been the case recently. But I’m not sure we know
how to avoid that. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation, and I do like the wording in the
third revised version better than that in the previous drafts. I think the changes were positive.
That’s all I have to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the proposal to raise the funds rate 25 basis
points today and the idea that the default going forward should be to continue doing this on a regular

August 10, 2004

87 of 103

schedule. But I agree with Governors Kohn and Ferguson that our decisions should be datadependent. I am concerned about the downside risk and think that we might need to pause.
I prefer to include sustainable growth along with price stability in the final sentence. First of
all, I believe very strongly that we have a dual mandate, and that language reflects it. But beyond
that we have the sentence in line 3 that says, “The economy nevertheless appears poised to resume a
stronger pace of expansion going forward,” which is a rather confident statement that we feel we’ll
be able to continue on the path of raising rates. And I think the reference to sustainable growth
simply acknowledges that there is a slight downside risk to that forecast.
I understand the desire also to shift back to more formulaic language concerning risks and
away from the kind of explicit statement we’ve had about future policy, though I personally think
the latter approach has worked quite well. I was struck, however, by the difficulties of describing
the risks as I read the language in alternative C. I dislike the language in alternative C intensely; I
won’t go into the reasons right now. But as Governor Gramlich mentioned last time, the Committee
has thought about this issue quite thoroughly and has studied the options, and there are many
problems with the kind of dual risk assessment that is shown in alternative C. I can’t see going back
to that kind of language easily without a thorough discussion of the problems involved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I happen to agree with you on that. I think it’s a very
difficult issue, and it’s one that Vincent will discuss for a few minutes a little later. President
Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also support your recommendation for a
25 basis point increase in the fed funds rate target. And along with others I, too, like this version of
the language better than the original. I also like the fact that we’re not introducing a lot of change to

August 10, 2004

88 of 103

the language since every word we change is scrutinized in the market. So I am comfortable with
this proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you read the appropriate language, Mr. Secretary?
MR. BERNARD. First, with regard to the directive wording, which is on page 14 of the
Bluebook: “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth and output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1½ percent.”
I will also read the sentence regarding the assessment of risks, which the Committee is also
voting on. But before I get to that, I was asked to note that in box 4 under alternative B—and this, I
guess, would be the fourth revision—the end of that sentence which says “prices evidently reflect
transitory factors” should read “prices seem to reflect transitory factors.” What I will be reading
now is the language shown under June FOMC in boxes 5 and 6: “The Committee perceives the
upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the
next few quarters are roughly equal. With underlying inflation still expected to be relatively low,
the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be
measured. Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Please call the roll.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bernanke
Governor Bies
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

August 10, 2004

President Hoenig
Governor Kohn
President Minehan
Governor Olson
President Pianalto
President Poole

89 of 103

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vincent?
MR. REINHART. I have three brief items to bring to the Committee’s attention. Let me
deal with the two bureaucratic ones first. Dick Porter, now of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
conducted a survey of readers of the Bluebook to see how they felt about the content and the
distribution of that document. There are thirty-six separate responses from people at the Board and
the twelve Reserve Banks, expressing a very wide range of views. Indeed, the range is sufficiently
wide to make me glad you’re asked to vote on my appointment as Secretary only once a year!
[Laughter]
As to the content of the Bluebook, there were some suggestions about the structure that I
think we’ll be able to fold in over time. As to its distribution, there was widespread enthusiasm for
the Secure Document System as a way of delivering that document more quickly to the Reserve
Banks. But there were also some suggested changes, a few of which would involve changing the
FOMC’s Program for the Security of Information. A couple of the suggestions we can put in place
fairly quickly, including allowing access to SDS through laptops, given that NRAS provides a
sufficiently secure platform for that communication, and also allowing differential access to those
with Class I versus Class II access. So we’ll be doing that. As to the number of staff with access to
SDS, I got very conflicting guidance on that, so I’ve asked a couple of people here at the Board to
work with the research directors at the Reserve Banks to spell out some potential alternatives.
Second, I surveyed the Committee over the period on preferences regarding the special topic
for your two-day meeting in February. A clear winner emerged among the thirteen potential topics

August 10, 2004

90 of 103

I listed. Three out of four respondents listed a discussion of the Committee’s inflation goal as the
preferred item, with the second most cited item being a discussion of inflation targeting and
communications in third place. Anyway, I rated the responses by the order in which they were
cited. The inflation goal seemed to be the favorite topic. So Chairman Greenspan has asked me to
put that topic on the February agenda, with the intention of discussing the appropriate inflation goal
for the Committee and potential means to communicate it to the public, if appropriate.
Third, events evidently pushed further into the future your consideration of the structural
tension of the risk assessment paragraph that I discussed in a memo distributed to the Committee on
August 5. That is, the language about removing accommodation at a measured pace gives the
public some sense about the direction of rates independent of your assessment of risks to the
economy. You might want to bring more content into that economic assessment, which would be
especially important when the time comes to eliminate the removing accommodation sentiment but
might also be viewed as useful independent of that. I had one proposal to do so in my memo, and I
would appreciate your feedback over the next couple of weeks, as it will influence the policy
alternatives presented in the Bluebook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Vincent? If not, let me confirm the date of the
next meeting—September 21, 2004. This officially terminates the FOMC meeting, and I request
that the Board of Governors meet in my office to discuss requests for changes in the discount rate.
END OF MEETING

