September 21, 2004

1 of 100

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
September 21, 2004
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday,
September 21, 2004. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Poole
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guynn and Lacker, and Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard, Madigan, Slifman, Tracy, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors

September 21, 2004

Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. English, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Ms. Danker and Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistants to the Board, Division of
Monetary Affairs and Office of Board Members, respectively, Board of
Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Weinbach, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, and Goodfriend, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, and
Messrs. Rolnick and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Chicago, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York, Minneapolis, and
Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Bryan and Gavin, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland
and St. Louis, respectively

2 of 100

September 21, 2004

3 of 100

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
September 21, 2004
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes for our August 10 meeting?
MS. MINEHAN. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. Dino Kos.
MR. KOS.1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the charts that Carol
Low circulated a short time ago. In the intermeeting period, markets were generally
calm, and investors perceived events with a generally positive outlook. Despite the
Committee’s tightening of policy on August 10, yields fell across the coupon curve,
spreads narrowed, equities rose, and asset markets continued to exhibit unusually low
volatility.
The top panel on the first page graphs the three-month deposit rate in black and
the three-month rate three, six, and nine months forward in the dashed red lines since
mid-June. The cash rate rose commensurately with the increases in the target fed
funds rate. But forward rates have been falling gently at the same time, apparently as
the softer data and more-tepid corporate outlooks caused market participants to revise
their expected path of further monetary tightening.
The coupon curve has also declined. Two-year Treasury yields, which tend to be
very sensitive to the funds rate, held firm and actually declined a few basis points
since the last meeting, as shown in the middle left panel. But the ten-year yield
continued to fall. This morning the yield was at 4.07 percent, not far from the midMarch lows before the strong April employment report. At this point the ten-year
yield is again close to hitting levels that may trigger mortgage hedging activity that
could send yields lower.
In part the fall in yields seems associated with the softer data—the revised and
lower forecasts—and in part the persistence of high oil prices. The market is viewing
higher oil prices as a restraining force far more than as an inflationary one. The net
result is that the yield curve has continued to flatten. A flattening yield curve is not
unusual in a tightening cycle. But the typical pattern is that the short end rises faster
than the long end—which also rises. This cycle has had the anomalous situation in
which the very short end is rising and the rest of the curve is falling.
How unusual is this cycle? The top of page 2 graphs the change in the two-year
yield measured in basis points indexed to the date of the first tightening in recent
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

September 21, 2004

4 of 100

cycles—for 1994, the mini-cycle of 1997, 1999, and 2004. I did not include earlier
cycles given the different policy and operating environment prior to 1994. As this
graphs shows, the red line depicting 2004 stands out in that yields have fallen. We
see the same pattern for ten-year yields in the middle panel. Finally, the bottom panel
graphs the change in the swap spread also on the same basis. This last item has more
variability, but again this cycle stands out in that spreads have actually narrowed
since the beginning of the tightening cycle. Admittedly this is a limited sample, and
one can argue whether 1997 should even be included, but it is notable in any case that
the market’s reaction has progressively become more benign as the Committee has
become more transparent and the communications policy has evolved.
Moving to page 3, breakeven rates on TIPS have narrowed and that fall even
accelerated as the price of oil again headed higher in recent weeks. Whereas earlier
this year the correlation between TIPS breakevens and oil price changes was positive,
it has now turned negative—again suggesting that the economic tax of higher oil
prices is viewed as a more powerful force than its inflationary impact. The middle
panels graph corporate and emerging-market spreads, which continued to narrow.
Corporate issuance was on the low side, while investors’ search for yield continued.
And after a soggy July, equity prices have risen since your last meeting despite some
downbeat corporate outlooks, the summer slowdown in retail sales, and a buildup of
inventories in parts of the tech sector.
Extending this favorable picture is the continuing low volatility in many markets.
Page 4 graphs the implied volatility for the S&P 500, the major currency pairs, and
representative swaption contracts. These are similar to graphs I presented at the last
meeting, so I won’t go through them in any detail but only to note that implied
volatilities remain low and in some cases are going still lower. The VIX equity
implied volatility index is at about 14 percent, its lowest level in about a decade. This
combination of low volatility, narrow spreads, stable or rising equity prices, and
lower yields, even in the face of tightening monetary policy, is about as benign an
environment as one can imagine. What is unclear is whether this happy set of
conditions will persist or whether this is the calm before the storm.
One market that did see a bit of volatility during the intermeeting period was the
fed funds market. After my June briefing, when I described how the fed funds market
had become less volatile, this is a development I should have anticipated! [Laughter]
Ironically probably the main reason for the volatility around the time of the last
Committee meeting is the transparency of monetary policy and the confidence this
gives reserve managers at banks to buy reserves to meet requirements before a wellanticipated rate increase. I’d like to spend the rest of my briefing on this topic. But
let me step back a bit to summarize what we at the Desk do on a day-to-day basis.
Keeping the funds rate close to its target involves providing enough reserves over
a maintenance period to allow banks to achieve two objectives. First, the injected
reserves should allow the banks to meet all their requirements as well as their

September 21, 2004

5 of 100

precautionary demands for excess reserves. Second, the reserves need to be injected
at a measured pace to avoid undue risks that some banks will end any day overdrawn
or that some banks will accumulate so many reserves early in the maintenance period
that they risk holding unwanted excess levels by the end of the period. But managing
reserves becomes more complicated when there is a great degree of certainty
regarding changes to the target fed funds rate around FOMC meeting dates. When
the expectation of a potential rate hike becomes priced into the interest rate futures
market, these expectations also begin to show through to the funds rate in the days of
the maintenance period immediately prior to an FOMC meeting at which an increase
in the policy rate is anticipated. Reserve managers begin to shift their demand for
balances to meet more of their reserve requirements ahead of the meeting, when rates
are expected to be relatively cheap.
This reaction was exhibited during the reserve maintenance period leading up to
the August 10 increase in the fed funds target, as shown in the shaded portion of the
top panel on page 5. That panel depicts the target funds rate in black and the
effective rate in the horizontal red line, along with the highs and lows for each day.
With near certainty that the Committee would raise the target funds rate, the incentive
for reserve managers was to accumulate reserves and bid up the funds rate. The Desk
sought to lean against those pressures by adding more reserves than is typical at that
point in the reserve maintenance period. The green line in the bottom panel graphs
the average level of excess balances in that period compared with more-normal
levels, the blue line. Perhaps the funds rate would have been even firmer had we not
added the extra reserves. However, as we witnessed in that reserve maintenance
period, there are tradeoffs in how the Desk reacts to a widely anticipated rate hike.
The added reserves may be of limited effectiveness if expectations are very firm.
And any buildup of high cumulative excess reserve balances in the banking system
during the first half of the maintenance period will leave banks holding a much higher
than normal level of reserves than they typically want at that stage in a period once
the meeting date has passed. That could possibly set up conditions in which
downward pressure on rates would emerge—whether the funds target was raised at
the meeting or not.
This risk materialized after the August meeting because the Desk did not feel that
it had the scope to reduce cumulative excess positions following the meeting date.
Given the upcoming high payment flow day of the Treasury’s mid-quarter refunding
settlement on August 16, to do so seemed likely to exacerbate the expected upward
rate pressures anticipated on that day. As we witnessed during this period, the high
cumulative excess positions eventually led to very high levels of volatility. The latter
worked their way into trading as the end of the maintenance period approached, with
trading well below the new target rate as well. At the same time, it’s questionable
what impact the high levels of excess reserves provided early in the period had in
damping rate pressure before the change was announced. Evidence suggests that that
effect was only limited.

September 21, 2004

6 of 100

As the Desk will continue to face these challenges in a rising interest rate
environment, it may be prudent to battle firm trading conditions less aggressively
prior to a widely anticipated hike in the funds rate. While providing some level of
reserves in excess of median levels in the midst of firm trading may be warranted, we
are likely to be cautious in our provision, recognizing the risks that arise from high
cumulative balances subsequent to the actual rate movement.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign exchange operations in the period. I should
note that tomorrow will mark four years since the last intervention by the U.S.
monetary authorities. This continues the longest period of non-intervention by the
U.S. monetary authorities in the floating rate period. I will need a vote to approve
domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Shouldn’t your next-to-last sentence be, “Noted and
complimented”? [Laughter] Why do we bother intervening at all in the functioning of reserve
markets a week or so before an FOMC meeting?
MR. KOS. Well, that’s an excellent question. The charge that I at least believe I have
from this Committee is to achieve—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is readily changed. [Laughter]
MR. KOS. Well, okay. But in the regime under which we are now operating, as far as
I’m aware I’m expected to try to achieve the target fed funds rate every day. So despite the fact
that the market is expecting a higher funds rate, until the Committee decides to raise its rate
objective, we’re still working under the old directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If I might say so, it sounds absurd on the surface, and it
sounds absurd beneath the surface as well! [Laughter]
MR. REINHART. But, Mr. Chairman, the alternative would put Dino in the position of
giving a signal of your action at the upcoming meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All he needs to do is to state what his intentions are in
advance. In other words, he can indicate that he will supply a certain amount of reserves over a

September 21, 2004

7 of 100

specific period. The current approach is clearly not the optimal policy procedure. I’m not sure
it’s doing any harm or causing problems, but I can conceive of a situation in which we might
find that the injection of reserves on the upside or on the downside leads to an inadvertent effect
if an external event occurs in the process when you’re reestablishing the balance later in the
maintenance period.
MR. KOS. Well, what you’re suggesting would make our task easier. We felt somewhat
uncomfortable with the result in that final reserve maintenance period in August, so I think doing
what you suggest would make our life a lot easier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I make a request? I’d like to ask you and Vincent to
be a committee of two to do an analysis of this problem. And then will you submit possible
alternatives to the current procedure at the next FOMC meeting?
MR. KOS. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there agreement on that? Or would somebody like to
make a comment?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Of course, I have no objection to a study. But I think
Vincent has it right when he says that the implications of the regime you are proposing, which as
I understand it is for the Desk to pre-commit to some amount of reserves that it is going to add
independent of—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’m saying that may be a possibility. Let me put it to you
this way: All I can say is that, on the surface, the way we’re doing this now doesn’t seem right
to me. To be sure, we’ve gone through this experience several times, and it has had no adverse
consequences. The reason it has had no consequences, possibly, is that there were no intervening
events in the rest of the maintenance period that required an adjustment. Now, it may turn out

September 21, 2004

8 of 100

upon reviewing this issue that the existing policy has no alternative, but I doubt it. Let me
withdraw my request at this point because I had assumed the need to look at this was selfevident, but it is not self-evident. As a consequence, I think we ought to open the matter up for
further discussion. Are there any other comments on this issue? President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I’m totally confused here. I thought the volatility came about as a
result of Dino’s implementing the existing directive of the Federal Open Market Committee. I
would not like to see him implement anything other than that until the Committee meets and
adopts a new directive. Maybe I’m misunderstanding you. I must be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there have been very serious questions over the
years about whether the Desk should be trying to lock in the desired federal funds rate every
single day. So, first of all, the funds rate has not been at 1½ percent.
MS. MINEHAN. Correct. It hasn’t.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So whether that degree of rigidity should be involved here
is no longer an issue. It’s now a question of the degree of deviation from the objective, not
whether there should be any deviation. In that sense, if we want to read the directive explicitly,
Dino has breached the authority given him—which I’m glad he did.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes. I tend to think of it as two forces at work; there’s the market and
then there’s Dino. Dino is trying to do what we told him to do, and the market is trying to do
what it wants to do. I agree with you that there may be some way to look at an average target
over a period of days. I just thought you were saying that he—
MR. KOS. Well, I think it would be very awkward to have any kind of precommitment—I’m not sure if that’s the right word—about reserves unless we were to do that in
every period.

September 21, 2004

9 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There could be other ways of doing it. I don’t necessarily
see all of the commentary about Desk operations. Has anybody commented on specific
deviations from the funds rate target—other than the obvious anticipatory arbitrage against a
potential rise?
MS. PERELMUTER. No. This situation has arisen only around the FOMC meetings; it
is just in the maintenance period encompassing a meeting when this sort of activity begins. In
the previous period of this intermeeting interval we were, as you know, close to the 1½ percent
objective. But as soon as we got into the current maintenance period on Thursday, banks began
trying to build up reserves and to buy them cheaply. That’s all people are saying. And they
figure we’re managing reserves to meet demand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember, there’s another aspect of this. By Committee
desire, we have been changing the funds rate only at meetings. That was not the case in the past.
So there’s another element implicit in this to which the market is adjusting. All I’m saying,
though, is that the current practice does not seem to me to be the optimum, thoroughly thoughtout procedure to guard against the one single issue that we haven’t faced—a shock in the
maintenance period subsequent to the Committee’s decision.
MR. KOS. Having a two-week reserve maintenance period and operating on a daily
basis to achieve the funds target daily will result in the market trying to anticipate moves that
may happen within the maintenance period. It’s not a stable equilibrium. We’d have to give it
some thought, but I’m not sure what the obvious solution to that is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there are numerous people around this table who are
far more familiar with the actual mechanical operations on a day-by-day basis than I. But just

September 21, 2004

10 of 100

looking at the final result, it seems clear to me that something here doesn’t work as well as it
should and that there may be better ways of doing it. That’s all I’m saying.
MR. REINHART. We often consider alternative ways of implementing policy, and in
light of this discussion, the committee of two will look into the issue, for sure, Mr. Chairman. I
would just note another observation that Dino made in his briefing, which is that implied
volatilities are quite low. So the cost associated with a somewhat more volatile overnight rate
doesn’t have much consequence if the Committee also has anchored down expectations about the
target rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And no adverse event occurs during the maintenance
period. It’s only that that matters. There’s no credible argument, if there is no adverse event,
that these intra-maintenance-period fluctuations have any lasting significance, as best I can tell.
MR. REINHART. And I’d make another observation. If one looks at the pattern of fed
funds futures contracts, in the months in which there are no meetings scheduled, one can see that
the probability of an intermeeting move has gone down to as low as it gets. The Committee’s
decision to remove policy accommodation at a measured pace has signaled to markets that it’s a
decision that is made at meetings. So they have a fixed target, and that, therefore, puts Dino in
the sights of the fed funds traders. But the consequences, in normal times, seem fairly
manageable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. The way we operate, Dino is asked to supply reserves against two
different demand curves—a maintenance period demand curve and a daily demand curve. And
there’s a yield curve relationship within a maintenance period that ties the daily rates together.
To ask him to make the funds rate do this step function I think is asking a lot. That would be

September 21, 2004

11 of 100

asking him to disrupt markets to some extent on a day-to-day basis, pushing against the fear of
overdraft and the fear of lock-in on the part of banks. That doesn’t seem to make sense to me
either. To Vincent’s point, the fed funds futures market builds in an expectation of this step
function. What we’re asking Dino to do is not to fight against that. We’re not asking him to tip
our hand; we’re asking him to go along with what the yield curve says about what the rate is
going to do after the meeting. I don’t see that as prejudicing the Committee’s discretion.
MR. KOHN. I’m not sure.
MS. MINEHAN. I’m not sure.
MR. KOHN. I would be very, very careful about asking the Desk to do anything that
seemed to prejudge what our action would be at the next meeting. Moreover, it could be that the
cost of having the Desk not prejudge that—the cost of this very aggressive daily supply of
reserves, which we’ve gone to more and more over the last few years—is a little more
fluctuation in excess reserves. If the Desk supplies reserves on a daily basis, with contracts that
mature frequently, I’m not sure what the problem is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Should the Desk today and yesterday create sufficient
reserves to keep the funds rate at 1.5 percent?
MR. KOHN. Yes.
MS. MINEHAN. Why not?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He’s not doing it right.
MR. KOHN. Well, he’s trying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, wait a second. He has no limit on the amount of
reserves he can create at will. You cannot tell me he is trying and failing; he’s just not pushing
the button hard enough.

September 21, 2004

12 of 100

MR. KOS. Mr. Chairman, if I could? One thing that President Lacker pointed out is
that, if we operated more than once on the first day of the reserve maintenance period, we could
create as much reserves as possible, and we’d probably do a better job of achieving the target
rate on that first day. The cost of that, though, is that in subsequent days we might have a very
low funds rate for the rest of the reserve maintenance period. Therefore, over the period as a
whole we might have a rate that is below the target. So there is a tradeoff here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn’t mean to get into this. [Laughter] Unless others
wish to raise significant issues about this today, let me ask you the following: Does everybody
agree that this is a subject that we should at least get some further insight into and that we should
leave it to our two professionals in this area to advise us? Go ahead, Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. I just want to add one other point. One of the reasons this is happening is
that we’re communicating so well and we have a lot of credibility. Every desk manager and
every banker knows pretty much when rates are going to move, and we give them the luxury of a
two-week period in which to meet their required reserves. So when a bank has two weeks to
meet that requirement and can save 25 basis points on the cost of their reserves, management is
going to pick the time to do it. They would do the same if they were expecting us to drop rates
in a given maintenance period. So part of the problem is the luxury of the time they have—the
two-week maintenance period—to meet their average for required reserves. It may be
worthwhile to look at the length of the maintenance period again as part of this review because
the whole process of reserve management has really changed. This is a profit center operation in
a bank. They’re acting totally rationally, and I just don’t want to jeopardize the credibility that
we have in the market now.

September 21, 2004

13 of 100

Another question is how much the quarterly funding of the Treasury entered into the
picture in the recent period. Its occurrence in the same maintenance period probably also created
some of this unusual noise. In any event, I think we finally have gotten a lot of credibility in the
market, and we need to be really careful what we do. It may be that we ought to go back and
look at the fact that, especially in this period, banks have much lower reserve levels than they’ve
ever carried—they avoid reserves. They have such a low level of reserves, and there’s a large
amount of movement that the reserve desk can do every day in a bank. That’s another issue,
because banks are doing whatever they can to avoid reserves.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For the same reasons we’ve created the carry trade,
because if you lock in with some permanence one leg of it, that reduces the risk—
MR. KOS. Could I just make one small point? In a sense, after ’94 the Desk was taken
out of the business of signaling policy changes, which was a positive development.
MR KOHN. Absolutely.
MR. KOS. I think one thing we should be careful of is not to get back into that practice
by having either a signal or a non-signal be taken from what the Desk does. That would not be
something that I think this Committee would welcome. Certainly we at the Desk wouldn’t
welcome it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. I’ll pass. Governor Bies just said what I wanted to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. President Santomero, do you want to say a word
before we end?
MR. SANTOMERO. Let me just point out that there is a long literature on the
mechanics of our intervention on a daily basis. I support your notion of updating that literature

September 21, 2004

14 of 100

and looking into this; it might be useful. But this is not the first time we’ve looked at these kinds
of issues.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Strangely enough, it’s the first time, in my recollection,
that we have projected a potential path of monetary policy in a manner that was wholly credible
to the market, which is what has created this very unusual situation.
MR. SANTOMERO. I agree 100 percent. But there is a literature on this subject that we
can connect to. And the staff can do a good job of reviewing that and bring us up to date.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions on other issues to Dino? If not, would
somebody like to move to ratify the domestic transactions in the System account?
MR. POOLE. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection they are approved. David Stockton and
Karen Johnson, please.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judging by the standards of the
last few meetings, perhaps the biggest news is that we have made no major changes
to our Greenbook forecast since it was published last Wednesday. Of course, I’ll
admit that it helps when there are few data to get in our way. But even reaching back
to the August projection, much of the incoming data on production and spending
have, on balance, come in pretty much in line with our earlier expectations that the
expansion would regain its footing as we moved into the second half. Indeed, last
week’s release of industrial production indicates that a solid expansion remains under
way in the factory sector. Manufacturing output increased ½ percent last month after
an upward-revised increase of nearly 1 percent in July, and gains in recent months
have been widespread across industries. Reports from regional and national
purchasing managers have been similarly upbeat. For the quarter as a whole, factory
output appears likely to increase 6¼ percent at an annual rate.
Likewise, the spending data have, for the most part, remained firm. Purchases of
light motor vehicles averaged nearly 17 million units at an annual rate in July and
August, about ½ million units above the pace of the first half of the year. These
figures along with the retail sales data put real PCE on track for a 3¾ percent increase
in the current quarter, considerably faster than the 1½ percent pace registered in the
second quarter. Housing starts—just released this morning—reached 2 million units
at an annual rate in August. Ongoing strength was especially evident in the single-

September 21, 2004

15 of 100

family sector, where starts edged up to 1.67 million units from an already elevated
level. Business spending, as well, looks to be advancing smartly. Orders and
shipments for a broad variety of capital goods have been moving up, and backlogs of
unfilled orders in many industries have continued to mount. Real spending on
equipment and software is projected to increase 13 percent in the current quarter,
about in line with the sizable second-quarter advance. Meanwhile, nonresidential
construction activity has surprised us to the upside, and the odds are looking better
for a continuation of the recovery that appears to have gotten under way earlier this
year. Even the government is chipping in, led by a surge in current-quarter outlays
for defense. All in all, the catalogue of positive developments has been encouraging
that the expansion is not faltering. On balance, the incoming data leave our estimate
for the level of real GDP in the current quarter about the same as projected in the
August Greenbook.
If that is all that had transpired over the past six weeks, this would have been a
reasonably quiet forecast round. But it was not. At the considerable risk of finding
myself classified in the taxonomy of Governor Schwarzenegger as an economic
girlie-man, [laughter] let me admit to harboring some pessimistic perspectives on
recent developments. While near-term GDP was not much affected by the incoming
data, we had to deal with a slug of incoming information that suggested to us that the
economy has less momentum going forward than we had previously been expecting.
Chief among our concerns has been the employment situation. Gains in payroll
employment in recent months have been well short of our earlier expectations. At the
time of the August Greenbook, we were projecting employment gains to average
about 300,000 per month in the second half. With two months of data now in hand,
private payrolls appear more likely to increase in the neighborhood of 120,000 per
month in the current quarter, and we have lowered our fourth-quarter projection to
gains of 200,000 per month. A higher workweek and somewhat larger increases in
average hourly earnings have provided some offset to the weak hiring, but we still
have a substantial shortfall in labor income in recent months relative to our August
expectations. In addition, wage and salary income was revised down considerably in
the first half of this year on the basis of unemployment insurance tax records. Those
revisions and the weaker employment gains of recent months have pushed the
personal saving rate below 1 percent in the current quarter—nearly ¾ percentage
point below our August projection. All else being equal, the lower level of income
implies somewhat greater restraint on consumption going forward, and thus a steeper
rise in the saving rate than we had incorporated in our previous projection.
Another negative for the outlook was the loss of prospective stimulus from
inventory investment. The pace of stockbuilding in the second quarter of this year
now appears to have been considerably faster than was estimated last month. That
step-up in the pace of stockbuilding along with weaker final sales appears to have
brought inventories into more comfortable alignment with sales sooner than we had
been expecting. Indeed, in our August projection, inventory investment was a source
of stimulus to production in the second half of this year. It now appears that the bulk

September 21, 2004

16 of 100

of that stimulus is already behind us. We have also had to contend with less
favorable news from the technology sector. The recent shipments figures for
computers and communications equipment were to the soft side of our expectations.
Moreover, reports from a number of leading technology companies have been
relatively downbeat about the outlook for earnings and sales. Intel, Cisco, and
Gartner Group have all indicated some deterioration in near-term prospects. There
has also been a noticeable slowing in the pace of high-tech production, concentrated
in computers and semiconductors. We do not believe that these developments are
signaling the start of a serious slump, but they have led us to temper our outlook for
high-tech investment this year and next. Proving that we can find dark clouds on
even the brightest horizon, the recent lower-than-expected readings on price inflation
implied that our August path for the nominal federal funds rate was, in real terms,
exerting a bit more restraint on demand over the projection period.
Putting these pieces together, we had a forecast in which no progress was made in
reducing the margin of slack in resource utilization and in which price inflation
notched still lower. That outcome led us to flatten the assumed trajectory for the
funds rate by 50 basis points by the end of next year—an adjustment that was
sufficient by our reckoning to result in a gradual reduction in the output gap. I should
note that market participants also appear to have marked down their expectations for
policy at the end of next year by a similar amount. As a consequence, we still have a
shallower assumed uptrend for the funds rate than is currently embedded in fed funds
futures. In our projection, the funds rate is assumed to move up to 2¼ percent by the
end of next year and to 2¾ percent by the end of 2006—an endpoint roughly 60 basis
points below current market expectations.
We see several key features of the current economic landscape as suggesting to us
that such a gradual tightening of policy will be sufficient to contain inflation
pressures while promoting an eventual elimination of the output gap. First, fiscal
policy is expected to swing from the substantial stimulus of the past three years to
mild restraint in 2005. We are probably already experiencing the front edge of that
diminishing stimulus. In our projection, fiscal policy over the next year is doing
some of the work that would otherwise be required of monetary policy. Second, as I
noted earlier, the reversal of the low level of the saving rate imposes restraint on
spending going forward. Not only is the current level of the saving rate below our
estimate of the target, but the target itself is likely to be moving higher as interest
rates increase. Third, the external sector is expected to be a considerable drag on
activity in the United States, as domestic and foreign demands are increasingly
directed away from U.S. producers. By 2006, real net exports are expected to knock
more than ⅔ percentage point off the growth of real GDP. Karen will have more to
say on this issue shortly, but suffice it to say here that our widening external deficit
creates a stiff headwind for the economy. Finally, our shallow path for the funds rate
also reflects our relatively optimistic outlook for price inflation. In our projection,
the remaining margin of slack in resource utilization, a small decline in domestic
energy prices, and a leveling out of non-oil import prices result in an edging down of

September 21, 2004

17 of 100

projected core consumer price inflation from about 1½ percent this year to 1¼
percent over the four quarters of 2006.
Even with our revisions, we see some clear downside risks to the projection.
While the incoming data have been encouraging of the view that the soft patch is
receding, the data have hardly been definitive on that point. The run-up of energy
prices this year could well be exerting greater restraint on household spending than
we have allowed for in our projection. Moreover, it has created yet another source of
uncertainty with which businesses must cope. Indeed, the vocabulary of business
caution seems to have crept back into discussions of the hiring and capital spending
plans of our industry contacts. If these concerns are more pervasive or more severe
than we have implicitly recognized in the projection, the soft patch could prove more
persistent in coming months.
Of course, we readily concede that we may have overreacted to some of the softer
economic indicators of recent months. There are a number of reasons that one could
be concerned that the low level of the funds rate assumed in our projection will
stimulate faster economic growth, higher price inflation, or both. For one, simple
historical relationships between the real funds rate and the output gap suggest that the
level of the funds rate assumed in our projection has, on average in the past, resulted
in a much more rapid closing of the output gap than we are forecasting. We used
such a simple relationship to calibrate an alternative simulation for the Greenbook,
and the accompanying surge in demand in that simulation not only closed the output
gap but resulted in some overshooting of potential by the middle of next year. Our
problem with adopting something like this for the baseline is that we don’t currently
see the harbingers—stronger asset-price appreciation, a weaker exchange value of the
dollar, or more-rapid increases in interest-sensitive spending—that we think would
both signal and stimulate a more vigorous track for activity.
Another resolution to this possible tension is that the output gap could already be
much smaller than we are estimating. In other words, the low real funds rate of the
past few years may already have done its work. Of course, the implication going
forward is that the economy has less room to grow than we think. Again, we
illustrated this possibility with an alternative simulation that embodied a higher
estimate of the NAIRU and a lower estimate of the trend rate of labor force
participation. On our assumed path for the funds rate, the economy again overshoots
potential, and core price inflation moves up steadily from current levels. Such an
outcome is, no doubt, plausible. Our ability to measure the economy’s productive
potential is limited, and the profession has not distinguished itself in this endeavor in
the past. Moreover, some employers are reporting that it has become difficult to
locate workers with the skill sets that they need, providing a hint that the labor market
may be tighter than we are estimating. But in the end, we are unpersuaded. The
participation rate and the employment–population ratio are very low, and the declines
in those measures in recent years coincided with the weakening labor market. Also,
survey evidence suggests that, while household and business perceptions of the labor

September 21, 2004

18 of 100

market have improved, those perceptions remain well short of the conditions that
prevailed at other times when inflation pressures emerged.
The actual inflation data themselves are considerably more ambiguous on the
question of whether we have overshot potential. Certainly, the recent data have been
more encouraging. After hitting a high of 2¼ percent at annual rate in March, the
three-month change in the core PCE price index through August appears to have
receded to below 1 percent. Just as the earlier pace likely overstated the emergence
of inflation pressures this year, the most recent figures probably overstate the
dissipation of those pressures. Our best guess is that the underlying pace of core
consumer price inflation is about 1½ percent at present. That still represents some
pickup from last year’s 1¼ percent pace. We believe the acceleration in core prices
this year can largely be explained by the indirect effects of the steep increases in
energy prices and by the larger increases in import prices. But we can’t rule out the
possibility that labor and product markets are tighter than we currently estimate.
In sum, we are expecting moderate above-trend growth, moderate erosion of the
output gap, a moderate drop in inflation, all brought about by a moderate rise in the
federal funds rate. Yes, we too know that it will never come to pass; but we are
satisfied that we have produced a forecast in which we don’t know the most likely
direction of the surprises.
Before handing the baton to Karen, let me return to the dark clouds for a moment.
Here, I don’t mean the ones that the staff has conjured about the outlook, but rather
the ones real people see when they look out the window. As the Greenbook went to
press last week, Hurricane Ivan had yet to make landfall. The storms of the past
month are bound to leave an imprint on the economic data, though most of the effects
will be on the income side of the accounts. A big jump in economic depreciation is
likely to be matched by lower rental income, lower proprietors’ income, and reduced
corporate profits. As far as real activity is concerned, we simply don’t have enough
information yet to reach an informed judgment about the possible magnitude of any
effects on spending or production. But as devastating as these events have been for
so many people, we are not expecting the effects to be large enough or persistent
enough to have any implications for your policy.
MS. JOHNSON. The baseline forecast for real output growth in the rest of the
world is little changed from that in the August Greenbook. This is the case despite
substantial market volatility of, and much media attention to, global oil prices. The
primary reason is that despite the intermeeting fluctuations, the path of oil prices
implicit in futures prices showed little net change from the path incorporated in the
August Greenbook. We did look very carefully at the question of how the effects of
elevated oil prices are likely to be distributed across foreign economies. And there
are differences among industrial countries, emerging-market economies, net oil
importers, and net oil exporters. Nevertheless, the basic common elements of
reduced oil intensity in several foreign countries, especially the foreign industrial

September 21, 2004

19 of 100

countries, and well-anchored inflation expectations in most important foreign
economies, along with the expectation that only a portion of the spike in spot prices
will prove to be persistent, have led us and most forecasters to judge that the output
effects of recent oil market developments will be limited.
Our initial projection for growth abroad in 2006 is that foreign real GDP will
expand at about 3¼ percent, a slight deceleration from the 3½ percent annual pace of
the second half of this year. Among the industrial countries, most of the stepdown in
growth is accounted for by Canada and the United Kingdom, countries whose
economies have been expanding particularly rapidly, closing their output gaps, and
that need to bring growth in line with potential in order to avert the emergence of
inflationary pressures. The central banks of both those countries have already moved
to tighten policy, with the Bank of Canada tightening 25 basis points earlier this
month and the Bank of England increasing rates by a total of 125 basis points since
mid-2003. Some deceleration is also projected for the Asian developing economies
on average, particularly in Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, and Indonesia. Elevated oil
prices are boosting headline inflation abroad, but core price inflation, where data are
available, appears to be well contained. Over the forecast period, we expect inflation
abroad to decline gradually as oil prices reverse some of their recent run-up and as
food prices, which have been a factor in Asia, retreat in response to increased supply,
and as monetary tightening in Brazil and Mexico have some effect.
Extension of the forecast horizon to the end of 2006 allows the effects of returns
to near-trend growth here and in most regions abroad to show through to our
projections for real net exports, the nominal trade deficit, and the current account
deficit. The consequences of weakness in activity here and abroad earlier, past dollar
depreciation, and sharp swings in oil and nonfuel commodity prices will have been
pretty much fully felt by the end of 2005. For this forecast, we have projected
slightly more rapid depreciation of the dollar than previously, with the broad dollar
decline averaging nearly 1½ percent in real terms in 2005 and 2006. We judge that
such an outcome in relative income here and abroad and in price competitiveness of
U.S. goods would lead to a widening of the nominal U.S. trade deficit of about $90
billion from its current average through the last quarter of 2006. In addition,
prospective increases in market dollar interest rates, along with other factors, imply
that U.S. net investment income will move into deficit, declining nearly as much as
the trade deficit over the same period. As a result, our projection for the current
account balance widens from about $700 billion this quarter to nearly $880 billion in
the fourth quarter of 2006, reaching about 6½ percent of GDP. In real terms, there is
an equivalent deterioration. The positive contribution from real exports to overall
GDP growth slowly diminishes from more than 0.8 percentage point this year to less
than 0.7 percentage point in 2006. And the negative contribution from imports
remains above 1 percentage point, reaching 1.3 percentage points over the four
quarters of 2006. There is thus a persistent subtraction from U.S. GDP growth that
arises from the external sector and that reaches about ⅔ percentage point in 2006.
The slight deceleration in real export growth primarily reflects a lessening of the past

September 21, 2004

20 of 100

impetus coming from relative prices, particularly from the exchange rate. Similarly,
the strengthening in real import growth arises largely from a relative price boost. Of
course, real export growth would have to exceed that of real imports substantially at
this point for real net exports to have a neutral effect on the forecast for U.S. GDP
growth.
Only a few forecasters have added 2006 to their outlooks. Although we are not
absolutely alone in anticipating a marked deterioration in the external balance over
the next two years, many forecasters currently call for little change from this year to
next. For example, the average current account deficit polled by Consensus Forecasts
is about $625 billion for both 2004 and 2005. Of course, some of the individual
outlooks in that average call for the deficit to widen, but some actually project a
narrowing. Plus, a number above $800 billion for 2006 seems to be way off the radar
screen of most forecasters.
Our view that the current account deficit will widen into rather startling new
territory reflects the large size that the deficit has already reached and our projected
path for the dollar. Trend growth here and abroad is consistent with the deficit
widening further unless relative prices change, and the present large deficit means
that the decline in the nominal balance moves quickly as likely growth rates yield
rapidly diverging exports and imports. This poses a severe challenge to us with
respect to our projection for the exchange value of the dollar in the baseline forecast.
For some time we have taken to heart the results of research that we and others
have done that shows that structural models of the exchange rate have little
forecasting power. Accordingly, we have incorporated into the forecast paths for the
real value of the dollar that are nearly flat, with some slight trend at times to signal
features of the maintained assumption about U.S. monetary policy or our ongoing
concern that the financing of the U.S. external deficit would ultimately result in
downward pressure on the dollar. But that strategy now results in the external sector
having a very prominent effect on the top-line GDP path. Moreover, as the numbers
we are writing down get larger and larger, we are beginning to have doubts that
financial markets will be able to manage them easily. However, no clearly better
alternative comes to mind. If we arbitrarily projected a path for the dollar that
minimizes the negative effects coming from the external sector, then we would be
masking an important feature of the U.S. macroeconomy, and that dollar path, rather
than net exports, would become the essence of the international forecast. Because we
do not believe that we truly can project when any major change in the value of the
dollar will happen, in particular whether it will happen within the forecast interval,
we do not see any basis on which we could follow that strategy. For now, we have
used the alternative simulation in the Greenbook to suggest to you what would be the
consequences of a sharp move in the dollar sometime in the forecast period. As
awareness of the looming external deficits becomes more widespread, we may see
more clues in financial markets as to what to expect from them. Dave and I would be
happy to answer any of your questions.

September 21, 2004

21 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For the first time, Karen, you seem to be painting a shortterm picture of an unsustainable pattern in the current account deficit. As I have listened to you
in the past, the issues as I’ve heard them are that we always talk of the need for a much higher
rate of increase in exports than imports to close the huge existing gap between them. You are
now raising a somewhat more subtle issue in which it is not only the gap but the absolute size of
the foreign trade magnitudes relative to GDP that have an accelerating impact. In other words, if
we had a very small external sector but a very large difference between imports and exports, the
percentage of the current account deficit to GDP would be small despite that sizable percentage
difference in the growth of exports and imports. But now that the trade numbers are getting
larger and larger in absolute terms, their impact on GDP—other things being equal with regard
to the ratio of imports to exports—is becoming ever larger and a source of increasing instability.
The reason is that, as the current account deficit continues to widen because the growth of
exports fails to exceed that of imports, the bases of both are changing. And if under such
conditions the deficit is rising relative to the GDP, we have an arithmetically unsustainable
pattern even in the short run.
MS. JOHNSON. Well, I like to avoid the words “unsustainable” or “sustainable”
because then you’ll ask me what makes something sustainable and I can’t answer that question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’m not asking a question, I’m just making a statement.
MS. JOHNSON. I absolutely agree with everything you said.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Am I inferring correctly what you say?
MS. JOHNSON. Yes. And where we saw it most clearly was when it came time to look
at the contribution of those numbers to GDP. In the past, there were those of us, such as myself,

September 21, 2004

22 of 100

who were somewhat of a Cassandra regarding the external deficit, but we were talking tenths of
a percentage point one way or another in terms of the effect on GDP. The notion that the effect
would get swamped by the unanticipated ups and downs that would come along in the forecast
period was always present, and the external sector didn’t seem to be creating a situation that
would strike financial market participants as unmanageable.
This time, as we worked our way through preliminary runs of the forecast, the negative
contribution from the external sector got up to be almost 1 percentage point of GDP. Well, we
finally settled on something a bit smaller for 2006. But 1 percentage point of GDP gets one’s
attention; in fact, ⅔ percentage point of GDP gets my attention. So the reason that this seemed
an opportune time to call extra attention to that point is that, when we first extend the forecast
horizon, as we have now into 2006, it gives us a longer time period over which these kinds of
forces are having their effect. This is a very inertial process, so one has to look ahead more than
just a few quarters to see its consequences.
We don’t know much else about 2006, so we don’t have information that would lead us
to say, “Oh, a U.S. recession is going to cause imports to fall,” or “A crisis in Asia is going to
cause capital inflows to be particularly high.” We don’t know what kinds of other random
events are going to occur in 2006. All we’re seeing is this long-lasting fundamental process, and
we’re seeing it very clearly. Surely, the numbers we’re forecasting right now for 2006 will not
actually happen; I fully appreciate that. But they will be embedded in what does happen, and
this is an opportunity to see them more clearly before the outlook gets complicated by other
developments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that’s a very useful insight.

September 21, 2004

23 of 100

MR. STOCKTON. Let me just provide a little domestic-side perspective on that.
Obviously, one of the issues that we were struggling with in this projection is that we have a
surprisingly shallow trajectory for the funds rate. And you might wonder why that isn’t showing
through more forcefully in this forecast, but it is on the domestic spending side. We have for
private domestic demand an acceleration of 1¼ percent this year, which moves up to 4½ percent
next year and to 4¾ percent in 2006. The reason that isn’t showing through to top-line GDP and
production is that, on our dollar and net export forecast, a lot of that demand is showing up in
demands for producers abroad not in demands for producers domestically.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have one quick question on energy issues. On virtually
all the previous occasions when oil prices went up, it was difficult to distinguish between rising
prices of gasoline and home heating oil and rising crude import prices. So the estimate of the tax
effect from imported crude and the impact of gasoline prices on PCE gave roughly the same
answers, as I recall. We have an unusual test period in the second and third quarters of this
year—in fact, probably all of this year—in which, because of the huge differential spreads in
refinery marketing, we’re getting different results. Does that enable us to econometrically
differentiate where the real impact is? In other words, does it show up in the equations in
shortfalls of consumption expenditures as a consequence of the rise in gasoline prices or a later
rise in crude oil prices? Or is it too soon to make that judgment?
MR. STOCKTON. I think I can say unequivocally that on the econometric side a couple
of months of extra data are not going to allow us to identify these things. Now, there is an
interesting coincidence that consumption was especially weak not only as oil prices were rising
but as margins were increasing substantially, and there was some improvement in consumption
in August, as margins shrank very dramatically and prices came down. So there could be some

September 21, 2004

24 of 100

small nod in the direction that you suggested, but it would be hard for us to distinguish those
relationships. One reason to be a little skeptical about just using a model run—model multipliers
on the energy effects—has been that we don’t see the offsetting strength in drilling activity.
Drilling activities improved and improved noticeably, but not as much as we would have
expected especially given that far-dated futures have increased quite a bit. So there could be
more restraining effects of higher oil prices this time around than has been true, on average, in
the past because we’re not getting some of the natural offsets that occur.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. An interesting question is whether drilling is a function of
profits at the production level, which one has always assumed to be the case, or if the aggregate
consolidated profit is more relevant. I say that because the implication here is that the propensity
to spend out of the refining marketing margin may be much lower than the propensity to spend
out of the profits from crude and natural gas production, which would signal another way of
coming at this particular issue. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. I have a question for David. I think one way of summarizing the
Greenbook forecast is to say that the equilibrium real federal funds rate that is implicit in that
forecast is very low. As I read it, it’s on the order of 1 percent, which I interpret as very
depressed relative to the equilibrium real funds rate that would be implicit in the FRB/US model,
for example. I would find it helpful if you could pinpoint what the source of this divergence is.
By that I mean which components of spending or aggregate demand do you see as particularly
depressed relative to what the FRB/US model would predict? Where are the model’s residuals
large? A related question, in light of the comment that you just made, involves the gap between
the Greenbook forecast and the FRB/US model forecast of the exchange rate. Simply running
the model, given what has happened to net exports, I suspect that one would predict a substantial

September 21, 2004

25 of 100

decline in the real exchange rate. The Greenbook is projecting a much flatter path of the real
exchange rate. Is it because net exports are the big source of the divergence that you have the
very low equilibrium funds rate?
MR. STOCKTON. To start with the last question, just as a benchmark we ran an
alternative model simulation in which the real exchange rate depreciated at a 5 percent annual
rate over the forecast period, in contrast to the 1½ percent decline that we’ve actually built into
the forecast. That 5 percent decline produced enough additional growth and a little extra
inflation so that, if one were to apply a Taylor rule to that outcome, the funds rate path would be
just about on track with current market expectations. So that certainly would be one way to
reconcile the difference between our forecast and current market expectations of the funds rate.
MS. YELLEN. And is that what the FRB/US model would predict?
MR. STOCKTON. Yes, that was with FRB/US. I would say that Karen, if she were to
run FRB/Global, might come up with slightly different estimates, but we do see that as an
important element. Now, in terms of explaining the difference between the implicit equilibrium
funds rate in the staff forecast and that which FRB/US would produce, a couple of things stand
out. One is that interest-sensitive spending in the judgmental projection looks soft relative to
what the model would expect. Interestingly enough, that’s surprisingly so in household interestsensitive spending; the model wants to see considerably stronger housing investment and also
stronger consumer durables. The model also thinks that—take it for what it’s worth—the stock
market should be stronger and the exchange rate should be weaker. Those actually are the three
most important components of the difference in how we see the outlook from what the model
would expect. In both cases of projecting asset values—for both the stock market and the

September 21, 2004

26 of 100

exchange rate—we’ve taken a sort of neutral approach to the forecast. But there are reasons for
being skeptical about that going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. My question actually relates to this last discussion. I want to ask about
the alternative simulation on the international side—the 30 percent decline in the real value of
the broad dollar index. When I saw the results, I was a little surprised that they weren’t more
serious in that 30 percent depreciation scenario. But then I saw the sentence you had there
indicating that the shock did not incorporate any of the potential impact on the U.S. economy
through the confidence of business or consumers or through higher risk premiums on private
domestic asset prices. So I was wondering if you could give us the benefit of your thinking on
that as to what magnitudes we should expect here.
MS. JOHNSON. Unless you happen to have an urn and a few balls that I can select
from, I don’t think I’m in any better position than you are to judge that outcome. When we have
in some previous Greenbook simulations—or in the June FOMC presentation, for example—
added an asset market disruption and volatility as a consequence of a change in the dollar, it is
always just very arbitrary on our part. There’s no systematic link that we’ve been able to
discover in the data between the exchange rate and these other things. A lot depends on the
exogenous shock, if you will, that gives rise to the exchange rate change. So to mimic a world in
which people became less confident about U.S. assets, we put in higher risk-premium terms and
things that drive the stock market, and we get out some disruptive effects. But the dollar could
move as a result of a world in which productivity gains finally started showing up in other
countries—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or ours unwind.

September 21, 2004

27 of 100

MS. JOHNSON. Yes. But I’m looking at a scenario that would have a net positive
shock to the global economy so that it’s not that our incomes in the future are likely to be lower
but that foreign incomes appear likely to be higher. Foreign assets look as if they should be
valued more highly. The relative differential shows through to cause the dollar to fall, but on
balance, it is a more favorable foreign outlook rather than a less favorable U.S. outlook that
produces that effect. You’d get a very different story if the dollar were to fall for political
reasons that could be driven by safe-haven concerns, which would tend to drive down U.S. longterm interest rates somewhat, as we saw in ’97 and ’98. Alternatively, the dollar could fall for
anti-U.S. political reasons, and presumably people would then be selling U.S. bonds as well as
U.S. dollars. So the mix is all over the map. The dollar itself is just a reflection of what that
underlying shock might be, as would be the case with stock prices and with the long-term
interest rate. We can arbitrarily put those shocks into the model and get out the answers, but
basically we feel why bother the model? We could just write down the answers. That’s in
essence what we’d be doing, so we’ve shied away from it.
MR. MOSKOW. If we had this sharp drop in the dollar, you point out that it would
affect confidence of U.S. business firms and U.S. consumers. How would you see that playing
through?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, presumably that would lead to a step-up in the U.S. saving rate.
We would get some benefit from a dollar decline. Remember, a drop in the dollar is a very
expansionary shock to the U.S. economy. When we run that shock sort of naked, the way we did
this time, and ask the model what the outcome would be, the Taylor rule wants monetary
tightening. And we still get some more output and some more inflation because it’s a very
expansionary shock. But if it happens in the context of something like a loss of confidence,

September 21, 2004

28 of 100

these residuals that were just being discussed presumably would go up in other countries, too—
ones without all of the attributes of the United States, such as Brazil, Argentina, and Korea.
These kinds of shocks tend to be associated not with expansionary macroeconomic
outcomes but with recessionary macroeconomic outcomes because, despite the fact that the
exchange rate gets a relative price boost, these other events cause such havoc and disrupt fiscal
policy and so forth that there’s often monetary tightening to counter the inflationary effects. But
also there’s stress in the financial markets and stress in investment spending, and fiscal policy
gets off track and, all in all, you get a recession movement, not an expansion, despite the
exchange rate shock. So out of context, it’s just very difficult to put these added features into the
equation along with the exchange rate. One could do dozens of these simulations, and I would
have no way of attaching probabilities to them, to be honest.
MR. BERNANKE. I think the difference between us and Korea is that they borrow in
foreign currencies whereas we borrow in our own currency.
MS. JOHNSON. Right.
MR. BERNANKE. So a depreciation of their currency creates balance sheet effects.
MS. JOHNSON. It has some balance sheet effects that complicate the household sector’s
problems and the nonfinancial corporate sector’s problems, and typically there are some balance
sheet effects that threaten the banking system. Now, for sure, we don’t think that a depreciation
in the dollar would have serious consequences for the U.S. banking system. In June I mentioned
that, given the information we had, the balance sheet effects from a dollar depreciation appeared
to be abroad rather than at home. Dollar-denominated assets would become less valuable
abroad, but balance sheets in the United States would tend to be more or less dollar neutral

September 21, 2004

29 of 100

because the dollar is on both sides. It would be a complicated picture. But the confidence
effects and other aspects of the story depend very much on the precipitating shock.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I have many of the same questions. Let me just raise a couple of
issues. The first is on the investment income swing that shows up in the capital account. I don’t
profess to be anywhere near an expert on this, but I had always thought that those numbers are
typically positive because we generally make more money abroad than foreigners make here.
Does that swing from time to time, and is this just a normal swing, or is this telling us something
significant?
MS. JOHNSON. The holdings abroad need to be divided into two basic categories, one
of which is the net foreign direct investment story and the other is the portfolio—that is, stocks
and bonds and bank claims. What you’ve described has characterized the foreign direct
investment portfolio. We have, on average, earned higher rates of return on our holdings of
foreign direct investments than foreign investors in the United States have earned on theirs. That
has been a big source, and will continue to be a big source, of net positive income into the U.S.
current account. It is ironic that we’ve become the world’s biggest debtor and nonetheless we’ve
actually been recording, at times, positive income flows. That is because much of the bond
portfolio is dollar-denominated. There are very few—some, but not a lot—foreign-currencydenominated bonds issued by U.S. corporations; they are mostly dollar-denominated bonds. And
interest rates on those have been quite low. So even though the position has deteriorated—
basically, rather severely—from 1995, the net income actually stopped deteriorating and was
quite flat for a while, owing to the low interest rates. In principle, if the interest rates were

September 21, 2004

30 of 100

actually zero, one could see that that whole part of the portfolio wouldn’t matter at all. So the
notion that we earn more on direct investment is still present in the data and in our forecast. But
as we apply somewhat higher interest rates to the bond part and the bank deposit part, we finally
see the consequences of being a big net debtor starting to overwhelm this direct investment
portion of the position.
MS. MINEHAN. I have just one other question. For many countries around the world, a
lot of their growth ends up being export oriented and we’re the big importer. So there is a kind
of codependence between us and the rest of the world as regards the value of the dollar. The
numbers get awful, but how does that codependence unwind?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, one of the features in the Greenbook simulation, going back to
the prior question, is the model’s ability to say that foreign policymakers act in a way that speaks
to this codependence. One problem that we face collectively in the global economy is that the
low interest rate environment for all concerned does limit the capacity of foreign central banks to
stimulate domestic demand as they lose external demand. So zero-bound problems become quite
relevant, as we highlighted especially in the paper that we circulated ahead of the June meeting.
The most immediate and direct device we have for undoing the codependence is to get domestic
demand abroad stronger and to do that through monetary policy stimulation; but that’s limited to
some degree by zero-bound problems. And when we run these model simulations, we tend to hit
the zero bound, particularly in the euro area, say, where the policy rate is sitting at 2 percent
right now. And, of course, Japan is already in the vicinity of the zero bound, so there’s not a lot
of scope for stimulating domestic demand.
If I wanted to, I could tell a happy story. There are plenty of happy stories. We’ve been
through this before—in the 1980s—and we’ve lived through the past decade. The world hasn’t

September 21, 2004

31 of 100

stopped turning; even the financial markets haven’t stopped turning. There’s a lot of potential in
the developing world for capital accumulation, either financed out of the high saving rates of
those countries or financed out of foreign direct investment that doesn’t keep flowing into the
United States but goes to China, to the rest of Asia, and maybe even to Brazil and other Latin
American countries. There’s a lot of potential in Brazil. There have been investment bank
articles that I’m sure some of you have seen about how fifty years from now China, India, and
Brazil are going to be the dominant economies in the globe. If that capital accumulation is
realized, that’s domestic demand in the rest of the world. The market economies of the globe
can handle all that; there’s no reason to think that it can’t lead to a quite benign resolution of the
circumstances we’re now in. But that’s terribly complicated, more by politics, property rights,
infrastructure, and those kinds of issues than by anything inherent in this imbalance problem.
MS. MINEHAN. We’ve raised an issue of very outsized numbers and the potential for
financial instability. But there seems little we can do here in this country on the monetary policy
side—possibly a lot we could do on the fiscal policy side but not on the monetary policy side.
MS. JOHNSON. The essential monetary policy contribution, it seems to me, is to keep
U.S. inflation low and U.S. output as close to potential at a sustainable rate as possible. This is
what you would do in any event.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not quite. Now, if I believed in the efficacy of
intervention, which I do not, it would not surprise me to be sitting here and observing the
sequence of events that Dino has described this morning. Dino is talking about reductions in
volatility and related increases in stability. We’re looking at an extraordinarily stable system in
which there is a benign response to 75 basis points—or will be. [Laughter] Well, I’m not prone
to avoid making forecasts!

September 21, 2004

32 of 100

The question that I think arises is whether, on the basis of history as Karen points out, we
can get through these periods without crises, as a developing literature around the world
suggests. If there were a way in which we could move the dollar’s exchange rate down
significantly in a manner that had no secondary effects, would we not want to accomplish that?
Would we prefer the euro–dollar relationship at this stage to be at 145 instead of 122? The
answer is, “Yes, we would.” But we don’t know how to get there. The general presumption
might be that we can get there through intervention, but the experience with interventions
suggests otherwise. There are some people here who were at the Fed during the Plaza Accord
period. I was not, but I was watching from the outside, and I don’t recall a lot of intervention.
My recollection was that in February 1985 the dollar and the pound sterling were almost at parity
at one point. The situation was like an avalanche waiting to break; and when the G-5 met and
released a few statements, the avalanche did break. There wasn’t a great deal of intervention,
but it appeared to be extraordinarily successful. That struck me in retrospect as sheer luck. I
don’t recall that the G-5 said anything of great significance.
We have a degree of credibility in the Federal Reserve, but I’m not at all certain that if,
for example, the Secretary of the Treasury and a number of us started talking in that direction,
we would knock the dollar–euro exchange rate down sharply. I hesitate to think of the
consequences. If it were easy to do, I would recommend it. The problem here is that there is a
wide consensus that this is the time we want the devaluation of the dollar to happen, not later
when the economy may be in a weakened structural situation.
MS. JOHNSON. But as a footnote to the 1980s, that was a time when the rest of the
world was growing; it enjoyed a much better macroeconomic performance. Japan was growing

September 21, 2004

33 of 100

strongly. Europe was doing better. The domestic demand contributed from outside the United
States was healthier at that point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And with respect to the issue that we discussed earlier, the
absolute level of our current account deficit was lower.
MS. JOHNSON. Yes.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. When Karen did her June paper, I asked her if she was
going to recommend Plaza Two—that the paper was just the stalking-horse for recommending
Plaza Two. But I think it’s hard to conceive of a strategy that we could manage—you weren’t
suggesting this, but let me just say it—where to deal with the risks in our presumptively
unsustainable external position, we would induce a run on our currency and induce a broadbased run on U.S. financial assets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You couldn’t do it and control it.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Yes. I think the lesson of those various periods is just
how hard it is—once the expectation is created that as a matter of policy we’re going to try to
induce a substantial decline in the value of our currency—to contain it or to slow it and manage
it. And yet if we could immaculately induce the rest of the world to revalue against us in some
gradual way, we’d do it if we could. That would be rather nice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that in a way is what we’ve been trying to do.
We’ve been trying to do that obviously by persuading the Chinese and others who have been
intervening in the foreign exchange market. What I find disturbing about the scenario that Karen
has outlined is that we may achieve the adjustment in a wholly inappropriate macroeconomic
environment. I’m not saying there’s anything we can do or say about it, but I don’t think we can
just push the issue aside. Who else in the world is going to think about this other than the

September 21, 2004

34 of 100

Federal Reserve? There’s no one else in the American government. On the G-7, there’s really
no one else but the United States. To the extent that events of this nature go on, they are
observed and evaluated but without some notion of whether there are policy relationships
involved. I’m just saying that, if we don’t do it, I don’t know who else will. As I look around
the world, there are a lot of very good people, a lot of thoughtful people, but the mechanism
through which adjustments would occur is the G-7.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Or the G-10
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or the G-10. The trouble is that if we go from G-7 to
G-10, I’m not sure that’s an improvement. So as a matter of course, I would not merely say that
there’s nothing we can do about it and that we should just forget about trying to do so and go on
our merry way. The problem is that no one else is doing anything. The probability of our
thinking about it and coming up with and doing something constructive is very low, but it’s not
zero, and it’s probably zero for most of the rest of the world. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I’ll yield my time; this is more informative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Just on this point. I think I cannot be accused of going on my merry
way on this particular issue. But as a result of the discussion that Karen led last meeting, I’m
actually more pessimistic about the demand switching—I believe that’s what it’s called in the
trade—than I was going into that discussion. Now, the first question is the one that you and
President Geithner raised: how to get there. How do we start the slide in the exchange rate?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it will take an Immaculate Conception.
MR. GRAMLICH. Right. That’s an obvious problem. But the other problem is that we
have to get more demand stimulation in the rest of the world. And as Karen just mentioned, the

September 21, 2004

35 of 100

zero-bound issue really gets in the way of that. We talked a little last week about fiscal
expansion, and that possibility is always there, but I think demand switching has two real
problems. One is how do we get there, and the other is how do we switch demand on in the
countries where we have to switch it on. It’s not so easy. So, I’m all for talking about this and
so forth, but I think it’s a very hard problem—a lot harder than I previously thought it was.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s extremely hard. But I would say that we are in the
best position, with the best resources, to think about it. The probability is that in the end we will
come up with nothing worthwhile. But unless we keep thinking about it, I don’t think we can do
our own job on American monetary policy.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Karen, am I correct in remembering that one of the
things your June paper showed is how little an ambitious fiscal consolidation plan buys us in
terms of an improvement in the external position?
MS. JOHNSON. That is the case in our model. However, I’ve been, if anything, a bit
skeptical about that. But when you reduce any component—exogenous government spending,
exogenous investment, a change in the saving rate—you create an opening in the demand–supply
balance that is then going to be filled by something, and you want it filled by exports. That
would be the pro-adjustment response.
Our model suggests that, as monetary policy eases in response to flagging demand, we’re
more likely to get interest-sensitive components of U.S. domestic demand stepping in than to
induce a change in the exchange rate and get higher exports. But that is all conditional on two
things, one of which is how interest-sensitive that demand is. And if the interest-sensitivity isn’t
as high as we have it in the model or if those components suffer some of the residual problems of
the sort they have suffered lately because of confidence or whatever, maybe U.S. interest-

September 21, 2004

36 of 100

sensitive demand won’t come rushing in. That’s one possibility. The other is that, as far as the
model is concerned, that relationship depends on the model’s ability to tell us what the exchange
rate is going to do because the induced effect on the exchange rate is how that adjustment works.
I always start and stop these conversations by saying that we don’t have a good model of the
exchange rate and that’s why we make all our statements conditional. In order to close
models—most models, including ours—we use uncovered interest parity because the model has
to have an exchange rate equation. There has to be something that does that, and that’s what
economic theory says to put in there, so that’s what we put in. But uncovered interest parity has
never succeeded empirically, ever. So that conclusion rests on these two properties: that we
don’t really know what the exchange rate response would be and that we don’t know if our
interest sensitivity is as high as the model says it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s an important insight about the nature of the
adjustment process. The fact that you cannot forecast exchange rates is telling you something
good about the flexibility of the adjustment process, which in itself is a useful insight in terms of
knowing what to do analytically and from a policy point of view.
MS. JOHNSON. I could tell stories in which that flexibility would all work in the right
direction, but I could imagine at least some factors that could go the other way, in the sense that
every time the world seems to be going through a period of uncertainty and unsettledness—and a
pronounced external adjustment might be such a period—there’s a tendency to see capital flow
into the United States, not out of it. And that would counteract the desired adjustment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Just to your point on the exchange rate and why we may need to think
about this. It strikes me that, because of external demand and our own situation, we have a more

September 21, 2004

37 of 100

accommodative policy than we normally might because of trying to keep domestic demand up,
and the result is that it also keeps our demand for imports very high. That means that we as a
country accumulate more debt, and as we look down the road, we continue to see this already
very large current account deficit growing further. Therefore, we have a greater likelihood of a
crisis later as we try to maintain our own domestic demand, given that the rest of the world isn’t
helping us along. It may be time to think, as you are saying here, about the external side in terms
of the exchange rate. We can’t predict the future; I recognize that. But all the indications are that
this problem is building and that the likelihood of this future crisis is building. Because of our
need to maintain strong domestic demand, we continue to put liquidity out there, and the world
continues to accumulate our debt. This future problem is building in part because of our policy
and the fact that we are dealing with one policy instrument right now.
MS. JOHNSON. But I would just reiterate what Governor Gramlich said a minute ago.
If all that happens is that we decide that we’re going to use monetary policy to limit U.S.
domestic demand, that by itself is not going to be sufficient to produce a good result.
MR. HOENIG. That’s why I’m saying, with regard to the Chairman’s point, that we may
have to look at the exchange rate side or at least think about it. I believe it is perhaps becoming
more critical that we do so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our dialogue with the staff regarding the economic
outlook was a little lengthier than usual, but I think it was a very important discussion. It does
impose some time constraints on us going forward, however; so I would request that we try to
keep our comments slightly less lengthy—unless, obviously, one has important things to say!
[Laughter] With that, who would like to start off? President Moskow.

September 21, 2004

38 of 100

MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe I should speak faster! In this
round, the reports from our Seventh District contacts were unusually varied. Many were quite
upbeat; others were reminiscent of last year, when uncertainty over the strength of the expansion
caused firms to delay investment and hiring. Hence, while I think we’ve moved out of the soft
patch, we do not yet have a clear sense of how robust conditions are going to be. On the upside,
some industries continue to do very well. These include printing, magazine advertising, paper
packaging, and a wide variety of heavy machinery producers. Indeed, industry reps at this
month’s International Manufacturing Technology Show in Chicago said that business was as
good as it has been since 1998. In contrast, producers of consumer goods were more subdued.
As you know, automakers are now less bullish and are increasingly concerned about their
inventories. They plan to offer even higher incentives and to be very conservative about
production. Reports on consumer spending were also mixed.
Reports on hiring reflected the varied levels of optimism across sectors. Many
manufacturers outside the automobile sector are adding hourly workers to their payrolls. But in
line with Dave Stockton’s comments, we’re once again hearing from our directors and other
contacts that some businesses are uncertain enough about the strength of demand that they’re
reluctant to add workers. The large temporary-help firms we spoke with said that year-over-year
growth in billable hours had eased slightly, but they attributed at least part of the softness to
transitory factors such as the hurricanes. Furthermore, one of them reported that wage gains had
moved a bit higher across the board.
Nonetheless, the inflation outlook remains subdued. Of course, some input costs are still
quite high. In response, some of our contacts are changing their purchasing strategies. Many
users of steel, for example, think prices will come down substantially, so they’re not building

September 21, 2004

39 of 100

inventories at the current high prices. And many are switching from long-term fixed-priced
contracts to ones that guarantee future supply but with the cost linked to the price prevailing at
the time of delivery. Downstream, most firms have been unable to pass higher costs on to
consumers.
Turning to the national outlook, last time the two big questions facing us were whether
inflation had picked up and whether the soft patch was temporary. We now feel better about
inflation, and as I noted at the outset, we seem to have emerged from the soft patch, but we don’t
have a clear picture of how big the improvement will be. Job growth has not yet shown the
kinds of gains that one would expect if growth were running above potential, and I am concerned
that during the intermeeting period we heard renewed talk about increased uncertainty making
businesses hesitant to hire and to spend. There’s a chance that this risk aversion will become
embedded and take us into a more extended period of subpar growth. But there are reasons to be
optimistic. Financial markets are not pricing in heightened risk, productivity trends and
accommodative monetary policy are supporting growth, and quite a few of my contacts are very
upbeat about their businesses.
On balance, we think that the mixed signals mean that the economy is growing only
modestly faster than potential. Our forecast is for the output gap to remain sizable for some time
and for inflation to stay under control. The question going forward is, How quickly should we
remove the current high degree of policy accommodation? We still have a long way to go before
the funds rate reaches neutral, so I don’t see any reason to deviate at this meeting from our plan
to remove policy accommodation at a measured pace. But if we see signs of persistent
sluggishness in the economy, then we might want to pause at some time in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.

September 21, 2004

40 of 100

MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s hard to remember an intermeeting period
when less happened—where economic developments were more predictable and more stable—
than this one. So I want to concentrate on a few pieces of information that I picked up during
this period.
My Wal-Mart contact focused on the weak August sales in their stores. He conducted a
survey of all Wal-Mart store managers to determine when schools in their communities opened.
It turns out that a lot of schools open on a schedule that is tied to Labor Day and many do not.
By comparing sales at stores in the two groups, he determined that the late Labor Day had a fair
amount to do with the slow August sales that Wal-Mart reported. He estimated that the total
impact was about 90 basis points; that is, August sales relative to August last year were reduced
by almost 1 percentage point as a consequence of this pattern of school openings and the late
Labor Day. I thought that was rather interesting, and of course, it may mean that September
sales will be somewhat stronger.
The other comment that I thought was interesting—and this is not totally new—has to do
with the transportation system. My trucking industry contact at J.B. Hunt said that his firm is not
investing in any new capacity. Actually, the number of trucks is flat to down slightly. Margins
are not particularly good, so they’re not investing. A major difficulty is getting drivers.
Nationally, as we know, a lot of trucking companies have gone out of business, and rail capacity
is not expanding either. So he thought we might end up with some strains in the transportation
of goods. Obviously, we know that the transportation of passengers is getting quite messed up as
well because of all the airline bankruptcies. Those were the only two comments that I wanted to
offer. My contacts said that things are rolling along about as anticipated and that business looks
generally good. Thank you.

September 21, 2004

41 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Eleventh District continues to expand at a modest,
or maybe even a measured, pace. At our Board of Directors meeting a little over a week ago,
one of our directors summarized it best by saying that the economy is going nicely—not great,
but nicely. Her theme was echoed by many other directors and by members of the Advisory
Council on Small Business and Agriculture. I also met with a number of CEOs for breakfast that
same week, and what was most interesting to me was that none of them had much to say about
the economy. It was neither so strong nor so weak that it deserved much in the way of comment.
What they were almost obsessed about, though, were the rising costs of health care to their
businesses, with little hope for improvement, and related issues of tort reform.
Even though most of my contacts are telling me that the economy is doing okay, I sense a
certain reluctance on the part of business people to make long-term economic commitments—a
point others have mentioned already this morning. One of our Houston directors, who is in the
petrochemicals business, has been raising prices for months. His company has been running
close to full capacity in several product lines. He raised the question of whether he should be
investing in new plants, given that his current plants are running full out. For a variety of
reasons, his answer was “absolutely not.” One of our agricultural advisory council members
made a similar point regarding cattle ranches when he said, “Just like in chemicals, no one wants
to build new plants.” It’s my view that these remarks reflect an underlying caution—call it lack
of business confidence, if you will—that may act as a brake on economic growth going forward.
In the case of large publicly traded companies, we can blame some of this caution on Sarbanes–
Oxley. But this reduced appetite for risk-taking and long-term investment has spilled over to
smaller, more entrepreneurial, privately held businesses as well.

September 21, 2004

42 of 100

Having said all this, I should point out that the Texas economy has continued to improve
throughout 2004. Job growth has picked up steadily, and the gains are fairly widespread across
most industries. After three years of massive declines in high-tech employment, reasonably
steady gains have taken place thus far in 2004. One of our advisory council members from
Austin’s high-tech sector noted that Austin is finally off the bottom. It is a “feeling better”
economy but not yet a “feeling good” economy.
The national economy seems to reflect the same pattern of slow, modest growth and
decelerating inflation that has emerged in the Dallas District in recent months. I have no reason
to differ in any significant way from the staff’s GDP outlook. I think we’d all be pleased to have
the baseline scenario unfold. Average real GDP growth of just under 4 percent in the fourth and
fifth years of expansion is pretty good.
If the staff’s inflation outlook for 2005 and 2006 is correct, or even just in the right
ballpark, the U.S. economy will remain in the zone of price stability in the near future. As I look
at the staff’s inflation projections under the alternative simulations, I can’t help but notice that all
of the inflation projections are for core PCE to come in under 2 percent, with many of the
projections centered closer to 1 percent. It was not that long ago that this Committee was
agonizing over the threat of deflation when our inflation measures were pointing to core inflation
around 1 percent. I’m not recommending that we agonize again, but the similarities are striking.
As I looked at the table on page 2 of the Greenbook supplement, I was struck by the threemonth change in the annualized rate of various measures of inflation for the period ending in
August. CPI inflation is running at 1.3 percent, core CPI at 1 percent, PCE inflation at 0.9
percent, core PCE at 0.7 percent, finished goods PPI inflation at minus 1.1 percent, and core PPI

September 21, 2004

43 of 100

for finished goods at 0.5 percent. Were this pattern to continue, the Committee would be facing
an inflation pattern not very dissimilar from the one we were looking at in the spring of 2003.
For many months now, the Committee has been saying that its policy stance is
accommodative. I won’t dispute that conclusion; I’ve been saying it myself. If we’re measuring
the degree of how accommodative we are by the real federal funds rate, then it’s critical to get
the right measure of anticipated inflation into the equation. If the staff’s inflation projections are
correct, then policy is much less accommodative than it would be if we assume inflation
expectations are well anchored in the 2½ to 3 percent range as in the University of Michigan
survey. If the last few months of inflation data reflect a return to the inflation patterns and trends
of the last few years, there may be less policy accommodation to be removed than the Committee
has been assuming, and there may soon be room for a pause in the measured pace of policy
changes. I think our current policy of measured withdrawal of policy accommodation is correct
for now. But with inflation low again and falling again, I have to remind myself why I think so.
The reason seems to have changed from “to contain inflation” to “because the economy is strong
enough to tolerate it.” In other words made famous recently, we may be doing it because we
can. After today, we may want to reassess that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The New England economy is in a growth
mode, but the pace of that growth is a bit subdued. Employment levels for the region as a whole
are now above those of a year ago. It’s the first time in the last two or three years that that has
been the case. Most industries and states have added jobs over the last year, and we have even
had some positive recent reports on manufacturing employment. We think that reflects the
strong growth that has occurred in merchandise exports—probably in response to the decline in

September 21, 2004

44 of 100

the dollar, however small it has been, that has already occurred. The tourism industry appears to
have done fairly well this summer, though cool weather affected both the Maine coastal region
and Cape Cod. Finally, commercial real estate markets remain flat in terms of vacancy and
rental rates. This hasn’t affected prices on premier office buildings, however, which remain in
the stratosphere, according to one contact.
Discussions with our Bank’s board of directors and a group of the region’s small
businesses revealed considerable variation. Most of our directors, whether they were bankers or
industrialists, focused on the recent slowdown with concern. Their collective level of caution is
higher now than earlier. The smaller businesses on our advisory council, however, mostly had
more business than they could handle and complained of shortages of technical staff, high
benefit costs, and rising prices for energy, steel, rare metals and alloys, plastics, and paper
products. Similarly, discussions with temporary-help firms suggest a good deal of regional
strength, but readings of business confidence overall have been lumpy. Business confidence is
better than last year but reflects a great deal of uncertainty and some concerns about rising costs.
Clearly, some businesses and industries are doing quite well, especially smaller firms and those
with military and export markets; others are more cautious and defensive in outlook. And
uncertainty about geopolitical events, terrorism, and the upcoming election continues to be a
factor.
Turning to the nation, incoming data have been mixed as well. We in Boston have had
for some time a take on overall growth that is a little less optimistic than the Greenbook, and we
now find that our two forecasts are just about identical. So I can’t find much to object to. Both
forecasts depend greatly on a rate of employment growth that remains, at this point, more a hope
than a reality. And we see this as an important source of downside risk.

September 21, 2004

45 of 100

As I think about policy at this point, I find myself in a bit of an internal argument. On the
one hand, as Part 2 of the Greenbook makes very clear—as did Dave at the beginning of his
comments—the expansion has regained some vigor. There is continued labor market slack, to be
sure, but it’s also not clear where things such as the labor force participation rate and the
employment–population ratio ought to settle after the employment boom years of the late ’90s.
Productivity growth continues to be relatively strong, and industrial production has picked up
except for high-tech goods. And in some areas such as truck and rail shipping, as well as
primary processing industries, capacity is in short supply. Consumers seem ready to spend on
autos and houses, and they’re willing to take saving rates to record lows in the wake of
substantial appreciation in housing prices. Clearly, this could turn around and is a potential
source of downside risk.
Businesses have probably added enough to inventories to hold them for a while. They
are likely to purchase non-high-tech equipment at a faster pace over the rest of the year to get in
under the wire of the investment tax credit change of next year, and that will borrow some
strength from 2005. But overall the underlying fundamentals don’t suggest a complete washout
in business spending in 2005—not by a long shot. So the economy seems poised to grow over
the coming quarters at 3½ percent or better according to almost all forecasts, with unemployment
in the low to mid-5s and negligible inflation. Not a bad outcome at all.
Clearly, there are some challenges. I think the fiscal deficit poses a problem, and we’ve
talked about the external deficit as well. But in this context, I ask myself, Is this an economy
that still needs negative real fed funds rates as a stimulus? Or do such rates have the potential to
cause real problems for both inflation and financial stability? The answer to the latter question
may be “not any time soon,” but we may now have an opportunity to avoid those problems at

September 21, 2004

46 of 100

little cost. So that’s one side of my internal argument. The other side takes into account how far
we are in terms of economic growth from where we could, and maybe should, be. Every forecast
I know of, the Greenbook included, has significantly written down growth for the last half of this
year and for 2005. Estimates of excess capacity, whether that is measured in output or by
employment, have been raised a bit over the summer. And now the Greenbook expects that such
gaps will not close until later in the forecast time period—mid-2006—with less tightening than
that expected by the markets.
Inflation has fallen off a bit in the first half and seems likely to stay low absent a major
acceleration in oil prices, which likely would have more of an effect on growth than inflation.
With the fiscal stimulus from the partial-expensing tax provisions removed next year and with
profit growth moderating, the forecast seems to hinge primarily on levels of employment growth
that we just haven’t seen yet.
I usually conclude this part of my internal argument with this question: Aside from the
fact that we’ve just about told the markets that we’re going to increase rates by 25 basis points
today, why is that necessary? In the end, I find myself continuing to come down on the side of
removing policy accommodation slowly, at least for now. I don’t think negative real rates are
consistent with an economy that is growing at the solid pace ours is. Real funds rates are
marginally negative, depending on how one calculates them, and will be less so, or even slightly
positive, after a 25 basis point move.
As I said at the August meeting, I really don’t know where neutral is, and I think it would
be good to have a discussion about this whole concept of neutral at some point. But to quote
President Santomero from the last meeting, it is probably above where we are. I don’t think we
should go to neutral soon, but getting out of negative territory has appeal to me. Markets expect

September 21, 2004

47 of 100

a change today, and halting now could make things seem worse than they are. I must say,
though, that if the data don’t start to get better soon, especially as they relate to employment, I
think we should take the pause that the Greenbook anticipates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The tone of the reports that I’m getting
from my business contacts in the Fourth District is positive, but it’s hardly reminiscent of the
reports of robust growth that I was hearing earlier this year. Still, both order books and profits
are reported to be fairly strong. Business leaders across a broad array of industries tell me that
they expect to see steady sales growth through the end of 2004.
Despite these positive reports, business confidence remains less upbeat than order books
and profits would appear to warrant. My contacts still say that, if the economy continues to
grow and stays on its present course, they will persevere in their search for more productivity
improvements rather than hire additional workers, at least for the foreseeable future. And this is
perhaps still the most remarkable aspect of this expansion—the ability of businesses to continue
to squeeze out more production with the same number of workers. It can’t persist, of course, but
I’m beginning to wonder how long I’m going to keep saying that.
At a recent joint meeting of our boards from the three offices in the District, the directors
made several observations about energy prices. Although most directors expect energy prices to
retreat somewhat from their current high levels, they are basing their future business plans on
energy prices that they expect will be higher than those of a year or two ago. In response to
energy prices, though, several of our directors were commenting that they are adjusting—or at
least trying through innovation to adjust—the composition of the products that they’re
producing. They’re using innovations to develop products that are less energy-dependent.

September 21, 2004

48 of 100

The Fourth District economy, like the nation’s, seems to have a lot going for it except
considerable employment growth. The incoming data, though, suggest to me that the risks we
face remain balanced and may actually have narrowed a bit in their scope since the summer. By
that I mean that the prospects for either a resumption of the exceptionally strong business
expansion that we saw in the winter and spring or a slipping back to a tractionless recovery—
both of which seemed possible in the summer—look considerably more remote to me this time.
Similarly, the extreme inflation or disinflation outcomes seem to me less likely as well. In
summary, I believe the economy is expanding at a sustainable rate, and I think we should
continue with our plan to gradually remove our policy accommodation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic growth in the Fifth District
softened further in recent weeks, but we don’t see any indications that the expansion is off track.
Manufacturing shipments and orders continue to expand, although manufacturing employment
appears to be flat or declining in our District. Retail activity in our region has been soft lately,
consistent with the national figures. Outside the retail service sector, activity has been flat
overall since August, but our District continues to outpace the nation in residential construction.
We’re hearing complaints about the cost of construction materials, and the scarcity of heavyequipment operators appears to be limiting construction work in some areas. More broadly,
while our directors and other contacts report expanding economic activity across a variety of
sectors, there is a lingering sense of unease about the pace of this recovery. Several contacts say
that firms are reluctant to add workers, and many attribute this to concerns about the
continuation of the recovery.

September 21, 2004

49 of 100

Turning to the national economy, in spite of the encouraging net job growth in August
and the upward revisions to the data for the two previous months, the September Greenbook has
written down expected job growth this year from what was anticipated in August. The end-ofyear output gap is correspondingly a couple of tenths wider than in the prior projection, and
there’s a commensurate reduction in the expected path for core consumer prices both this year
and next. I think it’s reasonable to project that the labor market will gradually improve and that
the output gap will close by the end of 2006, helped along by a less aggressive rise in the funds
rate as built into the Greenbook forecast. That said, though, I think that the recent data have
clouded the picture enough to suggest substantial downside risk in the outlook. Evidently we’re
not returning just yet to the growth rates that we had been anticipating prior to the recent soft
patch. Thus, some markdown in the expected funds rate path seems warranted.
Much of the financial market nervousness about inflation evident earlier in the year
seems to have receded. Nevertheless, financial markets still expect a funds rate about 75 basis
points higher by the end of 2006 than does the Greenbook. That expectation continues to keep
long-term interest rates higher than they otherwise would be. The Greenbook anticipates that
long rates will come down as we follow through and raise the funds rate on the expected path.
The result is something of a central banker’s dream—a rising policy rate accompanied by falling
long rates. However, should the economy truly need the greater stimulus assumed in the
Greenbook, we should be alert to other possibilities in the period ahead. Markets might again
get more nervous about inflation, and long rates might rise rather than fall as we indicate a less
aggressive rate of increase in the funds rate. Clearly, that would be counterproductive.
Accordingly, I think we should be cautious about sending such signals. We could well
find that our credibility for low inflation is sufficiently secure that signaling our intention to

September 21, 2004

50 of 100

move the funds rate up less aggressively succeeds in lowering long rates and stimulating the
economy. On the other hand, we might be unpleasantly surprised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m going to take your admonition seriously
and say about the District economy that it continues to track the national economy quite closely,
as it has throughout this recovery. I’m tempted to let it go at that, except there was a
development yesterday that went largely unnoticed and is a cause for celebration. I’m sure you
noticed it; the Minnesota Twins clinched the Central Division for the third consecutive year—
demonstrating once again that a small market team can succeed. [Laughter]
When I think about the national economy, it seems to me that the evolution of the
forecast this year has not been all bad. That’s not a ringing endorsement, I understand. We’re
certainly looking at somewhat slower growth than I had anticipated earlier, but we’re also
looking at a bit lower inflation than I had expected. Beyond that, it seems to me that, if we think
about broad trends rather than meeting-to-meeting fluctuations in the data, changes in the
forecast, and clouds that appear from time to time and then dissipate, we see the following:
Growth last year was 4½ percent in real terms and is likely to be something like 4 percent this
year. The unemployment rate has declined—perhaps not quite as much as measured, but it has
declined. Inflation is low—and it’s certainly low in the historical context of most of the postwar
period—and it seems likely to stay there. Moreover, I think the outlook is positive, and I say this
for essentially two reasons. One is productivity, and the other is history. Although history
obviously doesn’t repeat itself precisely, I think there is a message in the long expansions of the
1980s and the 1990s, which is that the economy is fundamentally resilient and fundamentally

September 21, 2004

51 of 100

flexible. Expansions, once established, don’t terminate quickly. And from that perspective, I
think we’re in good shape overall.
On the employment situation, the staff probably recalls that I’ve been skeptical about the
employment forecast for some time. Now I find myself skeptical about the explanation pointing
to a reluctance to hire. I guess I’m an outlier in this regard, but I must say that for quite some
time no business person I’ve talked to has expressed anything special about his or her
willingness or unwillingness to hire. My sense of the situation is that they’re making the same
kinds of decisions they always make with regard to these kinds of issues. Now, if we mean by
“reluctance to hire” that we can’t explain the slow improvement in employment, I agree with
that. But I really don’t know that there’s anything special there.
Finally, with regard to our earlier discussion on exchange rates, I certainly don’t object to
thinking about how that might play out and what our role might be. But as I think Karen
observed, it doesn’t have to play out in a disorderly fashion. And it seems to me that, if we want
to avoid the risk that movements in exchange rates could turn disorderly, we’re going to have to
adhere to sound policies in any event.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I gather your bottom line is to recommend to those of us
who root for the Baltimore Orioles that we move to St. Paul! [Laughter]
MR. STERN. I’m not sure. That move may be necessary but not sufficient. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in the Third District
continues to expand. Our region did not experience the June lull seen in other parts of the
country, but in the last month we’ve seen some easing in the pace of growth—perhaps a delayed
lull rather than a new trend. Manufacturing is a case in point; our business outlook survey index

September 21, 2004

52 of 100

of general activity fell to 13.4 in September from a robust 28.5 in August. In contrast, the index
of new orders strengthened in September, and shipments remained very high. It’s fairly unusual
for us to get disparate readings across the general activity, orders, and shipments indexes.
I will note that the comments we received from respondents were generally positive and
more consistent with the readings on new orders and shipments. In a special question this
month, we asked how firms’ investment spending had been affected by the special tax
depreciation allowance. About a quarter of our firms said that the allowance led them to
increase their spending on capital equipment this year, and it appears that these firms have
smoothed out the spending over the year. Consistent with the continued strength in new orders,
half of our firms report that they expect to spend more on capital equipment in 2005 than they
did last year, and a quarter of them expect to spend significantly more.
Each of the three states in our region experienced positive job growth in the first two
months of the third quarter. Employment growth in the third quarter has slowed from the second
quarter but is about the average of the first two quarters combined. After five consecutive
quarters of decline, the three-state unemployment rate edged up to 5.2 percent on average in July
and August. Despite the increase, the statewide unemployment rates in each of our three states
remained below the national average, and we continue to receive reports that some firms are
having difficulty finding qualified workers. I thought that’s where President Stern was going on
the hiring story because I keep hearing that story in the Philadelphia District.
Retail sales of general merchandise have been rising in the District, although year-to-year
gains have eased from earlier in the year. Some of the year-to-year weakness in August was to
be expected because last August’s sales were significantly buoyed by the tax rebate checks that
were received around that time. Commercial real estate markets in the region remain soft, but

September 21, 2004

53 of 100

we’re beginning to see a slight improvement in nonresidential construction. This is concentrated
mainly in warehouse construction, with office construction still quite flat. Residential activity is
now beginning to moderate from the very strong pace earlier this year, but home sales remain
strong, and house appreciation continues at a high rate in our three areas. We continue to get
readings of rising prices in our region, with firms expressing concerns about rising fuel prices
and mental and other health care costs. The outlook among the contacts in the region’s business
community is for continued improvement this year, with modest gains anticipated. Our staff’s
leading indexes of economic activity are all signaling output growth in the three states in the
region over the next three quarters and stronger employment growth as well.
Turning to the nation, incoming data suggest that the economy is emerging from the soft
patch. Consumer spending has picked up, although it is not growing as strongly as it was earlier
this year, as several people have noted. Manufacturing activity has rebounded, and business
investment continues to expand at a good pace. Payroll employment gains improved in August
after two months of weak reports.
Despite oil prices hitting $50 a barrel in mid-August, inflation has eased somewhat from
levels seen earlier this year, and long-term inflation expectations remain steady. The economic
fundamentals continue to suggest that inflation will remain in check. However, I am not as
sanguine about the inflation outlook as the Greenbook. The Greenbook has GDP growth above
potential for the next two years. At the end of that period, the output gap is eliminated, yet
monetary policy remains accommodative, with the fed funds rate below neutral. It’s difficult for
me to believe that the inflation picture could be as favorable as the Greenbook suggests unless
the fed funds rate is at or above neutral at that point.

September 21, 2004

54 of 100

On balance, the data suggest to us that growth for the year will likely be 3½ to 4 percent,
in line with what President Stern indicated. In my view, this is a reasonably good showing,
although I must admit it’s about 1 percentage point weaker than we had forecast at the beginning
of the year. At this point, I believe the FOMC should remain on the course of continuing to
remove policy accommodation at a measured pace. The real fed funds rate will remain negative
even if we move ¼ percentage point today; thus, monetary policy will remain expansionary and
will help ensure the sustainability of the recovery despite higher oil prices and diminishing fiscal
stimulus. Finally, I see no reason to alter our risk language at this time. I think it gives us the
necessary room to deviate from the measured pace in either direction, if that proves to be
necessary. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Shall we break for coffee?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since our last meeting, economic activity in
the Twelfth District has continued to expand at a solid pace but more slowly than earlier in the
year. In most of the District, housing markets remain vigorous, but there have been scattered
signs of cooling in some areas. High volumes of international trade have kept many seaports
operating at capacity and have overburdened parts of the warehousing and distribution chain. So
far, however, bottlenecks have been relatively minor. District job gains remain modest and well
off the pace of earlier in the year. Looking forward, our contacts report that they expect to
increase hiring in coming months to meet sales and output levels. Many comment, however, on
the difficulty of finding workers with the requisite skills and experience. Relatively unskilled
labor, in contrast, is perceived to be readily available.

September 21, 2004

55 of 100

Turning to the national economy, recent data suggest that the sharp slowing in activity in
June was short-lived. The bounceback in consumer spending, including auto sales, is
encouraging, and the drop in oil prices from recent highs should also help. While all of this is
good news, we still haven’t seen real strength in job growth, and it’s not yet clear whether output
growth will return to the robust rates of last year or something much closer to the growth rate of
potential. These are key issues because of the slack remaining in labor and product markets. In
this regard, the Greenbook presents a rather sober view of the economic outlook, despite its
assumption of persistently low real interest rates.
I’m in sympathy with the Greenbook’s view. First, while the oil shock almost certainly
had something to do with the recent weakness in the economy, I have yet to be convinced that its
effects were particularly large. Therefore, we might not get a big boost to activity from its
dissipation. Second, it seems likely that partial expensing is providing noticeable stimulus to
equipment investment this year, which means that the underlying impetus in the recovery is not
as strong as many think. Finally, I remain concerned about the potential for weakness in
consumer spending, which could restrain growth even more than the Greenbook envisions. In
spite of only modest income growth, consumer spending provided critical support for aggregate
demand during the recession and afterward, and the saving rate remains at an extremely low
level. With interest rates rising, households may seek to get their finances in order and bring the
saving rate up to more normal levels. An alternative simulation in the Greenbook illustrates that
this could be a potent factor in restraining growth over the next couple of years. In addition,
mortgage refinancings have remained low, and the associated loss of cash flow to households
could undermine spending for a time.

September 21, 2004

56 of 100

Turning to inflation, the data for July and August have been very favorable, especially
following the May and June data, which also showed modest increases in core consumer prices.
This development strongly suggests that the run-up in inflation last winter reflected temporary
factors.
Overall, it’s a bit of a mystery why this expansion has not been marked by faster average
growth together with a larger reduction in the amount of slack, given persistently easy financial
conditions, including the low levels of real interest rates, as well as the decline in the dollar and
the increase in equity prices over the past year or so. But, of course, continuing caution in the
wake of September 11, the wars in the Middle East, and the corporate governance scandals are
reasonable candidates for an explanation. The continuation of this pattern suggests that the
equilibrium real federal funds rate remains quite depressed relative to its historical average, so
monetary policy must remain accommodative for the foreseeable future. A pause in the process
of raising the funds rate is, thus, likely to become appropriate in the near future, especially if
inflation remains well behaved as expected. At the present time, however, the real funds rate is
so low that a modest tightening at this meeting seems justified.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. With the exception of the deterioration in the external
imbalance, our view of the outlook has not changed significantly since the last meeting. The
inflation news seems better. The growth news seems somewhat reassuring but not exciting.
There do not appear to us to be any compelling signs at this stage of a deeper and more
protracted deceleration in growth that might raise concern about the sustainability of the
expansion.

September 21, 2004

57 of 100

Relative to the tone around the room, I’d put myself at a slightly more optimistic point on
the continuum. On the expectation that we will continue to move monetary policy toward a
more neutral stance at a pace that matches present market expectations, we expect the economy
to grow at the pretty solid rate of around 4 percent in real terms for the balance of this year and
at a pace of just over 3½ percent in ’05 and ’06. And we see core PCE staying close to a range
of 1 to 1½ percent during that period.
The fundamentals of the staff forecast remain as they have been. There is reasonably
steady improvement in the labor market, with healthy growth in compensation supporting
consumer confidence and consumption. Productivity growth reverts only gradually to the stillimpressive average of the ’90s surge. Global demand growth remains quite broad-based—at
close to potential—though not strong enough to help exports provide a positive contribution to
U.S. growth. With strong balance sheets, enterprises commit more resources to investment and
to employment growth and compensation. Unit labor costs accelerate modestly, and firms
absorb some of that increase with lower margins, as competitive pressures contain pricing
power. We see the probability of a higher or lower trajectory to this outlook of 3½ to 4 percent
real growth and 1½ to 2 percent on the core PCE as roughly balanced for both growth and
inflation, though perhaps we should be uncomfortable on how moderate and benign this outlook
looks.
This leaves us with slightly lower growth than the Greenbook and slightly higher
inflation, but those differences are not particularly large. The main differences in our views
involve the path of monetary policy and its consequences. The Board’s staff sees a considerably
more gradual move upward in the fed funds rate, with the consequence that the real fed funds
rate stays low relative to most measures of neutral or equilibrium for a longer time, without

September 21, 2004

58 of 100

inducing much in terms of a surge in growth above potential or in terms of accelerating inflation.
In this sense, Janet raises the right question. I think she has the right answer.
To us the greatest sources of uncertainty involve the issues of whether households decide
to save more of their income, whether enterprises show less tentativeness in spending, and
whether the process of arresting and reversing the deterioration in our external imbalance will be
traumatic or benign. Higher household saving, of course, would be a rational response to a
number of forces, including an increase in debt with interest rates rising, the prospects of lower
future returns on housing, the expectation that individuals will bear more of the burden of rising
health care costs and more of the risk in accumulating a viable pension benefit going forward,
and the prospects of higher taxes over the medium term.
We don’t have a good explanation for the degree of tentativeness among U.S. businesses
that remains. Perhaps it will fade. Businesses nationally are showing somewhat less confidence
in the strength and sustainability of this expansion than we seem to think is justified. The virtue
in this, of course, is that they’ve gotten themselves less overextended. Our Empire survey, for
what it’s worth, shows a significant recovery in September in sentiment about present and
prospective business conditions and almost every other indicator that we asked our survey
respondents about. Hopefully this portends good things for the nation.
The deterioration in our forecast for the external imbalance puts us in very uncomfortable
territory, more vulnerable to a shock to confidence. The fact that the dollar has been broadly
stable and long-term rates have fallen in the context of the large upward revision to the expected
path of the current account deficit may suggest that the risks in this area have diminished, but I
suspect that is not the case. And just because a problem has no apparent solution does not mean
it’s not a problem. [Laughter]

September 21, 2004

59 of 100

I think we should be quite comfortable with the path of the fed funds rate now priced into
the markets; and we should be pleased with how responsive the slope of that path has been to
changes in the data. My view is that we should seek to leave that path unchanged in our signal
today. We don’t see evidence of upside risks at this point that would justify inducing a steeper
path. And absent a major change in our confidence about the strength of future demand, I think
we should be careful not to induce expectations of a more gradual tightening until we have
established a more definitively positive real fed funds rate and have moved closer to the range
that defines neutrality. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, on the national outlook, our view is similar to the
Greenbook’s in that we think the expansion has regained some of its traction and will continue as
we move forward. Discussions with business contacts throughout our District tend to support
this notion as well. For example, most retailers that we’ve contacted in the last few weeks
reported that sales have improved in August over earlier in the summer. In addition, the chair of
our board, whose firm is in the manufacturing area on a worldwide basis, reported to us just last
week that capital spending budgets finally seem to have been, to use his word, “unleashed.”
Another director noted that low interest rates and available capital have enabled firms to find
capital for acquisition and expansion fairly readily. In our most recent survey of all thirty of our
head office and branch directors, about two-thirds of those who expressed an opinion about the
next six months—and that was most of them—thought conditions would improve, while about a
third thought the economy would just, in their words, “muddle along.” Finally, District hirings
continue to exceed layoffs and by a fair margin now. The ratio of announced planned hirings to

September 21, 2004

60 of 100

planned layoffs was 2½ to 1 in the third quarter, greatly surpassing the previous high of 1¼ to 1
earlier in the year.
Based on recent evidence like this and on forecasts by our staff, I believe the most likely
outcome is continued good growth in the 3½ to 4 percent range, as suggested by others. The
uncertainty seems to center on whether hiring will pick up, and I agree that the most likely
outcome is that it will strengthen as we move through the remainder of this year and into next
year. On the inflation outlook, it appears that the Committee and others were correct in that the
spring increases were temporary and price inflation has settled back to more-modest levels. In
that environment, my judgment is that what I would describe as our careful, systematic
movement toward a more neutral fed funds rate is serving us well. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like Bill Poole, in searching for words that
describe developments since our last meeting I kept coming back to “ho-hum.” We’ve had some
mixed readings, as is almost always the case, but no really big positive or negative surprises.
And maybe, just maybe, we should allow ourselves to be pleased with that. I’m generally
comfortable with the most likely path and composition of output and spending laid out in the
Greenbook. If we get 3½ to 4 percent growth over the next several quarters, we should continue
to make gradual progress on pushing the unemployment rate lower, and those sectors where the
recovery has lagged should show improvement.
I also would not quibble with the conclusion that recent inflation data suggest no
immediate threat of a troublesome run-up in broad price indexes. While I don’t want to do
anything to reinforce the label that Al Broaddus gave me at his farewell lunch as the remaining
“hawk” in the group, I would point out that some mainstream outside inflation forecasts still

September 21, 2004

61 of 100

have a decidedly upward tilt. When it comes time to choose the words for our statement today, I
hope we will resist the option of using language that gives too much emphasis too quickly to the
last couple of months of better inflation data.
Perhaps the most interesting dimension to our most recent economic data and our
projections for coming quarters is in the area of employment and the labor markets. We spent a
good bit of time in preparation for this meeting thinking through some of the same possibilities
that are addressed in the Greenbook’s “less room to grow” alternative scenario. My labor
economists concluded that, if the recent decline we’ve seen in the labor force participation rate is
permanent—and making certain other assumptions about population growth and immigration—it
seems entirely possible that employment growth in the range of only 100,000 per month, on
average, would be sufficient to maintain the unemployment rate at its current level. We’ve done
better than that recently and, hence, the continued decline in the unemployment rate. This job
growth is far below the heady claim of the Council of Economic Advisers now on everyone’s
mind that the tax cuts would create 300,000 new jobs per month. It is also far below the job
growth incorporated in the Greenbook’s baseline projection for 2005. I make these points only
to suggest that, as is the case with many of the other variables with which we work, there are
probably sizable error bands around our estimates of future job growth. And those estimates
could have important implications for the notions of slack, the room our economy has to grow,
and ultimately price pressures.
Developments in our region don’t shed much light on policy issues today. My director
from the corporate executive office of UPS in Atlanta, their chief financial officer, characterized
the growth in their business as relatively solid though not quite as strong as earlier in the year.
And members of the small business advisory group that I met with last week reported some of

September 21, 2004

62 of 100

the same spottiness and uneasiness that has shown through in other sources of information.
Reports from our contacts note that, while the effects of the three hurricanes that hit our area
were severe in the affected areas and will likely show through in some of the state level data, the
economic disruptions are expected to be short-lived. Higher insurance deductibles and adequate
flood coverage may have a negative impact on consumer spending in the short run, but we know
from past experience that reconstruction outlays will probably make up for the temporary
slowdown. Damage to agricultural areas may take a while longer to mend, and fortunately, this
is a traditionally slow time of the year for tourism in Florida.
Looking ahead to policy considerations, as we almost all have come to do, I think recent
developments have met the hurdle for staying on the policy path embraced at our last meeting.
Assuming things continue to unfold in roughly the manner described in the Greenbook forecast, I
hope we will stay on the path of gradually removing more of the policy accommodation. I think
we should give considerable weight to the possibility of unintended consequences and distortions
in resource allocation from policy stimulation that remains in place for an extended period of
time. Should we at some point find that the economy has less room to grow than we thought and
inflationary pressures begin to build, in my view we will be in a better position if we have gotten
to a more neutral policy setting. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with what seems to be the general
assessment around the room that the data since our last meeting have confirmed our expectation
that the soft spot in the economy wasn’t that soft or prolonged and that the economy is on a
fairly reasonable track. But I think we all have noted that recent information, including the
anecdotes, has also suggested that underlying demands and the path for the economy going

September 21, 2004

63 of 100

forward are not as strong as expected. This latter observation extends a string of downward
revisions to actual and projected growth over the year. These revisions reflect the fact that,
although economic growth has been good this year, it is considerably less than one might have
anticipated from the unusual degree of fiscal and monetary stimulus in place.
The rise in oil and energy prices must be an important part of the story, but the extent of
the shortfall this year seems to be too much to ascribe to energy prices. And the fact that
inflation as well as output has been coming in below expectations since June suggests that
whatever factors are holding back the economy of late should be viewed primarily as having the
characteristics of a demand shock. For the most part, the unexplained shortfall relative to model
forecasts so far seems to be in business investment spending, and we’ve cited “business caution”
to explain it. Like President Stern in his reference to “reluctance to hire,” I think this is just
another way of labeling our ignorance. Perhaps businesses have been held back by heightened
terrorism or other geopolitical uncertainties, risks of further oil price increases, and the fallout
from governance scandals on risk appetites. However, the longer business caution persists, the
more I suspect that we’re missing something more fundamental.
The bottom line, in my view, is that we just don’t have full understanding of what is
damping the response of the economy to accommodative policy. The facts that there are these
restraining forces and that our understanding of them is incomplete have important implications
for the strategy of policy going forward in terms of helping to foster both solid growth and stable
prices. Rates do need to rise, but it’s impossible to prejudge the appropriate path when we don’t
have a good understanding of the important dynamic forces at work.
Tightening today is called for. I agree with most of my colleagues that it will bring the
real funds rate into positive territory. It will mean that the increase in rates is larger than the

September 21, 2004

64 of 100

increase in underlying inflation over the last year. Tightening today is built into the yield curve;
on that yield curve intermediate- and long-term rates remain very low and consistent with very
supportive financial conditions. But in my view, uncertainty about the economy implies that the
path hereafter to achieve our objectives should be decided flexibly, meeting by meeting,
depending on incoming information. And I think the burden of proof for skipping a meeting or
for slowing down the pace of tightening should not be unusually high.
Markets have reacted to recent incoming data by reducing the expected pace of
tightening beyond this meeting. They think we can and will skip taking action at some meetings
if the data suggest we should. These expectations could reverse quickly should incoming data on
activity or prices strengthen. I believe these types of reactions are quite constructive and impart
an important automatic stabilizer to the economy. I hope we don’t do or say anything that will
leave the impression that we are not ourselves prepared to adapt to changing circumstances.
Moreover, I believe that flexibility is still most likely to be called for around a very gradual path
of tightening. Incoming data have reinforced the perception that the risk of accelerating prices
has diminished and that relatively low intermediate- and long-term interest rates could well be
required to sustain solid growth. Both markets and the staff have marked down their
expectations for policy.
In addition, the case for gradualism in the face of uncertainty is well known—nicely
summarized by Governor Bernanke earlier this year. A related strain of research has shown that,
when the FOMC is uncertain about the levels of the natural rate of unemployment or, as in the
current circumstances, about the natural rate of interest, paying attention to inflation and growth
rates is useful to avoid policy mistakes. In the Bluebook table depicting policy rules, there are
two rules in which formulas for the funds rate are derived from changes in inflation and output,

September 21, 2004

65 of 100

and those illustrate this approach. They suggest a shallow upslope to rates, not too different
from the assumption in the Greenbook. Undoubtedly, this will not prove to be the appropriate
path for policy, but I’m not sure in what direction the path should deviate, and we will need to
look at the data to make that judgment. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The news that we have to deal with for
this meeting relates to the mysterious soft spot that is affecting or trapping the economy. We’ve
had soft spots before, blamed variously on the hangovers from the 1990s, the Iraq War, Enron,
and Sarbanes–Oxley. Let’s face it, none of these is a credible explanation for the current
slowdown. At the last meeting, I thought the problem was an oil shock. While I still think the
economy is suffering the effects of an oil shock, I’m beginning to think that more is going on. If
one goes back to our forecast earlier in the year or looks at the Greenbook forecast revisions or
the Blue Chip forecast revisions lately—and this is the point that Don just made—both inflation
and output forecasts are down. Perhaps this suggests that we may have a plain old demand
shock out there mixed in with the oil shock.
Whatever the shock is, there also seems to be a strong international dimension to it.
Taking the International Finance Division’s forecasts of yesterday, if one could imagine the
world economy without the United States and China, domestic demand would be deficient in
country after country. The countries that are doing well are those that trade a lot with the United
States or China or both. And in general they are doing well because of exports, not anything
related to domestic demand. It is too strong to say that there would be a world recession without
the U.S. and Chinese economies, but there would certainly be global sluggishness. And this
sluggishness would be greatly magnified, as we discussed a minute ago, if the dollar started

September 21, 2004

66 of 100

slipping, which it might do at any point. As I am told, John Connelly once said, “Our dollar,
your problem.” [Laughter]
So what do we do about all of this? With weakness emanating from some unknown
source, seemingly on the demand side, do we continue our program of gradually raising or reequilibrating rates? I would say “yes” for this meeting, but I’m getting much less certain about
future meetings. To rationalize my vote for continuing to re-equilibrate, my own personal view
is that up to now the re-equilibration process has gone very well. Since we began raising rates in
late June, the funds rate has risen 50 basis points, yet ten-year bond rates have fallen 65 basis
points over this span, and even the TIPS long-term rate has fallen 30 basis points. A 35 basis
point decline in long-term nominal rates would be fully explainable within the context of
orthodox macro theory; that is, either the Fed showed it was concerned about inflation, or
inflation just plain dropped and the inflation premium in long-term bonds was reduced. As for
the 30 basis point drop in real interest rates, there are technical explanations, but the most likely
cause is that the real economy has weakened. Whatever the explanation, why fight it? We have
an opportunity to bring the financial system closer to equilibrium. We can lessen the chances
that we’ll be caught with inordinately low interest rates should inflation suddenly speed up, and
we most likely can do this with minimal effect on real long-term rates, perhaps even a negative
effect if there is some sort of expectations effect. This win–win situation can’t go on
indefinitely. If it were to do so, lots of macro textbooks would have to be rewritten. But it does
seem a likely result for today and, again, why not take advantage of it?
One broader point should also be kept in mind. Re-equilibration means re-equilibration
in several different markets more or less simultaneously. The funds market is now something
like 3 percentage points out of long-term equilibrium, as defined mechanically according to past

September 21, 2004

67 of 100

averages. The long-term market may be about half or perhaps a little more than that out of
equilibrium, defined the same way. I don’t know that there is any theorem that re-equilibration
will happen at an equal pace in different markets, and maybe it shouldn’t puzzle us much if the
pace of re-equilibration is different.
So my judgment on what we should do today is clear. We seem to have a situation where
we can restore equilibrium a bit without damaging the economy, at least for a stretch. This is a
good horse to ride, and we ought to keep riding it for now. When we get to the next meeting, it
may be time for the “pause that refreshes,” or it may not be. Markets seem to be responding to
the data, and perhaps we should as well. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In reviewing developments so far in
2004, it’s useful to characterize the economy as having faced a medium-sized aggregate supply
shock during the first half of this year. This composite shock comprised various effects
associated with the decline in the dollar, the increase in broad indexes of commodity prices, and
the especially sharp rise in energy prices. The mixture of the supply shock and the ongoing
cyclical expansion made the economic data particularly hard to interpret this spring. This
Committee was generally more willing than outside forecasters or market participants to link
macroeconomic developments to the influences in this composite aggregate supply shock,
particularly the energy cost component. We argued on that basis that both the rise in inflation
earlier this year and the soft patch in economic activity in June were likely to prove transitory.
Both of these forecasts have worked out pretty well, supporting the view that shocks to aggregate
supply were indeed the principal reason that inflation in the first half was higher and growth
lower than had been expected.

September 21, 2004

68 of 100

Arguably, at this point, the effects of the supply shock may be, to a substantial degree,
behind us. The dollar has been roughly stable all year, and the rise in import prices accordingly
has decelerated. Broad indexes of commodity prices peaked in March. Oil prices are still rising,
and their volatility as well as their level may have a damping effect on the economy. However,
about three-quarters of the increase in near futures crude oil prices since late last year had
already occurred by last May, and refinery margins have fallen. The waning effects of the
supply shock can be seen directly in the moderation of core inflation and the rebound in
spending in the third quarter, as we’ve already noted. Of course, further rises in oil prices or
declines in the dollar are always possible. If no such development occurs, however, the ebbing
of the supply shock will afford us increasingly greater clarity about the underlying strength of
this expansion.
My own very tentative assessment is that the recovery at this stage is proceeding at a
pace that is solid but somewhat less vigorous than we had hoped or expected. In particular,
expansion at the current pace seems unlikely to create new inflationary pressures. Looking
forward, the jobs data will be crucial. If job growth continues at the pace of the past few months,
I think we would have grounds for concern about both business confidence and the prospects for
household spending.
Overall, I think our strategy of removing accommodation at a measured pace has worked
out well, not only in providing support to the economy and avoiding nasty surprises in financial
markets but also in allowing us time to assess ongoing developments. I support our current plan
of measured withdrawal of emergency stimulus. We surely can raise the funds rate today
without doing damage to the recovery. I also see no need to change the basic framework of our
statement. As we go forward, however, we should remain flexible in slowing or speeding up the

September 21, 2004

69 of 100

process as dictated by incoming data. Financial markets are well prepared for this type of
flexibility, and I believe it fits well with our declared strategy of removing accommodation at a
measured but not mechanistic pace. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve again had some discussions with contacts
in the banking sector in preparation for this meeting, but they tend to reflect the comments that
we’ve heard around the room, particularly Governor Bernanke’s observation that the economy’s
growth is solid but less vigorous than expected. Certainly, nothing I’ve heard from those I’ve
talked with in the banking sector would be different from that.
As the one member of the FOMC who has spent a lot of time as a political operative, I
couldn’t help but think about today’s meeting in the context of the fact that the upcoming
presidential election is six weeks from today. I was reflecting on the concerns that have become
issues in that contest and those that haven’t and the implications they might have for the
economy. The deficit levels and spending restraints have not become issues. We didn’t expect
that they would. Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid also have not become political issues,
but I think concerns about them have been elevated during the course of the campaign, not by
either party but by interested observers—not the least of whom is our Chairman as well as Pete
Peterson and others. Just as we were talking earlier about our prospective role in discussions
about the dollar, I would suggest to members of this Committee who have concerns about deficit
spending, Medicare/Medicaid issues, and certain tax policy issues, that the time to elevate those
discussions is immediately following the point when it becomes clear who the next President
will be. I hope that will be right after the election this time! [Laughter]

September 21, 2004

70 of 100

To the extent that James Carville’s admonition that “it’s the economy, stupid” is correct,
there seems to be minimal differentiation of the economic issues this time. The most aggressive
protectionists were given early exits from the process. We do hear talk about tax policy and
about outsourcing, but the one issue that seems to resonate is economic uncertainty. The
solution for that is not clear, which does not suggest that it isn’t a problem just because a
solution is not evident. But, importantly, monetary policy has not been a political issue. For the
three years that I’ve been either on this Committee or thinking about being on this Committee,
I’ve wondered about the extent that it would be as we moved into this time frame and came into
this meeting. The question to my mind was never whether the FOMC would allow political
pressure to interfere with its decisions on the appropriate monetary policy—I was certain it
wouldn’t—but the opposite. The question was whether the implementation of appropriate
monetary policy would become a political issue.
Mind you, today’s statement will be examined very carefully for political advantage, and
attempts to gain that advantage will be made. But almost certainly there will be none, I think for
two reasons. First, the general sense of the appropriate implementation of our policy ensures our
credibility, and second, there is the clarity of our communication. Now remember, the
communication can work only if the first part is accurate. During the last several years, we have
gone from being accommodative, to being accommodative for a considerable period, to a time of
patience, to removing accommodation at a measured pace. And moving from accommodation
toward a return to neutral at a measured pace is not only the appropriate policy, but it will be, in
my view, not at all a political issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.

September 21, 2004

71 of 100

MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As others have indicated, the U.S.
economy appears to be poised to pick up gradually from the soft patch that afflicted it over the
late spring and early summer but, as others have also said, perhaps more gradually than we had
thought at the last meeting or earlier this year. In response to that reality, the Greenbook has
undergone another makeover, with the new forecast pointing to a more subdued growth outlook
while still featuring stable inflation. The staff has extended the forecast period, and we now see
that the output gap does not close until late 2006. I have no strong objections to this new
forecast, and unlike the last two meetings when I was very anxious about the downside risk to
the baseline, the risks around this baseline seem to me somewhat more balanced, although the
range of uncertainty is still quite large.
I might give a litany of the risks or list why I buy into the forecast, but I’d like to move
on to the question that Janet and others raised: Why, with all the stimulus in the pipeline, is the
economy facing a prospect of very low inflation and a resource utilization gap that closes only at
the end of 2006, when the so-called recession was extremely mild and so many years behind us?
I, of course, don’t have the answer to that question, but I’m going to offer a few hypotheses.
One I’d like to reject is the oil price spike. I think Governor Bernanke and others have it
right that that seems to have been part of the negative supply shock in the early part of the year.
But with oil prices waning, I think that seems unlikely to be the real source of the problem that
the economy is facing.
Let me mention two or three more likely options. One is that the bursting of the asset
bubble and the series of shocks that have hit the United States since early 2001 may have been
more problematic than we originally thought. And here I disagree a little with the tone that Ned
took. As we’ve learned from the Japanese experience, it can take many years to counteract the

September 21, 2004

72 of 100

fallout from the bursting of an asset bubble. And it may be, even with the better policy mix
we’ve had here than in Japan, that it still could take longer than anyone originally expected to
deal fully with the fallout of both the bursting high-tech bubble and the series of subsequent
shocks, all of which I think have been fairly significant. We’ve seen this reflected in the
phenomenon that’s being called “business caution.” I, maybe more than others, think that
there’s something to this. As I’ve read the views of Reserve Bank directors that you have
communicated in your letters relating to their discount rate decisions, a number of boards of
directors have at least some members—in several Banks, many members—who buy into the
view that there’s a sense of caution among businesses. If one looks at various surveys such as
the NFIB survey and the survey from Duke University of 200 CFOs, they all talk about a malaise
story. The survey of CFOs indicates that they expect growth to be only 2.8 percent over the next
four quarters, noticeably lower than even our staff forecast. I think this business malaise issue is
very important to watch and, as firms go into their capital planning cycle, I believe we’ll get
some more information on it. But I do not think it’s something we can reject quickly.
A second factor affecting our economy is what has been described as “global
imbalances.” But the imbalances are not between this country and the rest of the world. I think
the imbalances are within the other economies, and Ned picked up on some of this. First, we’ve
seen that the financial indicators in almost all of the major industrial economies have been
marked down or have shown some expectation of slower growth going forward, just as ours has.
Market participants in Japan, the euro area, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Australia—in the
industrial economies around the world—have been marking down their forecasts of economic
growth. The second point to make about the rest of the world is that domestic demand has been
incredibly weak in almost all of those economies. I think Ned covered this quite well, and I

September 21, 2004

73 of 100

won’t take the time to repeat all of it except to note something that no one else has observed—
namely, as was pointed out very clearly in the Greenbook Part 2, domestic demand in the euro
area was growing only 0.6 percent. Net exports there accounted for almost all of the growth.
And obviously we’ve seen a marking down of growth expectations in Japan, which again has
been driven primarily by net exports. So we really are the only engine of economic growth in
the world. And we are in this interesting dichotomy with China and the rest of the world, which
may in fact play into some of the issues that Karen was talking about earlier.
The third possible explanation is that investment in new capital goods, such as high-tech
goods, may be less urgent than we had thought. This could be for two actually quite different
reasons. One is that there may be a deeper pool of productive capital than we had envisioned
and one that is also longer lived than we had originally thought. The combination of both moreproductive and longer-lived capital would support highly productive and profitable businesses,
which we have seen, but would also reflect an environment in which demand for new investment
is not so great. One important finding in this regard is from some work that two staff members,
Rochelle Antoniewicz and Erik Johnson, did at my request. I asked them to divide up the entire
Compustat data base into six or seven non-overlapping industry groups and to examine the
financing gap in each. They found that the gap in each industry group except oil and gas has
declined over the 2000-04 period. The overall drop in the financing gap in this analysis was
$291 billion, which is really quite a big swing across the industrial sectors they looked at. So it
may well be that businesses view their existing capital goods as fully adequate to deal with the
outlook that they see.
The other aspect of this possible explanation is that the slow growth in capital
expenditures may indicate that the new high-tech investments now coming on board are not

September 21, 2004

74 of 100

nearly as attractive as the prior generation of such equipment. One piece of evidence that
supports this theory is that both our staff and the BLS have estimated that the deflators for
various classes of high-tech equipment, such as desktops, servers, and laptops, have all fallen
relatively little since 2001. For example, our staff estimates that the deflator for desktops has
shown only a 10 to 20 percent decline year over year from 2002 to 2003. That seems like a
fairly large decline in the deflator, but in fact if one goes back to 2000 and 2001, that number
was 50 percent. All of this suggests that there may not be, as I’ve said many times, a “killer ap”
out there. In more technical terms, there’s not a technological advancement that might catalyze
new investments. So we may be confronting a phase where some of the positive supply shock
that we experienced before has worn off and businesses see that and aren’t so eager to invest.
That may explain why one of the areas of weakness that we are dealing with is equipment
software.
So those are two or three different hypotheses. But whatever the explanation that
ultimately proves true—and it may not be any of those—I think the macroeconomic result is the
same. In a textbook sense, the IS curve seems to have shifted down toward the origin, which
gives both a lower effective equilibrium real interest rate and lower income. Overall, we seem to
be confronting a new, less attractive set of interactions or dynamics that include growth in final
demand but relatively slow growth compared with potential, low investment in both high-tech
equipment and perhaps inventory, and some slowing of growth in the demand for labor and in
hours worked. While all of this is still positive, it’s slower—more punkish if you will.
How should we handle this range of outcomes? I think here the Greenbook and the new
interest rate assumptions the staff has made may give us the appropriate hint. I’ll just pick up on
the same words others have used by saying that I’m “quite comfortable” with moving rates up

September 21, 2004

75 of 100

25 basis points at this meeting. But going forward I think we should be more “pragmatic”—if I
can use a word that’s not so attractive in this community—or more “flexible,” to pick up on
Don’s word. We have to let the data and changed outlook lead us going forward. That may
imply a pause at some point in the not-too-distant future, or it may imply a pickup in the pace of
our policy moves at some time in the foreseeable future. It also may imply some change in
language—not at this time, but at some point in the not-too-distant future. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economic indicators, as others have said,
have been variable in the last few months. But on net they show continued expansion, though at
a slower pace than in the second half of last year and the beginning of this year. And as
Governor Ferguson just mentioned, recent surveys show that business attitudes, both at large
companies and small businesses, while still positive, are a little less optimistic than they were
last quarter.
I’d like to use a couple of anecdotes to throw on the table a few more hypothetical
explanations for what may be happening here. One is that CEOs, even in meetings with stock
analysts, sometimes are mentioning that their management teams have shifted their focus since
June, when the final rules came out for Sarbanes–Oxley, to implementing audit adaptations and
internal controls by year-end in order to be compliant with that legislation. Those activities take
time that management normally would use to make decisions on business expansion. They don’t
know what to expect with regard to their ability to comply with Sarbanes–Oxley, and we’re
already beginning to see in some 10Q warnings by some companies that they may not be totally
compliant by year-end. The reputation risk here is very significant for these companies.

September 21, 2004

76 of 100

Second, another interesting development—and I will cite the same Duke survey that
Governor Ferguson did—is that while CFOs of large companies are expecting GDP growth to
moderate to only 2.8 percent in the next twelve months, they still are anticipating earnings
growth at their own companies of 13.4 percent on average. This gets back to a comment I’ve
made in the past, which is that, in talking to CFOs, I realize that they still live in nominal worlds.
And one of their reasons for caution in both spending and hiring is their concern about how they
can deliver double-digit earnings growth to the Street when they see modest sales and very
moderate inflation in the months ahead. The only way to get that bottom-line growth is to
control expenses.
The other comment I’d like to make is that, overall, companies are stronger. One of the
indicators I look at is the pattern of changes in corporate debt ratings. Worldwide, this will be
the first year since 1998 that we’ve seen more debt ratings rise from below investment grade up
to investment grade than we’ve seen go down from investment grade to below it. It has taken six
years for that to happen, and it’s one of the reasons we’ve seen credit spreads come in.
The latest inflation data continue to show that inflation is moderating from the rates
recorded in the spring—again with health care a notable exception. That moderating rate of
inflation is one of the things that make me feel that the expansion is likely to continue, though at
a modest pace. Therefore, I feel that the position we have taken—that policy accommodation
can likely be removed at a measured pace—is still the appropriate signal to send to the market.
That signal, I think, has helped to extend the expansion because it has helped the long-term debt
market. As several of you have already noted, long-term debt rates have come down even
though we’ve been raising the funds rate. And I think our credibility, as we move along this

September 21, 2004

77 of 100

path, will keep capital within easy access and affordable to companies when they do have the
confidence to make additional business investment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Mr. Reinhart.
MR. REINHART.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With the help of the first exhibit
in the material distributed at the break, I want to begin by pointing out several notable
features in financial markets over the past six weeks likely bearing on your policy
deliberations. As shown by the solid line in the top left panel, short-term interest rate
futures indicate that market participants currently expect the Committee to tighten
gradually over the next year and a half, with the funds rate reaching 2⅞ percent by
early 2006. Compared with the interest rate sentiment prevailing in the markets at the
time of the August meeting (the dotted line), this path is a little firmer in the near
term and shallower later on. Apparently, investors read recent statements by
policymakers as confirming a desire on your part to continue to remove
accommodation and interpreted data releases—especially subdued readings on
inflation—as indicating that a lessened cumulative amount of firming will be required
to deliver satisfactory economic performance. The shift over the intermeeting period
was small relative to that in the run-up to the August meeting, when the weak
employment report for July was released between the publication of the August
Greenbook and your last meeting. Current market expectations relative to those at the
time of that Greenbook (the dashed line) are about ½ percentage point lower one and
one-half years from now—similar to the revision to the staff’s policy assumption
from Greenbook to Greenbook.
The top right panel focuses on near-term expectations by plotting the policy path
that is consistent with the futures curve and assumes that the Committee will move
only at regularly scheduled meetings. Those expectations indicate a near certainty of
a ¼ point hike today—which is also what dealers told the Domestic Desk in its
regular survey—and put the funds rate near 2 percent at year-end. Thus, market
participants expect you to pause sometime soon in the process of removing policy
accommodation—probably in December. These expectations seem to be held
relatively firmly, in that implied volatility on near-term Eurodollar futures rates
(given in the middle left panel) has trended lower, a phenomenon not unique to this
market. Despite subdued readings on interest rate volatility, market prices have
responded forcefully to key data releases. The middle right panel compares the
change in the ten-year Treasury yield (plotted on the vertical axis) in the half-hour
surrounding the release of the employment report with the surprise in the nonfarm
payrolls (or the actual value less a survey measure), which is given along the
horizontal axis. As shown by the red regression line, the average response to
employment surprises in the last year has been considerably more marked than in the
prior ten years. As President Geithner noted, one possibility linking the two middle
2

The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

September 21, 2004

78 of 100

panels is that the explicitly conditional nature of your statements has lowered
uncertainty about your actions and focused attention on a few indicators. The arrow
in the figure points to the observation corresponding to the release of the August
employment report on September 3, which is a bit of a puzzle. The monthly gain in
payrolls was a touch weaker than market participants expected, yet rates rose
considerably. You might rationalize this as owing to backward revisions to the
employment data, but I think it also shows the market’s judgment that the data were
not soft enough to halt your process of removing policy accommodation.
The net effect of other data over the intermeeting period, however, more than
offset this one-day rise in rates. The downward revision to policy expectations was
associated with a considerable relaxation in financial conditions, in that, as shown in
the bottom panel, corporate yields are lower, equity prices posted sizable gains, while
the exchange value of the dollar moved sideways. How you interpret this easing no
doubt influences your decisions today both on the funds rate target and on the words
of the statement.
Members might view the decline in yields and the concomitant rise in share prices
as the dawning recognition among investors that a lower track for the real risk-free
rate of interest will be necessary to support economic growth. As discussed at the top
of exhibit 2, a decision to hold the funds rate at 1½ percent would no doubt encourage
an even more substantial revision to the outlook for policy. While the Committee
may be convinced that a sustainable economic expansion is in place, it may be
concerned that the pace of output growth will not be sufficiently vigorous to ensure
satisfactory progress in reducing economic slack.
As shown in the middle left panel, the advance in payrolls has been fitful in recent
months and perhaps indicates a lingering hesitancy on the part of businesses to make
commitments, which several of you have already mentioned. If that hesitancy
continues for too long, then it may also be reflected again in capital spending and
begin to dent consumer confidence. Persisting slack has also rolled back a portion of
the turn-up in inflation of the first half of the year. As can be seen in the middle right
panel and as noted by President McTeer, the three-month change in the CPI has
dropped back to the levels of last year, when worries of the possibility of deflation
surfaced. And market participants apparently have lowered their expectations for
inflation going forward. For instance, as plotted in the bottom left panel, the nominal
one-year forward rate ten years ahead, which has been quite sensitive to longer-run
inflation sentiment, has edged down to just below 6 percent. If resource slack
persists, inflation could fall to levels that the Committee might find uncomfortably
low, given the limits to conventional policy maneuvering posed by the zero bound to
nominal interest rates.
I’d add that the “measured pace” language would not seem to pose an obstacle to
pausing in the process of firming, in that futures rates indicate that financial market
participants already anticipate inaction at one of the next three meetings—although

September 21, 2004

79 of 100

evidently not at this one. Indeed, a pause at this time might be seen as having the
benefit of ensuring that market participants do not come inappropriately to view the
“measured pace” language as a promise to firm policy 25 basis points at every
meeting. There is, however, an important obstacle to putting the process of
tightening on hold at this meeting: The universal conviction in markets that you will
not do so implies that the reaction to inaction could be sizable. A pickup in mortgage
hedging flows could magnify any initial downdraft in yields. The rally in fixedincome markets in recent weeks has pulled down the thirty-year mortgage rate to 5¾
percent, which is shown as the vertical line in the bottom right panel. According to
an estimate of the cumulative distribution of rates on outstanding mortgages, about
35 percent of them could be refinanced economically given current pricing. Because
of the wave of refinancings last year, outstanding mortgages are tightly clustered at
rates not much lower than the prevailing level. As a result, further reductions in
longer-term yields would likely lead to substantial prepayments of mortgages. The
experience of last year suggests that the resultant shortening of the duration of
mortgage-backed securities would prompt purchases of other longer-term securities,
amplifying the decline in rates and elevating volatility. Deviating from the currently
expected path of measured firming would seem to risk a considerable easing of
financial conditions, which may not be judged as appropriate at this time.
But the most compelling reason not to opt for alternative A is that you see merit
in tightening, the subject of exhibit 3. The Committee may believe that the economic
expansion will remain on a desirable track under current financial conditions, which
incorporate market expectations of gradual policy firming. In such circumstances, it
would seem appropriate to validate those expectations by tightening 25 basis points at
this meeting, as in the B and C alternatives presented in the Bluebook. As can be
seen in the middle left panel, even with the two tightening steps that the Committee
has taken to date, the real federal funds rate is still close to zero and near the bottom
of the range of equilibrium values estimated by the staff. A modest boost to the
nominal funds rate would also be consistent with a number of monetary policy rules
shown in the middle right panel. And given the forces likely to impinge on aggregate
demand in coming quarters—including the efforts by households to rebuild savings,
the swing from fiscal impetus to restraint, and the intensifying drag of net exports—
the Committee may find a quarter point move to be a sufficient step in removing
policy accommodation at this time.
As to the wording of the statement—which is the only distinction between
alternatives B and C—if the Committee put much weight on the possibility that
growth will rebound sharply, it may believe that the scope of its future action is
unduly constrained on the upside by the “measured pace” language and may prefer to
drop the last two sentences from the statement. That may be especially so if you
interpret the decline in risk spreads and increases in the price–earnings ratio shown in
the table at the bottom left as evidence of an increased appetite for risk-taking. In
that case, you may be concerned that the spur to spending of a lower cost of funds
and higher wealth poses the risk that the growth of aggregate demand would quickly

September 21, 2004

80 of 100

outstrip that of potential output. While such an outcome may be welcomed if the
output gap were as large as in the staff forecast, you might share President Guynn’s
fear that the prospects for aggregate supply were described not by the Greenbook
baseline but by the “less room to grow” alternative simulation. In that alternative, the
NAIRU is higher, and the labor force participation rate does not rise any further to
augment labor inputs going forward, putting inflation on an upward march toward
2 percent, as shown in the bottom right panel.
Removing the last two sentences would certainly surprise market participants,
who would presumably build in expectations of more-substantial action to come.
Therefore, you probably would not want to consider acquiring the flexibility
associated with alternative C unless you also desire an immediate tightening of
financial conditions. Alternative B would provide the comfort of aligning your
decision with prevailing expectations while giving only limited and highly
conditioned guidance on your future actions. Retaining the risk assessment of August
would seem appropriate if you believe that you will have to be cautious about the
extent and speed with which policy accommodation should be removed. After all, it
is not yet firmly established that the economy has exited its soft patch, and you may
prefer to await more information on that score.
Your last exhibit updates table 1 from the Bluebook in light of comments received
since its distribution on Thursday. In particular, as shown in bold, it seemed clearer
to link the description of the performance of output and the labor market in the
rationale paragraph by writing, “After moderating earlier this year partly in response
to the substantial rise in energy prices, output growth appears to have regained some
traction and labor market conditions have improved modestly.” That concludes my
prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Vincent?
MS. MINEHAN. I see that you made a slight change in B5 where the proposed language
is “to be roughly equal” as opposed to “are roughly equal.”
MR. REINHART. That was at the suggestion of the house grammarian, who complained
about the wording in the August and previous meeting statements.
MS. MINEHAN. Okay. So that really is unchanged, so to speak, from the current
statement? I was reading it and wondering, What am I reading here?
MR. REINHART. I don’t think my maneuverings are that subtle! [Laughter]

September 21, 2004

81 of 100

MS. MINEHAN. One never knows. Another change, which I had submitted as a
suggestion and I guess no one likes it but I’ll raise it anyway, is whether or not we want to make
B6 look more like A6 by referring to sustainable growth as well as maintaining price stability.
Now, maybe I should leave that to the Chairman to recommend. That may be a subject for the
next part of the meeting.
MR. REINHART. I would note that some market analysts have pointed to such a
possible inclusion as an explicit signal that policy will pause.
MS. MINEHAN. We would stop?
MR. REINHART. Yes. So that would have more import than just aligning the statement
to the goals in the Federal Reserve Act. It would be taken as a market signal.
MS. MINEHAN. Okay. I sort of figured that, but I also thought that might not be a bad
thing. But, again, that’s a subject for our discussion a few minutes from now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, let me make just a few short
remarks. The general outlook, as best I can judge, has been fairly well described around this
table, and I don’t have anything significant to add. I do want to respond in a way to President
Minehan’s last remark. The only thing that I think should be, and probably is, on the table, is
whether we should encourage lower ten-year interest rates, given how close they are to levels
that would prompt a lot of mortgage refinancings and a significant drop in duration in the
mortgage market, with the potential cumulative effects of such a development that others have
pointed to.
We have to be careful largely because, while there’s no question that some softening has
occurred in the overall expansion of the economy, the numbers in the Greenbook, if they
materialize, are really quite strong, and in that regard it’s quite credible to forecast much more

September 21, 2004

82 of 100

rapid growth in employment than we have experienced in recent months. That’s largely because
the standard error in the payroll series is quite large, and other indicators of employment have
been quite a bit stronger than the payroll series. For example, in recent months the net difference
between hires and separations in the private sector has shown strength, job openings have
increased, and initial claims have been remarkably low. So it is by no means out of the question,
especially since productivity growth is probably slowing at this stage, to come up with some
outsized employment number. And if we take seriously the scatter diagram that Vincent has
shown with respect to the response to employment surprises, we could get a fairly dramatic
change in financial conditions in this particular market.
One concern in the latter regard is that the carry trade has come back. If duration falls on
top of that, we may end up with a situation that, in the event of an employment surprise, could
create some significant collateral damage in the balance sheets of American businesses, with
negative repercussions on the economy. Remember that a surprise in which interest rates fall
and, hence, create capital gains in balance sheets, never caused anybody to go broke. There’s an
asymmetry here relating to the speed of adjustment.
So it strikes me that, even if it is our opinion today that we will pause at the November
meeting, we should not convey that message at this point because we would be taking risks that I
think are unnecessary and could be quite costly if we are wrong. On the other hand, the risk of
fostering a presumption at this meeting that we will increase rates further in November and even
in December leaves us in a position where we can pause in either of those two months or in both,
if we choose to do so, without significant consequences. If we do decide to pause later in the
year, we will end up with lower long-term rates, higher bond prices, and presumably higher asset
prices on the balance sheets of a number of financial institutions.

September 21, 2004

83 of 100

In sum, I think we have to lean against conveying the presumption that we will pause or
essentially bring to an end our current policy course, which I think has been more successful
than we generally expected when we initiated it. Keeping our press statement essentially
unchanged but obviously leaving open the possibility of a policy change therefore strikes me as
the best thing to do. Accordingly, I recommend a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds
rate and a basically unchanged statement as in alternative B. Remember that we have a sevenweek interval before the next meeting, and a lot can happen one way or the other in that period.
Before we take a vote, I’d like to have copies of the proposed statement distributed. Why don’t
we all read the draft release, and the floor will then be open for discussion. [Pause] President
Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for increasing the intended
funds rate by 25 basis points and for the statement as written. I’m reminded of something my
mother used to say when I was a child. I grew up in a family of four children with lots of
cousins around, and she would often say, “Children are to be seen, not heard.” And I think that’s
true of monetary policy today. We should be as quiet as we can possibly be. In fact, as a general
rule, I think one of our goals should be to make policy very noncontroversial and predictable,
and we should not raise issues that don’t have to be raised. So I support this proposal
completely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.

September 21, 2004

84 of 100

MR. STERN. I, too, support your recommendation, and I would largely echo Bill
Poole’s remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. I support the recommendation and the press release.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I support your recommendation as to the policy change. I take your
point about the language of the statement. As I said in my comments—and other people have
mentioned it as well—the big unknown is how much employment is going to grow. I certainly
hope your predictions are on the mark. I’m rooting for us to be successful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way, if the Greenbook projections
actually turn out to be right, that would be extraordinary.
MS. MINEHAN. Oh, yes. I’ll buy the Greenbook employment projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I support your recommendation, particularly about the last sentence of
the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I support your recommendations, Mr. Chairman. I think the current
structure of rates is close enough to what we need, and I would hesitate to do something that
would cause a lot of fluctuations in expectations. If we get to the point in November or

September 21, 2004

85 of 100

December where we pause, I think rates will go down. It will trigger some of that refinancing
we’ve talked about. I’m not really worried about the financial system in that situation; it’s pretty
robust. It proved that in the summer of ’03. There wasn’t that much collateral damage, but we
don’t have to inflict it until we have to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. I support your recommendation. I would note that if we get to the
end of this year and feel we have to take a pause then, we actually may want some of that
refinancing if that’s going to help consumers. So let’s not be afraid of getting all the help we can
get to keep the economy growing as long as inflation is under control.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. I support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. I support it as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. I support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Secretary, will you read the appropriate language?
MR. GRAMLICH. I support it, too—even though you didn’t care! [Laughter]

September 21, 2004

86 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sorry, I didn’t mean to skip you. I realize that silence
would not have been your position.
MR. BERNARD. Let me begin with the directive wording, which is on page 15 of the
Bluebook: “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 1¾ percent.”
With regard to the wording in the press statement that is formally voted on, the second
full paragraph of the draft statement: “The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks
to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few quarters to be
roughly equal. With underlying inflation expected to be relatively low, the Committee believes
that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless,
the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation
to maintain price stability.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bernanke
Governor Bies
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Hoenig
Governor Kohn
President Minehan
Governor Olson
President Pianalto
President Poole

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

September 21, 2004

87 of 100

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vincent Reinhart, you wanted to mention something about
the minutes?
MR. REINHART. I just wanted to give a quick report on the experiment with the
expedited minutes. Once again, we got the Committee to indicate its inclination to approve the
minutes in time to meet our deadline. That is, we would have been able to publish the minutes
two and a half weeks after the August meeting. Once again, it was a close call. The Chairman
has asked me to put a discussion of the minutes experiment on the agenda for December. I’ll
brief you then on some of the lessons we’ve learned and ask for guidance going forward. Now I
think the Chairman has a report on other developments relating to the Secretariat.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not at the moment. I want to put the FOMC meeting on
pause, as we like to say, and ask that the Board members proceed to my office.
MR. BERNARD. Let me mention that, as soon as the Board members come back, there
will be a picture-taking session. And unless there is a change in plans, you will be asked to
move to that end of the room.
MS. MINEHAN. When is this? Today?
MR. BERNARD. Yes, before lunch.
[Recess]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would everyone be seated please? I would like to report
that by unanimous vote the Board of Governors accepted the requests of the twelve Reserve
Banks for an increase of ¼ percentage point in the discount rate—much to everybody’s surprise!
As we close today, I would like to take a moment to recognize and to thank the
gentleman sitting on my right because this is Normand Bernard’s final meeting as Deputy
Secretary of the Committee. He has announced his intention to retire from the Federal Reserve

September 21, 2004

88 of 100

effective at the beginning of November. It is the end of an era. Norm has worked at the Federal
Reserve for more than forty-two years. As far as we can tell, today’s meeting is the 345th that
Norm has attended in serving this Committee, and I want to emphasize the word “serve.” His
dedication, his integrity, and his willingness to do whatever needed to be done have meant that
Committee members could always count on him. His institutional memory, as you well know, is
prodigious, as of course are his files! [Laughter]
From a personal perspective, he and his team have been a pleasure to work with
throughout our meetings and in the preparation of the minutes and transcripts. And Norm
always has an amusing story to contribute. I have here in my hand a piece of paper, which is a
bit yellowed, signed in 1962 by William McChesney Martin, granting Norm access to the
minutes and other confidential material of the Federal Open Market Committee. As the fourth
Chairman of the Federal Reserve since then, I regret that I am the one to witness the end of
Norm’s extraordinary forty-two years.
Today, Norm, we hope you will consent to join us in having a group picture taken
because we would like to have it inscribed and presented to you as a token of our sincere
appreciation. Moreover, I understand that there is a cake in the next room prepared for us as part
of the celebration. It has the number “345” outlined on its frosting. That, I can assure you, is not
the calorie count. [Laughter] It’s commemorating the record number of FOMC meetings that
you have attended. I know I speak for the entire Committee when I express our deep gratitude
for your hard work, your good humor, and your steadfast support over the years. We wish you
the very best in the future.
MR. BERNARD. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. [Applause] Well, this is a
surprise. I don’t know what to say. Obviously, I’ve stayed on about a dozen years beyond the

September 21, 2004

89 of 100

time when I could have retired because I liked the work. I joined the FOMC Secretariat in 1968
and have enjoyed the experience immensely ever since. I’ve especially liked the work
atmosphere and the people I have been working with. In some cases, I’ve known you for quite a
long period. For example, as I look around the table, I’m reminded that two of you were fellow
staff members in the 1960s—President Poole and Governor Gramlich. And several of my
former colleagues from the 1960s became members of the Board of Governors, including Nancy
Teeters, Martha Seger, Lyle Gramley, Chuck Partee, and Bob Holland. Governor Kohn came
somewhat later. [Laughter] Presidents Yellen and Minehan worked here at the Board as well.
The one constant was the high quality of the staff and the Committee members with whom I
have worked. I’ve enjoyed my association with all of you over these many years, and I thank
you for the friendship that you have expressed and you, Mr. Chairman, for your very kind words
this morning. Again, thank you all very much. [Applause]
END OF MEETING

