Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
September 17,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1990

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson,
and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of
Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
September 17, 1990
MR. CROSS.
[Unintelligible].
Since the last FOMC meeting
the dollar has slipped about 6 to 7 percent against [the yen].
The
market continues to focus on the weak fundamentals of the economy and
the implications of that are lower U.S. interest rates and easier
monetary policy. Of course, the United States already has the lowest
short-term rates, I think, of anyone in the G-10; and the market is
concentrating on the fact that, if anything, rates are likely to go
lower here and they may be going in the other direction in some of the
other countries. During the Kuwait crisis the dollar hasn't seen as
much of an upward movement from the kind of safe haven consideration
that might have been expected from earlier situations.
In fact,
[those in the trading] rooms around town tell us that since August 2
their older traders who have been through these situations before
haven't done as well as the younger traders who haven't had that
experience. So, the safe haven consideration has not given as much
upward momentum as the old hands would have expected. But there is
still some effect. For example, last Friday, when it looked as if
there was going to be real shooting with real bullets and on similar
occasions when the situation has become that serious, the dollar has
shown some upward movement.
So far, though, I think the effect has
been mainly in helping to keep the dollar from sliding more. And it
does give people pause about going too short against the dollar.
There has been an awful lot of attention on the yen, given that
Japanese interest rates have risen significantly since our last
Committee meeting, and there are expectations of, if anything,
possible further increases--in contrast to the situation here. And as
the dollar/yen rate has declined, we think there has been some
increase in hedging by some of the Japanese investors through currency
options and [unintelligible].
So far we haven't heard of a major
strategic decision for massive kinds of hedging or currency shifting.
But there is the danger that if the dollar continues to slip we could
get a lot more of that at some point.
So, Mr. Chairman, we sit here
in a rather precarious position in which the dollar in trade weighted
terms is at about the low point that we hit around the end of 1987.
The decline thus far has not been disorderly or frightening, but it
could move in that direction very suddenly. That completes my report,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Are there questions for Mr.
Cross?
I assume, Sam, that you have not been getting any indications
from the Treasury to pull out the intervention club?
MR. CROSS. We have not gotten any serious indications. They
have, of course, become more attentive to the situation as the dollar
has continued to slip. But there has not been evidence of that desire
at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
update us please?

Okay.

Peter Sternlight, could you

MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've continued to
aim for reserve conditions consistent with a fed funds rate around 8
percent. Operations have been conducted against the background of
market expectations of a more or less imminent monetary policy easing
move. That sense of imminence seemed to reach a high about a week ago

9/17/90

when the market focused very intensely on the employment report for
August. Since then, the anticipation of an immediate move has faded a
bit, but there are still expectations of a fairly near-term move as
the economy is seen as quite soft, though not collapsing. And outside
of monetary policy, there are expectations--related to the view that
an agreement on a budget deficit reduction package is close to being
reached--about market reaction to any such package. Since the August
meeting short rates have come down somewhat--about 15 to 20 basis
points for bills--while longer-term rates are about unchanged to
slightly higher depending on one's precise starting point. That
leaves the long bond yield right now a shade over 9 percent, about
9.03 percent when I last looked. That's my brief summary, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?
If not, Mike
Prell, would you update us on the more relevant economic statistics of
recent weeks?
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, we've begun to get some information
on developments since the Iraqi evasion of Kuwait but the data really
do not provide a decisive reading on even the current quarter let
alone where we are headed in the remainder of the year and into early
1991. Read literally, the employment report, retail sales data, and
other economic figures that have come in would appear to us to be on
track with our expectation for the third quarter. At this point,
based on the data, we have no reason to make a significant revision.
Looking toward the fourth quarter, given the flow of data, there
probably would be little reason to make any significant change. Our
forecast had been for 1/2 percent GNP growth; in essence, we were
saying there was little more than a 50/50 bet that we would be in
positive territory. I would have to say that the anecdotal evidence
coming in through the reports from banks and everything else we hear
has been quite negative. My reading would be that it might even be
somewhat more negative than we thought would be coming in, given the
kind of economic environment we had forecast. So, I'd have to say
that if we were to write down a Greenbook forecast today, we'd
probably be more in the vicinity of zero. Whether we'll be in plus or
minus territory in the fourth quarter. I think, at this point, is
really too close to call. But, as Peter suggested, many private
analysts may be thinking it's not evident that a significant
cumulative collapse is in process at this point. Indeed, one factor-which I would defer to Ted Truman to discuss further--as we look out
over the next few quarters, is the decline in the dollar. While it
may have some additional adverse price level consequences, it
certainly seems to indicate that there's a greater likelihood that the
trade sector will be a source of some buoyancy in the economy. I
might just turn to Ted to see whether he has anything he'd like to
add.
MR. TRUMAN.

You said it fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike or for Ted?
Don Kohn, would you like to fill us in on your area?

If not,

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, the aggregates have strengthened
about as projected in the Bluebook; in fact, they may be just a tick
stronger than we were projecting. Given a September projection for M2

9/17/90

of a little over 6 percent and for M3 of around 4 percent, for Juneto-September we're looking at 5 percent for M2 compared to 4 percent
in the Bluebook and 3-1/4 percent for M3 compared to 2-1/2 percent in
the Bluebook. Generally speaking, the strength has been in the liquid
components of these aggregates including Ml, which is several
percentage points stronger than we'd expected, and in money market
funds. Core deposit components are still fairly sluggish. We have
bank credit data for August which suggest a pickup to around 10
percent, but a lot of that pickup is in reverse RPs and securities
loans; business credit remains quite sluggish. Consumer credit has
picked up a little but that reflects a drop-off in securitizations;
otherwise, it remains sluggish as well. And real estate credit
appears to have dropped from the 8 to 12 percent area it has been in
for several quarters now to around five percent in August.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, I'd like to
ask among the Board members and the Presidents whether they have a
sense of change in their views since our last telephone meeting.
MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne, Mr. Chairman. I have
observed a clear and significant change toward the weak side in this
District in the last several weeks. And I think that economic
activity across the board has slowed both in August and in the first
part of September. Our manufacturers report a continuing decline in
business; in fact, we have not seen as sharp a decline since the
recession of the early '80s. Retailers generally indicate that sales
have fallen from the prior month, and that is continuing into
September. Bankers report an overall decline in lending activity. I
would say that a recession mentality has taken hold, and I think it's
not limited just to this District. Business sentiment is in the
process of thinking pretty much on a wide basis that we're headed
toward a recession and I think that is also the consumer mentality.
As I look at the national economy, my sense is that economic
growth is essentially at a standstill based on the employment,
production, and sales data, and that negative growth is the likely
outcome for the fourth quarter. And I think if we wait to ease until
a recession is upon us, we have waited too long.

I think it's

important to be somewhat anticipatory if we're going to stay ahead of
the recessionary curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed, is it your impression that if we
were to ease we'd bring long-term rates down?
MR. BOEHNE. If we did ease, I think it would be very
important for us to be up front and quite clear that we are easing
because we are trying to offset some [slack] in the economy rather
If we did that,
than to try to find some other reasons for doing it.
I think we would have a reasonable chance of at least keeping longterm rates from falling or falling very much. That's a risk, but I
think we minimize the risk by saying that we are easing because of the
softening in the economy. The recessionary mentality is moving
rapidly in business thinking and an easing on our part would seem to
be a very reasonable expectation.
MR. SYRON.
MR. BOEHNE.

Ed, Dick Syron.
Yes.

May I ask a question?

9/17/90

MR. SYRON.
I agree with your analysis about where the
economy is.
Certainly, in the First District our sentiment is
comparable to that in the 1973 recession in terms of people's
expectations.
I agree with your view of what's going to happen in the
fourth quarter, and I think a move in the easing direction [is
If we were to
But I am wondering about the timing.
appropriate.]
take the course that you mentioned, which is to explain that we're
easing--even before a budget accord has been reached and with the
uncertainties in the Middle East--because the economy is so soft, how
much weight would you give to the chance that people would expect
further easing because they would be saying: "Gee, the Fed has gone
ahead and eased, when they clearly didn't want to, preferring to wait
for a budget accord. They must think things are awfully bad."
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I don't think it makes a lot of difference
whether we ease today or tomorrow or the next day. Personally, I'm
growing increasingly uncomfortable with the continuation of a nochange policy. If we think that there's going to be a significant
budget announcement in the next couple of days and we could [wait], I
don't have a problem with that.
But I think we can get ourselves
paralyzed waiting for the next development to occur to provide a more
favorable environment to ease. And then we could find out we're
staring a recession right in the face and we would have to ease fairly
dramatically.
I think it looks as though we're more in control of the
situation if we ease the same way we tightened: that is, to take a
series of steps when the timing seems right, being somewhat
anticipatory about it.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry. One question I
have--perhaps this should be directed to Don--is: If we were to ease
very modestly, what would be the expectation of the effects on nominal
growth in '91 if we wanted it focused on [unintelligible].
What might
happen to nominal growth if we kept the interest rate constant?
That
probably would result in nominal growth being higher as a result of
the oil shock, and the Board staff's expectation was that nominal
growth would remain unchanged. If interest rates go down, it seems to
me we are probably talking about higher nominal growth, which is going
to result primarily in higher inflation. I wonder what Don's view is
on this.
MR. KOHN.
projections.

I think I'll defer to Mike who makes the GNP

MR. PRELL. Well, I think the direction should be reasonably
predictable: that if we take a more expansive approach by pushing
rates lower at this point than they otherwise would have been, we
would have somewhat higher nominal GNP growth next year. Our reading
of history suggests that in the short run that probably is going to
have more effect on the real side than on the price side. But I
should underscore that a movement of a fraction of a percentage point
isn't likely to have a dramatic effect in any event in 1991.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black. To get the other side
on the floor, let me just say that in looking at the national figures
the sense of our directors is that the economy is going to continue at
a pretty slow pace but we don't really [expect it to] turn down now
[unintelligible].
And I think this may be a very crucial point in
policy where we have to take a little less in the short run in the

9/17/90

interest of our long-run objective of bringing inflation down.

So,

I

It may be that we'll need to
would urge that we not move just yet.
move soon, but I don't seen the evidence quite yet that suggests we
My answer to the question you asked Ed a while ago is
ought to move.
And I think
that an easing move would raise long-term interest rates.
that could be very counterproductive for the economy.
MR. GUFFEY.

Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Roger.

[Unintelligible] the District economy will show
MR. GUFFEY.
relatively [unintelligible], albeit slow. Agriculture is the bright
part, though it is still uncertain because of conditions in the Middle
East.
On the question that you asked Ed Boehne, I line up about right
in the center of that.
It's quite clear to me, given the weakness in
the dollar and the uncertainty about the Middle East and the budget
accord, that one simply would push long-term interest rates higher-and perhaps even much higher--and the dollar lower.
I don't think
this is the time to take that kind of action.
MR. HOSKINS.

This is Lee Hoskins,

I am here now.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Mr. Chairman, Jerry Corrigan up in
New York. Let me make several comments.
First of all, this dollar
question is becoming a matter of increasing concern to me.
I think
the dollar question itself has been joined with a lot of the banking
I mentioned to you, Alan, on
issues and questions, especially abroad.
Friday, that last Tuesday I had an occasion to visit with
banks in London.
And one of the major themes of
our conversation--which gets back to something Sam mentioned earlier-was that we have this rather unusual phenomenon of the dollar being on
the weak side in the midst of an international crisis.
One of the
things he said in very unmistakable terms was that large flows of
funds into U.S. institutions and U.S. dollars, which they themselves
Funds were finding their way
would ordinarily expect, were not there.
into British and other institutions and into non-dollar instruments,
not only because of the uncertain macroeconomic situation in the
United States but also because of the elevated concerns and
perceptions in Europe about the banking situation in the United
States.
And I think that reinforces macroeconomic considerations.
In
those circumstances, it seems to me that the dollar presents another
risk beyond the one just [mentioned] on price level effects and that
is, though we still have this big financing need, any significant
further weakness of the dollar itself runs the risk of cutting the
wrong way in terms of how it plays out in long-term interest rates
I should also say that impressionistically
here in the United States.
and otherwise, I think that this credit contraction process has yet to
run its course.
For example, I know that some of the major banking
institutions are going to be in an asset contraction [mode] for the
foreseeable future, in part because of supervisory policies and
initiatives but also because these institutions are distinctly on the
side of being gun shy.
But beyond that, I have had further anecdotal
evidence that suggests that asset contraction by important regional
institutions is having the effect of rationing out some who are
perceived to be creditworthy borrowers--and in some cases creditworthy
borrowers not associated with the real estate business.
So, I think

9/17/90

that is still at work, though it's very, very difficult for us to
quantify it in any sense.
Insofar as the economy itself is concerned, I would agree
with the judgment that several have made that we don't, at this
precise point in time, see evidence of a cumulating process of
downward pressure. But, I must say, given the sourness of business
and consumer attitudes, that I don't think it will take a heck of a
lot to give us the message. Having said all of that, and having
debated mightily with myself and my colleagues, my own view of policy
at the moment is that we ought to try to sit tight here a bit longer
in the hope that we do get something rather promptly in the budget
area that is at least reasonably credible to the marketplace.
In
those circumstances, the dollar situation would tend to be a bit
better, depending upon the [actual budget] package. As things stand
right now, I think the likelihood is that we should ease at least a
step further, but I'd rather sit it out here a bit longer in the hope
that we can do that in the context of something of a positive nature
in the budget process.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments?

MR. BOYKIN. This is Boykin, Mr. Chairman. Looking at the
District, I would say that we're certainly quite [unintelligible].
To
some extent the oil situation is a bit of a positive, but it's still
too soon to get very much of a reading on that.
In my mind, the
external aspects of what policy should be tend to override the
domestic concerns at the moment. As Jerry Corrigan and others have
said, I think it's going to rest pretty heavily on what, if anything,
comes out of this budget effort.
So I would be a little hesitant to
move right away.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry. We've seen some
signs of weak economic activity in recent weeks; we recently had a
breakfast meeting where that was communicated. But at this point I'd
like to be associated with Bob Black, Roger Guffey, and others who
suggest that perhaps we ought to not take this step to ease at the
present time.
MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, this is Gary Stern.
In terms of
the domestic measures of the economy, I'd say things are still moving
along rather well in our District, all things considered. Having said
that, there is no doubt that there has been some deterioration in
attitudes and certainly concerns about the outlook; the level of
anxiety is up appreciably. How and when that actually will affect
economic activity remains to be seen. The only other thing I would
add is that I'm concerned, even without the energy price issue, that
we haven't been looking at very good inflation numbers for some time
it seems to me. And we now also have some acceleration in money
growth. So, I'm reluctant to be in a rush to ease policy in these
circumstances.
MR. HOSKINS.
Mr. Chairman, this is Lee Hoskins.
I'd like to
associate myself with Gary Stern's comments.
I think it would be
premature to move at this point, particularly with the aggregates
coming back roughly to trend. I think we ought to stay where we are.

9/17/90

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn.
I can't report
anything in the way of a change over the last couple of weeks, since
our last phone call. But I do think that the attitudes are becoming
increasingly cautious out there--really even pessimistic. My hunch is
that the numbers on growth in the Midwest are still a bit stronger
than the national numbers.
Clearly, we are at what I think is a very
moderate [pace] and [the risks] are very much on the down side.
It's
getting awfully close here. While I was disappointed by what the
30-year rates did, I think there's enough anticipation in the market
that we will ease that I'd be in Ed Boehne's camp--that we're moving
close enough [to recession] that we ought to use a near-term outlook
for policy.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as you heard on Friday, the
economy in the Sixth District would be characterized as quite weak.
There is definitely recession mentality among business people and
consumers. However, I do not think that we have seen any
deterioration; the report that you heard on Friday from our directors
suggested, if anything, a slightly more positive attitude and slightly
better numbers than I had heard two weeks before.
In general, I
continue to think that we need to ease policy and I had been in favor
of making the move two weeks ago.
However, in light of what has been
happening on the budget side, perhaps it might be better to wait just
a bit to see what happens on that score. And, of course, we do have
the problem with the dollar to consider as well.
MR. MELZER. This is Tom Melzer.
I guess I better speak so
you know I'm here!
In our board meeting last Thursday, I picked up a
tone similar to that cited by Gary: People would comment that they
felt very negative and yet the information that they were looking at
hadn't really changed that much. Right now, the facts perhaps don't
confirm the kind of pessimism that is out there and that is whipped up
to some extent by the press.
I don't think this is the time to move;
so, that's where I stand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
This is David Mullins.
As the numbers come in
on the national economy, my sense is that the economy continues to
sink slowly and is not [about to] fall off the table.
In the
employment reports there was a down-tick in aggregate hours worked.
My view was that retail sales were pretty weak, even though they were
down only .6 in August; without gas station sales, they were down 1.1
percent.
Industrial production continued to ease; capital utilization
ticked down another notch. On the other hand, the PPI numbers even
without the food and energy components were not especially
encouraging, even though there were some encouraging labor cost
numbers in the employment reports.
In terms of the aggregates, it is
true that money market funds and currency have picked up, but as Don
mentioned, the [core] components continue to be weak and credit growth
also continues to be sluggish. Another point, which some people
mentioned at the last meeting, is that our financial institutions
appear not to be in very good shape.
I do think there's some danger
in pinning our hopes to a budget accord.
I'm not very optimistic that
we'll get a very impressive deal and I'd hate to be put in a position
of trying to validate a weak deal, at least in the eyes of the market.

9/17/90

I would agree that there's a significant chance that if we
did ease marginally, long-term rates would react adversely and move up
That's almost inescapable in the current environment and I
somewhat.
don't know if it will be any better later on. My feeling is that with
the economy this weak and the [core] components of the aggregates and
credit growth also weak, there is not a real substantive danger in
being perceived as giving up on inflation. But there will be
doubters. I guess my view is that it wouldn't be such a bad idea to
get the market used to somewhat more movement in the fed funds rate
I would
and try to avoid the need for much larger changes later on.
agree with President Corrigan and others that the dollar puts us in a
more difficult situation now, and I would not oppose sitting tight.
However, I continue to fear that as we move from a third quarter which
I tend to think will be pretty weak into a fourth quarter which will
be even weaker and as the inflation in the energy numbers starts
working its way through the CPI--and if a weak budget accord comes
out--we may find ourselves in a more difficult situation later on.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that this slowdown is not
primarily a typical end-of-period monetary induced event. That is,
it's a rather unusual event, given that we are 15 months into a period
of the Federal Reserve bringing short-term rates down. Now, I think
that means that we probably don't have as much monetary ability to
And given what
maneuver since it's not a monetary-induced event.
Jerry Corrigan said about the exchange value of the dollar and what
others have said about long-term interest rates, a move that shows a
lack of Fed credibility on the price level objective simply will cause
the rate of interest that the money market will insist on to be higher
over the period ahead than we wish it to be.
So, ironically, in order
to have rates be lower we must not make the move until we get a
climate for the dollar and a climate for inflation that is better than
what we see at the present time.
MR. KELLEY. This is Mike Kelley. As I try to think through
the risks and [unintelligible] characteristics of an easing here, I
imagine that we probably could buy some insurance for the first and
second quarters of 1991.
How much of that would play through to real
GNP and how much to inflation, I'm not sure. On the other hand, on
the cost side it seems to me quite likely that we would have a further
substantial drop in the dollar, which could be a problem for a long
time to come. And possibly we run the risk of a surge in the core
inflation rate here that we probably don't have presently.
I
emphasize core rate of inflation.
It also seems to me likely that we
would get a rise in long rates, which might well offset much of the
benefit that we would hope to achieve from an easing of short rates.
On balance, the reward that we might get from an easing seems rather
ephemeral whereas the costs seem quite substantial and long-running.
So, I would favor hanging tight for now.
MR. LAWARE. This is John LaWare.
I'd like to identify very
closely with Jerry Corrigan's remarks. As you well know from repeated
speeches, I am more concerned about the risks of a recessionary
environment and believe that the effects could be very serious and
deep and long-lasting. On the other hand, if I thought that ease at
this point would put the dollar into a free-fall from its present
level, I would be very concerned that we might be abdicating real
control over the situation in the future because the financing of a
lot of our deficit would be forced back into our domestic market and

9/17/90

we'd have no choice perhaps but to flood the market with money in

order to keep interest rates down. I am persuaded, however, that much
of the tendency toward lower rates already has been discounted in the
dollar.
I really don't see it going into a free-fall, and I believe
that there is a significant danger in waiting too long to move toward
ease.
So, I guess at this point for the first time I really would be

on the side of making a modest move.
MS. SEGER. I'll bring up the rear and vote with John LaWare
and Ed Boehne, probably because in the last week I met with some of Ed
Boehne's bankers from Pennsylvania along with a lot of other people.

I feel that the negativism is getting to be a very big problem in and
of itself; the [negative] talk is just tremendous out there. In New
York I talked with some brokers, and they are seeing many of their
customers pulling funds out of equities in the stock market and going
into money market funds. So, this is not money that's going to be
supporting some big spending spree; it's money that people are scared
about--they are escaping to something that's perhaps safer. So the
money market funds are a parking lot; therefore, I don't view this
increase in the monetary aggregates as a sign of strengthening but
rather just the opposite. Also, there is tremendous concern about the
overall health of the financial system, not just S&Ls but banks as
well.
I had two days of meetings with small business people in
Chicago and heard again the very negative feelings. Many of the
business people feel that they are in a recession at the moment: it's
not a forecast, it's a fact for them individually. And frankly, I
think they need some encouragement. Also, there's more and more talk
about the spreading credit crunch. And it is no longer just from
bankers who are complaining about being roughed up by the regulators
and particularly by the examiners. I think that the credit crunch
actually is getting worse and that, as Jerry Corrigan said, we
probably have not seen the end of it.
Finally, in connection with the budget negotiations, I think
we're really inviting trouble to tie our policy moves to what Congress
does or does not do, because by delaying we will either produce a
recession or, if we're heading into one anyway as some people argue,
we'll just make it worse. Whichever way it is, we're going to
sabotage the efforts of those budget negotiations because a recession
itself is going to make those numbers worse regardless of what kind of
deal they strike. I personally don't feel comfortable arguing that
the existence of the negotiations is a reason to delay a decision.
So, as I said, I would support John LaWare's position that we don't
have a lot to gain by delaying and that we should be easing. I think
much of a modest easing is already discounted in the foreign exchange
markets and that that's one of the reasons we have seen the dollar
decline in the last month or so. That would be my position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. This has been very useful. Does
anybody have any closing comments before we adjourn? If not, this
session is adjourned.
END OF SESSION

