Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
September 7, 1990

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, and Melzer, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
and St. Louis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of
Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Eisenmenger, Hendricks, and Monhollon,
First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston, Cleveland, and Richmond,
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
September 7, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. This telephone
conference call is the two-to-three-week post-meeting call I had
promised.
In view of the crucial nature of the data that are
scheduled to come out today, I thought it might be a very useful time
for us to have this call.
I fully recognize that this is creating a
disruption in the Atlanta meeting, and I hope we'll be able to keep
this reasonably short.
I'd like to spend a minute on what I think the
employment report--which you may or may not have significant detail
on--has shown and then update our views on the general outlook.
As I'm sure you're all aware, the employment report came out
with an increase in the unemployment rate from 5.5 to 5.6 percent.
There were significant upward revisions in the nonfarm payroll report:
for June in the amount of 57,000 and for July in the amount of
130,000.
Excluding Census worker changes, July now shows an increase
of 73,000 and August 45,000. The composition in this relatively
stable [picture], however, in one sense is weak in that manufacturing
is down 45,000 even though--for reasons I haven't yet figured out-overtime hours went up a tick. The best news from our point of view
is that average hourly earnings, which had been preliminarily
estimated at .5 in June and .6 in July now read .5 and .4, with August
at .2. Nonetheless, there is an indication of a weakened third
quarter.
The downward revisions that appear to be the case in the
production worker hours for July and August suggest probably slightly
weaker GNP growth than indicated in the Greenbook.
As a consequence of these data, we are preliminarily looking
for a small decline in industrial production, in the area about 1/4 of
a percent. Nonetheless, there is no evidence of which I'm aware that
suggests that the economy is deteriorating at an increased pace.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance are not showing any dramatic
changes.
And even though some of the press reports on the auto sales
figures for the month of August were very negative, from what I can
see the data don't look half bad. Autos really are quite crucial to
this immediate period because, to the extent that there is a consumer
shock from the oil price increase and to the extent that one looks at
the confidence indexes and sees dramatic changes, one probably would
find the consequences of that in big ticket durable goods items in
consumer markets. And however one reads those auto sales figures,
they clearly don't suggest that the market is fading away at a
particularly rapid pace. As a consequence of all of this, I'm
inclined myself to suggest that we do nothing at this particular
stage. But I am fully cognizant of the fact that this is a very
crucial period and a lot of things are going on, many of which we are
not familiar with. Rather than merely assert a position, I frankly
would be most appreciative if I could get any updated views from the
members of the Committee since our last meeting. I purposely had not
requested staff comments because it would impinge on the time of the
Atlanta meeting. But if anyone wants to query any of our colleagues
here, please do so.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal.
I would
just report that since the last meeting of the Committee I continue to

hear very pessimistic views from our directors and other business
people. I think to a large extent they are reflecting activities in

9/7/90

their own particular institutions and are not taking a broader view.
Nonetheless, at least in this District, there is a clear desire for
some easing of policy. I must say that, while I have not had an
opportunity to look at these employment numbers in any detail, I would
slightly favor a move at the present time, as I did at the meeting.
I'm not sure what the events in the Middle East are producing in terms
of GNP and inflation. I don't think the employment numbers will pick
up a lot in the month of August. But from a psychological viewpoint,
it might be desirable to move the funds rate down by a 1/4 of a point.
That's my view, based on what I'm hearing in this District.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn. I would agree
largely with Bob Forrestal. In our District there are no significant
changes that I would report since the last meeting. I agree with your
assessment, particularly on the car sales. Having said that, if you
look at the June, July, and August numbers for total sales of cars-imports and domestic--there is something of a decline, though not a
precipitous decline. It seems to me that to some considerable extent
the market has discounted a change, particularly on the short-term
side, and that if we don't move the fed funds rate, it may back up.
I meant to
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I just interpose?
mention that the response of the market to the [employment] report
this morning was a decline in the bond market of 1/2 point and a
backing up of the bill rate by 4 basis points. That suggests that the
market was expecting, obviously, a weaker report than this, especially
in the context of the backward revisions to the data. There may well
still be some judgment that the market is expecting us to ease, but I
think it is clearly less. Don Kohn might weigh in on that issue--or
Peter, if he is available.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Peter Sternlight, Mr. Chairman. I think you
had it just right. The consensus from the market, as we have gathered
it to this point, is that they see a move as less imminent or less
immediate, though it's certainly in their minds that the economy is
weak and they wouldn't rule out a move in a slightly longer horizon-meaning weeks or months rather than days, I would think.
MR. BOEHNE. In the Philadelphia District, looking at it
strictly from a District point of view, the weakness that I reported
earlier continues. And if one were making policy based just on that
Mid-Atlantic part of the country, I think there would be sentiment for
some easing of monetary policy at this point. That's no different
than it has been for several weeks, however.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry. In the Twelfth
District, there really hasn't been any significant change in views
since the meeting. There is a lot of uncertainty, primarily
associated with developments in the Middle East, but basically I
wouldn't say that there is any substantive change. I would also say,
on a national basis, that the data we've seen since the last FOMC
meeting would not suggest any greater need to make a change than was
apparent at that time. And I would support your viewpoint that a
change in policy is not required at this point.

9/7/90

MR. BOYKIN.
Mr. Chairman, this is Boykin.
We really have
not observed any change since the last meeting that shows a clear
direction one way or the other.
I also would be supportive of the
position that you're taking of just standing by and not doing anything
right now.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
This is Jerry Corrigan.
I think
there is a tremendous amount of anxiety out there.
The anxiety may be
worse in some ways than the reality, but it's there.
There is a lot
of sentiment in the markets and elsewhere on the side that there is a
kind of window, if you want to put it that way, where policy might be
more accommodative.
But I don't see that the window is there on the
basis of these numbers and the other numbers we have seen in the last
couple of weeks.
At least for now, I too would associate myself with
the position you've taken.
MR. STERN.
This is Gary Stern.
I certainly agree with where
you came out, Mr. Chairman.
I would only add that we recently
surveyed our advisory council members and directors and that survey
didn't turn up anything very surprising.
That is, while anxiety has
clearly increased as a consequence of the developments in the Middle
East, I didn't get a sense reading through the report on the survey
responses that there really has been any discernible change yet in
economic conditions, at least in our part of the country.
MR. GUFFEY.
Roger Guffey, Mr. Chairman.
I don't think there
is'anything substantially different in our District than what was
reported on before.
The general tenor in the Tenth District as to the
outlook is that it's fairly promising.
I also would agree with your
position of no change.
And we shouldn't overlook what a change might
portend for the dollar, which is weak already.
MR. ANGELL.
Mr. Chairman, Wayne Angell.
I agree with your
assessment.
The money numbers look better than they looked at the
time of the FOMC meeting and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
looks even more precarious than it did then.
Not to follow your
advice and to make an easing move at this point really could [lead to]
a devastating kind of market reaction.
To me it would be unthinkable
to make that move, so I support your position.
MR. MELZER. This is Tom Melzer.
I would support where you
came out as well.
And I might add a comment on what the markets are
doing: I continue to think that this is an environment where we ought
to be sensitive to expectations that are reflected there.
I have a couple of comments based on a
is in the housing business nationally
and he commented that the housing market is still turning down, even
in some of the better markets.
He happened to mention Sacramento.
So, things in better markets are slowing down as well, which is not
terribly surprising.
I think the issue is just as consumers stay
frozen for an extended period of time [unintelligible] confidence
bounces back up.
But I can see a scenario where things continue about
where they are right now and consumer confidence could come back.
A
comment in the other direction:
in the trucking
industry--and he also has national exposure--said the first couple of
weeks of August were lousy in terms of volume but the second two weeks

9/7/90

picked up dramatically, and actually August came in as a very good
month. Some of it could be military-related.
I agree very strongly with staying where we are right now,
but I would not be at all surprised if down the road there came a time
when we decided to move. One other thought I would share: If we're
concerned about anxieties and consumer confidence and so forth, one
could make the case that we [might] want to move when there is a very
compelling case and we can move quite dramatically. I'm not sure that
we necessarily are in an environment where we should be nibbling away
at the edges. We don't have all that much room between the funds rate
and the discount rate right now. Our Bank doesn't have a
recommendation in for a discount rate change, as you know, but I for
one would rather think in terms of possibly creating some room fairly
early in this process, not later on.
In other words, if we nibbled
away at the edges with a couple of 25 basis point moves and then had
only 50 basis points of [spread between the two rates], we might be
forced for technical reasons to cut the discount rate at a time when
we really wouldn't want to--sort of at the end of an easing as opposed
to the beginning. That's just a thought for future reference.
MS. SEGER. This is Martha Seger. Even though I probably
have a little dimmer view of the overall economy than the average
view, I still would support the Chairman's position today to do
nothing, mainly because I'd like to break the link between the BLS
I think we have made that link too
employment report and our actions.
So even though I think, as Tom Melzer said,
apparent to the markets.
that the time will come in the not too distant future that we'll want
to ease, I would rather not do it on the day of the release of this
report. Also, I'd like to make a significant enough move so that it
really has an impact.
MR. KELLEY. This is Mike Kelley.
I concur with the
recommendation for all the reasons that have been recited and would
add just one more. And that is, that the budget summit is reconvening
and I'm not sure that a move now would be construed in a context we
I think there would be a linkage made there, and not a
would like.
good one.
MR. LAWARE. This is John LaWare.
I would go along somewhat
reluctantly with the recommendation. I'm not persuaded that the
I
economy is really so very strong as the indications would suggest.
On the one hand, if we wait until we get a
rather agree with Martha.
clear signal of what we ought to do, it may be too late to really make
much difference.
On the other hand, I don't have a persuasive
argument why we should move at this point.
MR. MULLINS. This is David Mullins.
I agree with John
I would agree that this is not an
LaWare generally in sentiment.
attractive window in which to move, but I don't really see those
opportunities becoming a lot easier as the oil price numbers start to
I'm also a little concerned with
work their way through to the CPI.
the notion that we make larger moves because I feel there is an
advantage in gradualism and stability; and if we wait too long and the
situation does deteriorate, we will be in a situation of making larger
changes in policy, which concerns me. But I would agree that the
current situation, especially the reaction of the long-bond market,
does not appear to suggest a good opportunity to move. I'm a little

9/7/90

concerned about our getting trapped in a tautological [unintelligible]
situation with bond market expectations--where they don't expect us to
move so they don't move and we don't move because they don't move.
So, I think we should think pretty carefully and look for
opportunities as we move on. But I would support the Chairman's
position at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that we should stand with an
asymmetrical directive toward ease. And I view that as a position in
which if there is a clear opening to move and the evidence suggests
But this is such an
that it is desirable, that we do so.
extraordinary period in which the particular moves the Committee makes
are going to be crucial for a good long time, so I would suggest that
this might be an intermeeting period in which we should have more
rather than fewer telephone conferences. Obviously, we will be
getting data next Friday on retail sales for August, which will be a
The problem I have is that whatever number
very crucial number.
I wish I
comes out I am certain will be revised very substantially.
It will also be interesting to
knew which direction that would be.
So, I am
see the PPI that emerges as well as the initial claims data.
looking at what are some very clear differences of opinion in this
Committee. And I think it might be not only useful but appropriate
that we meet again, perhaps in a week or so, and discuss where we
stand.
MR. PARRY. This is Bob Parry. I wonder if at that meeting
we could have an update of the forecast by the staff, because in
addition to looking at these individual statistics it's probably even
more important that we make the policy move on how we see the future.
It would be very interesting, I think, to get an update on their
projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
shakes his head.

Mike, is that feasible?

MR. PARRY.

In which direction?

MR. PRELL.

Up and down!

Mike Prell

[LAUGHTER]

If there are no further comments, I'll
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
adjourn the session. The session is adjourned.

END OF SESSION

