Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 21, 1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 21, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lindsey,
Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, and Scheld,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
St. Louis, San Francisco, Richmond, Kansas City,
and Chicago, respectively
Messrs. Fieleke, Meyer, Miller and Ms. White,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and New York,
respectively
Ms. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 21, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone.
with a controversial issue: approval of the minutes.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CROSS.

We'll start

Without objection.

Sam Cross.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Sam?

MR. HOSKINS.
Sam, was the unwinding of the DM warehousing
related to any collateral problems that we have with respect to notes?
Why did the Treasury do that? What reason did the Treasury give?
MR. CROSS.
Well, I think the Treasury is interested, as we
are, in not having these [warehousing] amounts continue indefinitely
and be too big. So, when the conditions were such that it was
possible to make some arrangements in order to bring those holdings
down, they were not reluctant or hesitant to do this.
It's not
envisaged as a continuous or perpetual facility.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. CROSS.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. CROSS.

Are we looking to bring ours down?
Our mark holdings?
Yes.
We don't have any plans at the present time.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Sam?
This is
the first time I recall in an extraordinarily long time when there
have been no transactions. When was the last time there were no
transactions during an intermeeting [period]?
MR. CROSS. Well, I don't think we had any intervention
transactions in the last period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We had to ratify some.

MR. CROSS. I'd have to look it up, but there hasn't been any
exchange market intervention for some months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, of that I'm aware. But quite
frankly, it's the first time I recall in a very long time that there
has been no [need for] ratification.
MR. CROSS.

We'll check the date.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Peter Sternlight's [area].

The same, of course, does not apply to

8/21/90

MR. STERNLIGHT.

Shall I proceed?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes, please.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. PARRY. Peter, what do you think the number of primary
dealers will be a year from now?
What is basically happening?
I

assume these pressures are not likely to get any better in terms of
profitability.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the experience of the opening five or
six months of this year is a little better than last year. I wouldn't
be surprised to see some further decline of several dealers. There
are still more than enough, certainly, to serve our needs and the
needs of the market. We got along nicely for a decade or so with a
number that varied in the mid-30s, and I think that would be a very
satisfactory kind of number now.
MR. PARRY.

So we may get back to that?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It's possible that we'll have some further
decline [in the number of primary dealers], yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
If not, may I have a
motion to ratify the transactions since the July meeting?
MR. SYRON.

So move.

MR. KELLEY.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We'll now move on to
the staff report on the economic situation. I'd like first to call on
Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I was away the last three weeks and
missed much of the excitement. For that reason I've asked Dave
Stockton, who was here for it all to reach the exciting conclusion, to
present the domestic side of the outlook.
MR. STOCKTON.
MR. TRUMAN.

Thank you. [Statement--see Appendix.]
[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Stockton and Truman?

Thank you.

Questions for Messrs.

MR. SYRON. In Part I of the Greenbook you talk about the
revision in your inflation forecast and say that it's primarily
because of the oil outlook. I was just wondering, since we did have
some other figures that came in before that--this is an exercise of
speculation, I realize--if you had been redoing the Greenbook and [the
invasion by] Iraq had not occurred, what rough estimate would you have
had in terms of the forecast for the change in inflation?

8/21/90

MR. STOCKTON. I think we were going to estimate something
roughly on the order of .1 or so higher price inflation both in 1991
and 1992 as well, if we had not made other changes to the outlook path
to offset that.
The dollar obviously was going to be providing a
little more boost to domestic prices. And the downward revision I
mentioned that we have made to our estimate of potential output, and
part of that is a downward adjustment to trend productivity, also
would have implied a bit more pressure on prices than we previously
thought.
MR. SYRON. Can I just follow up on that, in terms of the
downward revisions?
You revised down by 1/4 point, I guess, your
estimate of potential. But the revisions we saw in the actual data
were pretty disturbing to say the least. Were there any special
factors that caused you not to revise down further?
Or was it just
that your model came out with about 1/4 point decline in potential
given the data that we have?
I was a little surprised that there
wasn't a greater decline in potential, given that the unemployment
rate remained the same.
MR. STOCKTON. This is a very imprecise calculation. But the
important point to remember about the downward revision to potential
output is that we extended that downward revision to potential output
all the way back to 1980.
Therefore, the cumulative effect on the
level of potential output by the time we get to 1990 is quite large.
Essentially, what we're trying to do is this: Every year when we
receive the GNP revisions we try to feel around to [determine] what
sort of underlying trend productivity would best explain the course of
activity over the entire business cycle.
In the absence of any
particular reason for assuming that there had been a pronounced break
in the growth rate of potential output just in the last two years, we
essentially adjusted the entire path down extending all the way back
to the previous peak.
So, in terms of the level of slack one ends up
with, while it appears to you that we just have revised down 1/4 of a
percentage point in the last two years when the real GNP figures were
revised down much more, that might have implied that even then there
would have been somewhat greater slack. The cumulative effect of
having revised that trend down over 10 years implies that [when] we
get to the end the slack is not too much different, but we've-MR. SYRON. How sensitive is your model to short-term changes
in demographics--the composition of the labor force?
MR. STOCKTON.

It's not sensitive to that at all.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is a concern in a sense is that
there's very little chance that the demographics are wrong in that you
get pretty much the same pattern if you [unintelligible] the labor
force or if you construct the labor force out of the payroll data and
the insured unemployment.
They both show the degree of tightness that
has been exhibited by the sample surveys which, from the evidence that
we see, suggests that this is not a statistical anomaly that's going
to get revised next year.
MR. PRELL. We will be taking another cut at this when we get
the revisions on the employment data next month. We may have
something additional to report then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

8/21/90

MR. PARRY.
I have two questions.
Dave, at the FOMC
information call Ted Truman gave us some useful rules of thumb about
the effects of a change in the price of oil on real growth and also on
the CPI inflation.
It seems to me that the effects on inflation are
rather substantial; I was struck by what you show as a very sharp
decline in the fixed-weight deflator for the fourth quarter from 4.7
to 4.0 percent.
I know the impacts on the fixed-weight deflator are
different from those on the CPI.
But even taking that into account,
it seems to me that that is a very low number. Could you explain that
and indicate what contribution oil is making to that number?
MR. STOCKTON. For the fourth-quarter fixed-weight number?
Well, the principal reason the fixed-weight deflator does not show as
large an effect as the CPI is that, while obviously we consume more
energy than we produce, the weights for energy are several percentage
points different in the CPI and the GNP fixed-weight. And that is the
principal reason for the difference. There may be some slight
differences in what we assumed about the fourth quarter as well.
We
have a very low increase from the federal sector in the fixed-weight
deflator in the fourth quarter, which is helping to pull things down.
MR. PARRY. So, it's just across the board--smaller increases
in quite a few sectors?
MR. STOCKTON. I would say that's true, with the difference
in weights between the energy share in the CPI and the energy share in
the GNP being the biggest factor.
MR. PARRY. Yes, I heard. The second point is that I was
really struck by the Commerce Department revisions of compensation per
manhour in the nonfarm business sector for 1989.
In the period from
1984 through [the end of] your forecast the lowest compensation per
manhour, excluding 1989, is 3.7 percent; in the forecast it's about
5.1 or 5.2 percent. During the whole year [1989] the increase was in
the 2 percent area. It just seems very difficult to understand what
happened in 1989 that would make those numbers believable.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, the first thing to mention is that, as
Mike pointed out, we have not yet received benchmark revisions to the
employment or hours data. We'll receive those in September.
Typically, those [benchmark revisions] occur in May and June and by
the time the revised compensation per hour figures would come out [the
Commerce Department] would already have incorporated those revisions.
They had to. And as a result, we really didn't even wish to discuss
those figures in the Greenbook because we think at this point they are
pretty meaningless.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

MR. PRELL. We don't want to offer you the great hope that
that's going to eliminate all of the peculiarities in these numbers.
This series just seems to move in ways that are inexplicable at times.
And we think the ECI data are a more reliable guide than-MR. PARRY.

It certainly seems to be that way at this point.

8/21/90

-5-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The ECI data are far more comparable
with the monthly average hourly earnings numbers; both the numerator
and the denominator are comparable.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
on the compensation numbers.
MR. PARRY.

I guess the revision would be horrendous

I think so.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Boehne.

I think
MR. BOEHNE. Let me compliment you on your report.
you and Ted did an excellent job on what is a difficult situation to
get a hold of.
Our whole approach has been one of gradually opening
up some excess capacity and hoping that that will dampen prices. To
date, at best we've kept prices from accelerating. But if we
disaggregate prices, we find more progress in the goods sector than we
do in the services sector; and the goods side of the economy is more
responsive to monetary policy. That raises a very fundamental
question as to how much excess capacity one really has to open up in
the economy to generate the kind of anti-inflation progress [we hope
for] on the services side.
I'm wondering, now that we are, say, a
year and a half or so into this strategy, if the staff has given any
thought to whether the whole thing is just more complicated than this
fairly simple notion of opening up some aggregate excess capacity-that it may not be all that simple and that the fundamental strategy
may have some flaws to it.
MR. STOCKTON. I guess my basic reaction, of course, is to
agree with your statement that the process is considerably more
complicated than just opening up slack and having inflation change in
some mechanical way. The labor markets are extremely complex
phenomena, so it is going to be more complicated. On the other hand,
I would look at events of the last several years as more a
confirmation of that basic underlying paradigm than a contradiction.
That is, wage inflation in particular had been on a downtrend through
1986 with the unemployment rate above 6 percent--really in some sense
it was somewhere in the 7 to 6 percent range.
As the unemployment
rate moved below that, wage inflation turned around. And over the
last year, we've had the unemployment rate at 5-1/4 percent and we've
seen some mild acceleration. We have yet really to create, at least
on the labor market side in our view, any slack that would be
sufficient to reduce those trends. Now, another point that you made
that I think is correct is that we have seen progress in moving
[inflation] back down again on the manufacturing side as slack appears
to have opened up in terms of capacity utilization.
So, I think the
recent events have been relatively kind to that particular paradigm,
recognizing that there are developments in the agricultural sector,
the energy sector, and movements of the exchange rate that at times
clearly influence the pattern of overall price developments. But at
this point I wouldn't see any compelling reason to abandon the basic
paradigm while recognizing that the confidence [intervals] one can
place around the estimates of what slack is or what any particular
level of slack might actually lead to are quite wide.

8/21/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, actually, the error here is in
participation rates in the labor force. If you substitute historical
forecasts of labor [unintelligible] participation rates, the
unemployment rate opens up with the same growth. Presumably, the wage
rate following previous patterns does precisely what the model would
suggest. So I think the problem we're looking at in an arithmetic/
analytical sense is: What is going on in the participation rates in
the labor force that we do not understand?
I'm not saying that's the
sole issue but, unless we can answer that question, we're caught in
the dilemma whereby at these growth rates we don't get any loosening
in the system.
MR. PRELL. We also have to keep in mind the possibility that
some of those phenomena that might be affecting labor force
participation suggest that the unemployment rate may not capture all
of the elements that are affecting wage behavior.
If labor force
participation is falling off because people don't feel the job
opportunities are there, that's a somewhat different kind of slack in
the system that could moderate wage increases. So, it's a very
complex system. But I would underscore the point that there doesn't
seem to be evidence contradicting the basic view that slack will
diminish inflationary pressures.
Indeed, there are few other channels
available to us that would seem really to affect the inflation rate.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there's a fair amount of history in this
country and other countries [suggesting] that a recession will bring
noticeable relief on inflation. But there is not a lot of evidence
that suggests that this gradual approach of opening up slack but not
having a recession will result in very much.
MR. PRELL. That's true because we haven't had extended
periods of slow growth.
So the question is: Is it the slack or is it
the sudden shock of a decline that one sees in a recession that really
explains that?
MR. BOEHNE.

Right.

MR. PRELL. We noted that fact last fall when we had a
presentation on inflation--that there was uncertainty about whether
there was some sort of nonlinearity in the system.
MR. TRUMAN. I wouldn't want to overinterpret the
information, but the current Canadian experience is that they have had
slow growth for an extended period of time, not a recession, and their
consumer price inflation has begun to bend down. The year-over-year
They have been
rate has declined by about 1/2 percentage point.
helped, if you want to put it that way, by a depreciating dollar.
I'm
not sure how accurate that [linkage] is, but it is an example where a
basic strategy that is essentially the same--maybe a little more
so--seems to be producing some results along those lines.
MR. FORRESTAL.

How long have they been following it?

MR. TRUMAN. They've been at it for, depending on how you
count these things, about a year and a half or so.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Longer than us?

8/21/90

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, a little longer. They've had slower
growth; they have come down from a higher growth [rate] to
[unintelligible].
So in some sense there has been more deceleration
of growth in the period and their unemployment began to turn up in
about the early part of this year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But their unemployment rate was much

higher?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as I said, I don't want to overinterpret
this.
It is generally accepted that they have a much less flexible
economy than ours and, therefore, their natural rate of unemployment
should be higher. Their market mobility and so forth is tighter and
they have complicated laws; that is one explanation for why they
started out with a somewhat higher inflation rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. The budget deficit numbers that Peter mentioned,
particularly the $300 billion, are a little higher than I had heard.
That is a combination of lower revenues and higher expenditures, I
presume. On the expenditure side, is it mainly the RTC-related
expenses or are there other categories that are also going up?
If you
take that higher number, is there any way that we can finance that
without having big upward pressure on rates?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I shouldn't respond because I haven't
seen official estimates on that anywhere in that area. But as I said,
that assumes a soft economy--skirting along the edge of recession or
in some of the private estimates an actual recession--so there is
definitely a weakening of revenues. No budget package had the thrift
bail-out expenditures greater than in this current fiscal year.
MR. PRELL. Let me try to put this in the perspective of our
forecast.
For fiscal 1991 we have a $35 billion deficit reduction.
That's smaller than the $50 billion they still are talking about but
perhaps some of the people who are concerned by recent developments
would think that maybe even $35 billion is in question at this point.
As Dave indicated, just before the last meeting all the talk was
leading us to think that maybe $35 billion was too pessimistic. At
this point, it looks like a healthy adjustment given the political
situation. But if you take some of that out, we could begin to move
closer to a $250 billion deficit, including $70 billion of RTC-related
[expenditures] in fiscal 1991.
If you overlay on that a weaker
economic picture--say, with no growth or a mild recession over the
next year--then it could easily move toward the $300 billion level.
So this discussion of a $250-$300 billion deficit is not inconsistent
with the kind of picture that we've depicted in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Si Keehn just asked my question about
the budget, but perhaps I could also ask Ted about the $25 oil price
assumption. Does that assume increased production by the Saudis?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. As Dave said, we assumed essentially a
shortfall of 4-1/4 million barrels a day from Iraq and Kuwait. And
then we assumed an offset of 2-1/4 million barrels a day.
Partly just

8/21/90

because we felt it was useful to write down figures so we could in
some sense check our assumptions--and I emphasize assumptions--later
on against the realities, we assumed 1-1/2 million barrels a day in
Saudi Arabia, [300,000] barrels a day in Venezuela and 200,000 barrels
each, I think, in UAE and Nigeria just to spread it around.
MR. FORRESTAL. Also, in your description of the real GNP
targets, you said something about a 50 percent decline in-MR. TRUMAN.

No, 50 basis points.

MR. FORRESTAL.
I'm sorry, a 50 basis point decline in the
Could you say that
funds rate.
I didn't quite catch what you said.
again?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, in order to achieve this real GNP target,
the model made us, if I can put it that way, reduce the funds rate by
50 basis points in the third quarter. That was sustained and then
I
gradually the gap between that and the baseline [unintelligible].
should emphasize [unintelligible] we're dealing in a quarterly model,
so we moved Iraq back to [3.0 million barrels per day] in some sense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

In looking at
MR. STERN. Let me go back to the budget.
developments in Iraq and Kuwait and trying to understand the economic
consequences of that in the forecast, the one thing that surprises me
is that I, at least, don't catch anything on the military outlays and
what that is likely to mean for the outlook.
There isn't much
MR. PRELL. Well, I think you're correct.
in here. We have really a trivial increment to defense spending in
this forecast over the next few quarters, partly consistent with the
oil price assumption that things are presumably-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, one thing that is happening is an
increase in the cost of fuel and bottled water.
MR. STOCKTON.

Some chartered airline flights as well.

MR. PRELL.
I think there is also some effect on suntan
lotion prices--the sunblock effect! At this point, it seems largely
to be a matter of taking some things out of inventory, shifting
expenditures, and so on.
If this results in major deviations from
what we had anticipated in overall personnel and additional munitions
and [supplies], if we maintain a significant presence in the Middle
East over the coming quarters, then we might begin to talk about at
One could read into comments made
least several billions of dollars.
by the President yesterday that some of the defense reduction that
people had been looking for might not be achieved. That then perhaps
So,
would begin to chip away at our fundamental fiscal assumptions.
there is clearly upside potential here on the fiscal front for some
I think
lesser restraint than we have embedded in this forecast.
that's a clear risk.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

8/21/90

MR. MULLINS. Your answer on the defense spending is that the
increment is less than a couple of Texas S&Ls, presumably?
MR. PRELL.

That's true.

MR. MULLINS.
I'd like to get some insight, Dave, into your
view of consumer spending. You mentioned that the second-quarter
retail sales were a lot better than we initially had thought and that
one reason was that when you start from a small enough base it looks a
lot better when it comes up to--I guess it was minus .9 for the
quarter and was marginally positive in July. You mentioned in the
projection that household real consumption will fall but not quite as
much as the reduction in real income. Why did you make that
assumption and how do you feel about the impact of this event on
consumer confidence and whether consumers view this as transitory or
more permanent?
MR. STOCKTON. At this point we made the assumption that most
but not all of the decline in real income is reflected in the
consumption in the second half because we assumed that some households
will be uncertain about the permanence or transitory nature [of the
decline] and probably will be assessing and adjusting their
consumption plans accordingly. That is, some households clearly will
think that this is transitory and others that it is permanent and that
combination will result in only a partial reduction in consumption in
response.
I should say that the reduction in the saving rate that we
have as a consequence of this is pretty small; we have taken most of
the reduction in real incomes out of consumption. On the goods
consumption side, things have been quite weak and we expect them to
get weaker in the second half. If you look at the past year and take
that as the underlying trend relative to the second half--which shows
the averages through the ups and downs of the automobile sector in the
third and fourth quarters of last year as well as early this year--the
place where we would expect to see a particularly sharp hit is in the
automobile sales area in the second half of the year. The only
support that we really are getting in consumption is on the services
side, where in our view it's a little harder in the short run for
households to adjust consumption of housing services or medical
services to fluctuations in income. And that in essence provides
somewhat of a base on the consumption side on which we get relatively
meager increases--about a percentage point in the second half--in
consumption growth.
MR. MULLINS. What are the chances that this, on top of the
other shocks we've had to consumer confidence in residential real
estate values and the like, really could cause consumers just to put
their pocketbooks away for a while?
MR. STOCKTON.
I guess that is clearly a risk in terms of the
projection. As we reported in yesterday's briefing [to the Board], we
did receive some weekly information from the University of Michigan on
consumer confidence. That showed a very precipitous fall-off in the
few days right after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and then some
rebound throughout the course of the last couple of weeks to a level
that is still below where it was prior to the invasion. But it is not
an astronomical fall-off at this point.

-10-

8/21/90

MR. MULLINS. But do you think that evidence would be roughly
consistent with what you forecast in the Greenbook or marginally more
pessimistic or--?
MR. STOCKTON. Given the accuracy with which one can use
those survey data to predict consumption--and the link is very, very
weak--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You do have a proxy that is almost as
good and probably even better than that, which is the 10-day [auto]
sales figures.
In a period like this, to the extent that you get
consumer shock, it is going to show up in those numbers.
Indeed, if
you believe our seasonals, as distinct from BEA'S, there was really
quite a significant fall from the last 10 days of July to the first 10
days of August.
Was it 6.1 on our seasonals?
MR. STOCKTON. 6.1 or 6.2.
The 10-day auto sales figures
have the advantage of being very timely. They have a disadvantage, of
course, in that they can move around for reasons of seasonal
adjustment problems or other reasons that make them a little difficult
to interpret. We did call around to auto dealers in the wake of the
price increases and didn't pick up any major stories about a
significant reduction in showroom traffic, so-MR. PRELL. There has been a consistent drop-off from the
last 10 days [of a month] to the first 10 days in these seasonally
adjusted figures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[On our]

seasonals?

MR. PRELL.
I think on ours as well.
I just don't think
we've found a way of capturing the pattern, particularly in the
transplant sales. They have this tendency to be very strong in the
final-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, I'll wait for the second 10 days.

MR. MULLINS.
I think it's pretty reasonable that people
might not want to buy a car.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's not entirely clear. We have looked at
the historical evidence on these oil prices, and whether people don't
buy cars or whether they shift the kind of cars they buy is not as
clear as one would think.
MR. STOCKTON. One of the reasons that we delayed the
fall-off in auto sales in the projection is that we think, almost no
matter what happens to automobile demand, that the auto makers at this
point will make it through incentive programs [unintelligible] to
clear out the 1990 models. And that helps hold up sales a little in
the near term; but by the fourth quarter we show a bigger fall-off.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They don't have much inventory.

MR. STOCKTON. They don't have much in inventories and that
[unintelligible) they won't have any buyers. Our current assumption
is that there isn't going to be a precipitous fall-off in sales in the
near term that would require them even to have to go through some kind

8/21/90

-11-

of major increase in incentive programs.
But if that were to occur,
it seems quite likely that they would use incentive programs to [work
off] whatever inventories they needed to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Yes, I want to get back to your simulation.
If
I understand it right, you have a neutral policy going forward to
generate essentially the same nominal GNP.
It's just that the
components would differ; you would have lower output and higher
inflation. You open up slack in the economy and the inflationary
surge is temporary. You say that you don't take account of
expectations; you haven't talked much about that.
I think one could
argue that with interest rates going up around the world--every place,
really, except the United States--we could see a deterioration in
inflationary expectations. My question is: What do you think about
that? And secondly, what does that do to your real forecast?
MR. TRUMAN. Obviously, the neutrality of oil prices is a
feature of the model. Whether or not it's a feature of history, at
least it's captured by the model. And there's no particular
theoretical reason why that necessarily has to prevail at least to the
degree it has; maybe it [unintelligible].
As far as the model goes,
you're correct that there are not forward-looking expectations in the
model, though it's not quite clear to me in this world with which we
are dealing what you would ground forward-looking expectations on
because you have to have expectations about, among other things, the
oil price scenario itself. And, as has been discussed, that could go
a variety of different ways. When we ran the simulations, we did
adopt at least, again as a mechanical feature, slightly different
monetary policy assumptions abroad. And that does produce some
depreciation of the dollar and gives us some impetus to consumer price
inflation from that source.
So it does wash through this way; you
don't get a very dramatic impact. As I tried to lay out our judgment
about policy responses, I'm not so sure that other than in Japan we
are going to get any particularly pronounced policy responses. I
think it is true that the market is expecting a more--and I should
underline "a more"--vigorous resistance to inflationary impulses from
the Bundesbank at this time. Our judgment is that the market is wrong
or maybe overdoing it.
And in some sense, that's what we built into
the forecast. To the extent that we do get more [policy restraint]
abroad, then we would have a more vigorous resistance to the
inflationary impulses from higher oil prices. I think that would
manifest itself in the first instance in exchange rates, and that
clearly is a risk to the forecast.
MR. HOSKINS.
Let me follow up: Assume that inflation
expectations got worse and go back to the real side of the economy.
Presumably, you'd be forecasting higher unemployment?
MR. PRELL.
MR. HOSKINS.
those expectations.

Well, it depends on your-Right.

Well, suppose we don't accommodate

MR. PRELL. In a sense, the only thing that would change is
inflation expectations and that would drive down perceived real
interest rates. That would affect demand for goods and services in a

-12-

8/21/90

stimulative way, conceivably. It's a very complex process and it's
going to depend on your response to those-MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think the point you're getting to is
that if you drove that process far enough, that would be one
interpretation. It might even be minor. But in the 1970s process it
would result in circumstances in which, although in the short run the
mechanics of the model would generate lower real interest rates and so
forth and so on, in the longer run you would have a higher built-in
level of inflation and all the associated dislocations that we believe
underlie that. So it could get us on a higher plateau of inflation
[and a lower] long-run potential of the economy under those
circumstances [than we] would assume, even though in the short run it
might have stimulative effects as Mike described.
MR. PRELL. I think the third alternative illustrates this to
a degree by showing the higher level of inflation that we would have.
MR. TRUMAN. So it's relatively optimistic because, as Dave
said and as President Boehne's question implied earlier, in some sense
the fundamental forecast accepts that the amount of slack that's built
in the underlying forecast--given no further shocks from further oil
price increases--is enough to begin to bend down inflation. But it's
postponed and it's at a higher level.
MR. KOHN. If you moved to contain nominal GNP growth under
that alternative, two things would be pushing up nominal GNP growth-both prices and output. And if you tried to hold nominal GNP growth,
then you'd have more price with the adverse inflation and
[unintelligible] less real growth for that nominal GNP growth.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, I agree with what you said. I guess what
I'm getting at is that markets may now behave somewhat differently
with respect to expectations perhaps than they did in the 1970s in
that they in fact are not fooled. And when we have higher real rates,
the implication seems to me to be higher unemployment quicker. And if
we want to avoid going back to the 1970s [experience], one policy
response would be to signal the markets that we're not going to
accommodate it and in the long run that could lower our costs
[unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have a different question about what I guess I
would call a worst-case scenario or "what if" games. Did you try in
your model to see what the impact would be if we had one of these
horrendous sequesters that I hear kicked around town--if they knock
off $100 billion and send pink slips to the federal employees and
things like that?
MR. STOCKTON. We have not yet run through the model
something as acute as a sequester of the size that could occur under
current legislation. The reason we have not yet done that is that the
dislocation would be so enormous that at this point it's very
difficult to imagine politically in the weeks before the election that
either the Administration or the Congress would wish to have a
sequester of $100 billion, which is about the size that we're talking
about here, go into effect. In fact, at the mid-session review Mr.

8/21/90

-13-

Darman issued a report outlining all the things that would occur if
this sequester were to go into place, including that 30 percent of the
prison guards would be sent home and people would be let out of jail
because there wouldn't be public defenders and they couldn't get
access [to the courts].
It just seems so extreme that I guess we feel
fairly comfortable that something will occur in the time [before] the
sequester to delay, if nothing else, our decisions until after the
election.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You will admit that the government would
improve under such conditions!
[Laughter.]
MS. SEGER. What is the decision date for this?
Is it by
October 1 that something has to be done under Gramm-Rudman?
Is that
the magic time?
MR. STOCKTON. By October 1st they have to issue their
sequester report and by the 15th, I think, the cuts actually have to
be in place.
MS. SEGER. With the existing Gramm-Rudman law, what would it
take to derail it?
Is it a forecast of two quarters of real GNP
growth below 1 percent?
MR. PRELL. A forecast of recession or the experience of two
quarters of less than 1 percent growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
percent for Q2 and Q3.
MR. PRELL.

And we're not going to get less than 1

Either OMB or CBO,

I believe, can make that

forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you sure about that? Are you sure
that CBO could unilaterally, by just an arbitrary forecast of a
recession, derail Gramm-Rudman?
MR. STOCKTON.

It doesn't derail it; it simply allows

Congress--

MR. PRELL.

It allows for a suspension.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
In other words, it automatically puts a
vote on the table for suspension?
MR. PRELL. I'm not sure that it's automatic, but it does
provide for the Congress to temporarily suspend [the Gramm-Rudman
cuts].
They have to make that decision.
MS. SEGER. My second question in regard to worst-case
scenarios involves oil prices.
Having remembered the difficulties of
the 1970s and 1980s in getting even the direction of oil prices right,
what would be the impact on the economy of, let's say, a tremendous
additional acceleration in oil prices to $35 a barrel because the
Iraqis also take over Saudi Arabia or some other major producer? Have
you tried any of these scenarios in your model?
I'm not saying these
are terribly likely outcomes or high probability assumptions but--

-14-

8/21/90

MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are some nonlinearities involved in
this, but in that range the models will tell you that you would get
proportionally the same kinds of responses or a little more. Instead
of losing 1/2 percentage point of growth, we would lose another 1
percentage point plus of growth over the next four quarters--at least
abstracting from the dislocation effects, which I would argue and I
think you would argue probably would be there. So, the models would
suggest that a $35 oil price rather than a $25 oil price for a
sustained period is going to cut another percentage point or more off
of growth. And given the level of growth that we have, that would put
us near zero or below. We all know that when we make up numbers, a
smooth forecast will show something like zero but that probably is
going to mean several quarters of negatives--on that order of
magnitude.
MS. SEGER. What else could we face that would throw our
forecast into the trash can?
[Laughter.]

MR. PRELL.

Put it in the file cabinet?

MS. SEGER.

Trash can is more appropriate.

MR. PRELL. There always are innumerable uncertainties. I
think we've just layered over the normal ones. There are some very,
very big imponderables at this point. I might just say--and this
might seem silly normally, but just to close the loop entirely on this
Gramm-Rudman issue--if there were a declaration of war, that would
suspend the Gramm-Rudman [provisions].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.
inconceivable.
MS. SEGER.

And the probability of that is not zero.

That's why I raised the point.

It's not

Well, thank you for playing my game with me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, who
would like to start the Committee discussion?
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask a question of
the staff with respect to the forecast that has been laid out. To
give us the export numbers that are contained in the staff's forecast,
it seems to me that the forecast assumes that growth in other
industrialized countries will continue fairly strong. I know there
has been discussion of it already, but given the uncertainty about the
oil situation and the reactions of Germany and Japan for example with
respect to their interest rates, how comfortable are you that we will
maintain exports at the level that you are projecting?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's one of the conditional dimensions
of the forecast. We're reasonably comfortable, given the particular
oil price scenario that is built in here. In the baseline scenario we
think there would be a spurt in inflation, some reduction in growth,
and some reduction in exports in the short run--over the next several
quarters. But then these economies--at least the continental European
economies and Japan--in general would be relatively robust. There is
still the phenomenon of rebuilding in eastern Europe and East Germany
that is driving those economies and it should help sustain exports,

8/21/90

-15-

In Japan in particular, as I mentioned in my presentation, there has
been quite a lot of rise in short-term nominal interest rates, so they
call it monetary restraint and as always there's a question of
calibrating the extent that that is going to bring about adjustments.
And the big drop in the stock market in Japan [unintelligible] as
well. So I suppose we could see--it's not outside the realm of
possibilities--half the growth that we now expect in Japan. That
would have some implications for the forecast. But I think it's no
more uncertain than anything else that we put before you in this
export [unintelligible] policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Who would like to start off?

Si.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, reporting first on the conditions
in the District prior to the Middle East events, I must say I
certainly was surprised, positively, by the resilience of the Midwest
and the ability of the District economy to rise above the national
trend, at least so far. Certainly, the GNP revisions reduced our
baseline forecast at least somewhat, but pre-Middle East events we
continued to have a positive expectation for the economy. We forecast
continued improvement this year and into next year.
I have a couple of specific comments. The steel business
continues to be good. A company I talked with is currently operating
at a level of 85 percent of capacity; their order books are full for
the third quarter; the fourth-quarter orders are coming in well; and
they have not experienced the normal summer slowdown that they
generally do each year. They continue to look for shipments this year
of 83 to 84 million tons, which is about equal with last year. And
even prior to the Middle East events, there was something of a boomlet
going on in steel used in energy-related activities. Demand for sheet
and bar continues to be good. The only significant change in their
order book is that they do see a downturn in the demand for heavy
structural items that would go into commercial construction. Recent
price increases in the steel industry have been sticking, but on
average they are still at this time some 6 percent under last year.
In the construction area, on a year-to-date basis both nonresidential
and residential construction in the District have been comparatively
strong. We've had plus numbers in both categories versus negative
numbers on a national basis. And just one item, the backlog for
cement shipments, currently is running some 40 percent higher this
year than last year, at least for one shipper. But having said that,
I do sense in a more current perspective that there are not only
postponements of some major commercial projects but some outright
cancellations. I think within the last couple of weeks even in the
Midwest there has been a change of attitudes there. One supplier to
the commercial construction business tells me that their attitudes are
rather worse now than they have experienced since 1981 or 1982.
The auto business continues to be a sector of enormous
uncertainty. But I did talk to one company as late as last Friday and
they continue to hold to a sales forecast for cars and light trucks
together of 14.4 million for this year. And they're looking at 14.3
million for next year. While those numbers, at least in my eyesight,
look pretty good, their baseline number is 15.4 million. So, when
they're under that baseline number by that amount, they think
conditions are pretty negative. Third-quarter production schedules
this year are up 17 percent over last year; fourth-quarter schedules

-16-

8/21/90

are up 10 percent over last year. But, clearly, the production risks
at this point are on the down side. And even this late into the third
quarter the projected pickup of 17 percent is likely to be erroneous.
Meanwhile, auto dealer attitudes are very negative. One would expect
some pickup in orders because of the possibility of a strike; despite
But again, for the company
that, dealers just aren't ordering cars.
that I talked to, 27 percent of their dealers are operating at a loss,

which accounts for the negativism.

The heavy truck business is bad.

One manufacturer we talked to is looking for shipments of class E
trucks, the heavy trucks, this year of 125,000 units; that's lower

than others that are at 133,000 to 135,000. Again, that's against the
baseline number of about 160,000. So, clearly, they're having a very
bad year.
In the agricultural sector, growing conditions continue to be
very good, but because of late plantings and the reasonably cool
summer that we've had so far, crops are a bit slower [coming in] than
normal. The yield is going to be determined largely by the timing of
the first frost. If we have a reasonable break on that first frost,
production could be excellent and, indeed, farm income will be high.
There's a shot at least at having a record farm income.
With regard to credit and lending conditions, I continue to
think that this is really a phenomenon caused by the banks themselves
going through a self-correcting process. I think they've raised their
lending standards. But even with the increases in C&I lending by the
District weekly reporting banks lower this year than last, the numbers
are nonetheless positive. And C&I lending by small banks in the
District is higher this year than was the case last year. So, maybe
we're seeing a bottoming in this trend--at least in genuine C&I
lending, taking out merger-related activity and the like. I am
reassured by the bankers that for good credits--they do emphasize the
word "good"--there is plenty of money available. But they do all say
that they have raised their credit standards.
Shifting to a post-Middle-East-events comment and a look at
the national economy, I think it's just too early to assess the damage
that we're likely to experience. Having said that, I haven't talked
to anybody so far who specifically has changed their business pattern
or what they are doing in the way of operations. Some companies are
going through their capital budgets, but there are some contradictory
[comments] on that. Some companies are planning to pull back on their
capital spending programs, but I did talk to one company that's doing
quite the opposite. They are now in the process of accelerating their
capital spending because they sense that the level of inflation will
be higher and, therefore, they want to get their expenditures in
before that occurs.
Now, I continue to have a feeling, at least in an intuitive
sense, that the economy is operating at a very moderate level and that
the Middle East events certainly are a negative in all this. But it's
awfully hard to judge the outlook at this particular point. And,
therefore, certainly in the monetary policy sense, it's a very awkward
period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

8/21/90

-17-

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, in the Twelfth District, employment
growth continues to exceed that of the nation, although the rate of
growth has slowed more in recent months than has been the case in the
nation. For example, if you go back a year ago, our growth of
employment was about 1-1/2 percent more than the rest of the nation;
now it's running a little under 1 percent more. Following the
national pattern, employment in manufacturing and construction has
fallen in recent months, but it has fallen at a rate that is less than
half that for the rest of the nation. Growth of trade and services
industry employment is below that of a year earlier, but the growth
rates continue to be in the area of 3 to 4 percent, which are not bad
increases. Agriculture is performing well in the District as a result
of high crop prices and yields and also high livestock prices.
If I can turn to California, since California got some
attention in the Greenbook as well, economic growth has slowed from
last year's pace; there's no question about that. But the state's
employment is growing at a steady rate of just under 2-1/2 percent on
a year-over-year basis. Defense and aerospace layoffs are [slowing]
and will slow economic growth. But even in LA and San Francisco,
where the bulk of the layoffs will take place, the loss of jobs in
these sectors will be small relative to what are expected to be
healthy gains in other nonmanufacturing sectors. Real estate activity
is slow. There's no question that sales and permits are off
significantly. Median home prices indicate the drop in home prices
but, as was indicated in the Greenbook, most of the decline reflects a
shift in the composition of sales to lower priced areas, particularly
Sacramento, Riverside, and places like that, and also to smaller
homes.
Turning to the national economy, although the risk of
recession certainly is real, the upward revisions in retail sales for
May and June, the June drop in the inventory/sales ratio, and the
favorable report on June net exports are certainly encouraging. It
appears as though, with a better balance between inventories and
sales, positive real growth in the second half is quite likely.
Although the Greenbook's oil price assumptions are reasonable, I
believe that the effect on inflation in the second half of the year
will be larger than that indicated in the Greenbook. In addition, the
impact of higher oil prices in stimulating business investment could
turn out to be a bit greater than implied in the Greenbook forecast.
Finally, although a future drop in oil prices is assumed and certainly
would help to moderate inflation, I don't think we should forget the
effects of the dollar depreciation, which has been quite substantial.
The latter, plus continued upward pressure on wages, should prevent a
significant decline in inflation next year. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. In the Atlanta District, Mr. Chairman, with
the exception of exports, the tone of the reports that we're getting
is very, very negative. The list of the weak or the weakening sectors
that I talked about at the last FOMC meeting is unchanged. And I
suspect from reading the Beigebook that these weak areas are very much
the same as those around the country. Construction activity is
particularly sluggish at the present time and, unfortunately, there is
a large unoccupied stock that will have to be worked off before any
new activity is justified. I don't hear very much about the [credit]

8/21/90

-18-

crunch anymore. Clearly, the banks have tightened their underwriting
standards. What we are seeing, though, is a decline in consumer loans
rather than construction loans. And I suspect that that's more a
function of demand than supply. Before the Middle East problem arose,
the oil and gas business in the District was beginning to expand, but
the industry has been constrained by labor shortages. The workers
have left the area, particularly Louisiana and the Mobile area, and
are not returning. At the moment it's still too early to tell how
much stimulus the oil component sector will get from the recent price
increases. The important regional industries that are maintaining
their level of output are doing so only because their exports are
replacing domestic sales. And in this category I certainly would
include wood and pulp and paper producers. Agriculture is strong in
the District, and sales of farm equipment are rising pretty rapidly
both because of a good year domestically and also because of rising
export sales. In an overall sense, the slowdown may be a little more
pronounced than it was in July, but I don't see any new areas of
weakness emerging.
One other comment that I picked up from a number of contacts,
particularly people in small businesses, is that they are seeing a
growing problem with receivables, which have been much harder to
collect. As a result, these firms are in effect financing these slowpaying customers. Sentiment is very negative, I would say. And,
Governor Mullins, consumer confidence is very low in our District--and
it's getting lower as a result of the Kuwait and Iraq situation.
With respect to the national economy, I find myself in
agreement with the Greenbook generally. In the interest of full
disclosure, I would say my staff is a little more bullish on consumer
spending than I am. I must say that I am increasingly pessimistic,
and I was pessimistic before Kuwait, about the budget accord. I would
like to think that something will happen, but I'm not at all sure
that's going to be the case. Overall, I think that we may avoid a
recession; but I am more concerned about our falling off the edge than
I was at the time of the last FOMC meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, as seems to be the case for the
nation as a whole, economic conditions in our region are showing signs
of slowing. There are special factors here and there that keep the
overall growth numbers positive. After fairly strong employment gains
in the first quarter of the year, our three-state District would have
experienced employment losses in the second quarter had it not been
for a strong growth in government jobs. Our manufacturing employment
had been growing slightly while conditions nationally deteriorated.
In the last few months, however, manufacturing employment has declined
in each of our three states. Weakness has been concentrated in
transportation equipment--mainly defense-related--apparel, and
electrical equipment. While employment gains were experienced in
chemicals and petroleum refining, we expect some slowing in these
industries with the higher price of energy-related input. Employment
in the services sector has been extremely weak outside of government
employment. The government employment gains were for all government
entities and were not just related to federal census workers.

8/21/90

-19-

In private services, the main areas of strength were in
transportation and public utilities, both of which will be adversely
impacted by higher energy prices. The one area where higher energy
prices should help the District economy is in drilling activity, but
any positive response that does occur will be with a long lag time.
First, inflation-adjusted oil prices are only about half the peak
level reached in 1981, and the rig count is highly correlated with
real oil prices.
Second, almost half the drilling activity in the
Dallas District is for natural gas which has a long way to go before
gas prices catch up with oil prices. Third, drillers have to be
convinced that higher energy prices will persist for several years.
And lastly, even if everything on the price side fell in place--and as
Bob Forrestal found out--we simply do not have the capacity to
increase drilling activity since about half of that capacity exited
the industry over the last four years.
I did see on local TV that
they reinstituted a rough-neck school out in west Texas to teach
people how to drill oil wells.
So, somebody has a little optimism.
In the short run, the negative effects of higher energy prices in the
District will predominate over the positive effects.
I might add,
however, that the weak picture for retail sales that has existed
lately should be helped somewhat by the sharp boost in royalty and
partnership income which is proportional to oil prices.
Following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, we did do another
round of Beigebook contacts. As a result, the anecdotal evidence has
shifted from [an outlook for] slow but steady growth to one of great
uncertainty. Even the focus of agriculture down our way has shifted
from too little or too much moisture into marketing uncertainties in
the new environment. With respect to the national picture, I really
don't have views that would be considered different from the Greenbook
forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, since we met in July there has been some
further softening in an already soft Philadelphia District economy.
The sluggishness is widespread, including manufacturing, retailing,
construction, and capital goods.
Some areas of the District that have
experienced labor shortages for the last several years now report the
number of job applications rising. And in banking, I sense that our
loan problems, which heretofore have been concentrated largely in New
Jersey, are now floating across the Delaware, much as George
Washington did some years ago. And I think we're going to see some of
those loan problems in Pennsylvania as well. The chemical and plastic
firms are the two that I have talked to most, and both of those
industries already report substantial cost increases from the Middle
East problems. I also noted that attitudes have turned very, very
cautious.
For the first time in a number of years I'm hearing more
talk about recession in the outlook and, although I think that is
still a minority view, it's a growing minority view.
On the national outlook, my sense is that we probably will
see some negative real GNP by the fourth quarter. Before the Middle
East shock, we had increasing downside risks stemming from weakening
demand in most sectors and tighter credit conditions.
And with the
Middle East problems, I think we'll have still worse downside risks.
My hunch is that the Greenbook is underestimating the negative impact
on consumption. I think that consumer confidence has been on thin ice

8/21/90

-20-

for a while and with the cumulative impact of economic concerns that
were building, and as this Middle East situation drags on, I think we
will see more of a negative impact there. And that's going to affect
business confidence as well. I think the key issues for us are: How
much slack is enough and how much downside risk are we willing to
tolerate to provide a reasonable prospect of keeping the impending
bulge in oil-related prices from working its way into the core rate of
inflation? And that's the next part of the meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, the gloomy news continues to track
the people from the Northeast. The New England economy, I think, has
continued softening at a somewhat faster rate than it had before--even
in the pre-Saddam period. That will be exacerbated to some extent by
the Middle East problem--at least in terms of peoples' expectations-in that as a share of energy provided we rely about 50 percent more on
petroleum than the nation as a whole. But the number of BTUs per
dollar of output is only about 80 percent of the national output. So,
it tends to offset itself somewhat but not completely.
In the District, the most pressing immediate issue continues
to be a further softening--and almost a free fall in some parts--of
the real estate market. I don't know whether you've sold your house
or not, David. While we haven't heard anything about it yet, the oil
situation could have an impact on vacation homes similar to that in
1973 and 1979, when people did not want to buy them because of concern
about the greater cost of getting to them, and that's why we had a lot
of softness in condos. At that time--though it isn't true this time-there was a concern about the supply of fuel to get to vacation homes.
Even before this came up, though, we really had a quite poor tourist
season.
Construction employment, of course, has fallen very strongly,
but it still has a way to go.
Even though the level of construction
employment has fallen very significantly, it is still above the 1981
level; so we think that will continue to be a drag. Beyond that,
we've seen weakness now spread to the services and trade sectors.
In
the trade sector particularly, we've seen fairly significant declines
in employment. As for consumer confidence in the region, the
Conference Board data show that even before this oil situation
confidence had fallen 55 percent July-over-July. I don't know how
good these regional measures are, but several months ago New England
was the only declining region. Now it's striking that only three of

the nine census regions--relatively small regions at that--show an
increase in confidence.

In terms of the less dim, if not bright, areas of the
region's economy, I'd have to say that's in manufacturing exports. I
find a quite distinct pattern for manufacturers between their domestic
business and their export business. For the domestic business, our
survey shows them about flat to down 10 percent; but their export side
is up about 5 to 20 percent. Interestingly, and I think this reflects
something that Bob Parry said, we've started to see some turndown--and
we have secondary suppliers--in the aerospace industry and we've
started to be greatly concerned about how soft things are. But we're
beginning to see some hope that defense cutbacks won't be as great [as
anticipated].
In fact, at Raytheon, one or two contracts have been

-21-

8/21/90

continued that were expected to be dropped. Credit availability
continues to be much talked about and I think is a somewhat broader
problem. A relatively small thrift operator came in and said he has
told his loan officers: "If it isn't gold, don't bring it in to me."
I don't say that that's a particularly widespread view, but I think it
reflects something about the people in general working out problems.
As far as the national economy goes, it's far too early into
this whole situation to know what the impact is going to be in terms
of disruption. We need to look at things in terms of before Saddam
and after Saddam. My own reaction is that I am quite struck by any
overreaction to it. I'll admit that I was struck by the revisions on
the GNP numbers--that what we saw when they came out [differed so
much] from what [we thought] had happened before. And on the basis of
that, I myself have some concerns about confidence and a little
concern that the Greenbook forecast might be a bit on the strong side,
actually. However, I also have--maybe it's a reflection of being a
[unintelligible] from the Northeast--an increasing concern about this
issue of financial fragility in almost all of our large institutions.
Thus, on balance, I would have thought the economy seemed somewhat
softer before the Iraqi business, though perhaps not to the point of
dictating a policy change. I don't know if we know enough yet to
determine what's going to happen. With the degree of [military]
buildup that we're going through, it seems to me entirely possible
that--even short of an absolute shooting war--before too long we could
get to a point where we will get some stimulative effect on the
economy, particularly if the reserves are called up. We have had, as
everyone has, some reserves called up already in our District. I also
am somewhat concerned about the patterns in consumption and the
steepening of the yield curve in the context of the international
situation. So, I think the discussion in the policy section is going
to be very lively indeed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, as far as the District goes, it's more of
the same. Growth is unspectacular but it's steady. We continue to do
a bit better than the nation; of course, that's not a very remarkable
statement these days. But most of what has been happening in the
District reflects a continuity of what has happened over the last
several months. Agriculture remains good; tourism has been good; most
of the natural resource related industries are doing well; and the
diversified metropolitan areas continue to do well, all things
considered. I would say that we're not likely in my District to
continue to outperform the national economy much longer, but at the
moment anyway things are still going a bit better than at the national
level. The run-up in oil prices as a result of Iraq and Kuwait
occurred too late to stop the bikers from descending on Sturgis
[unintelligible].
So that turned out to be a successful event and
injected a lot of income into the South Dakota economy.
With regard to the national outlook, somebody used the word
"dilemma" earlier and I think that captures it. Even before the
invasion of Kuwait, we were looking at slow growth and we were looking
at that simultaneously with a lack of progress in bringing down
inflation. And it seems to me if that was the dilemma, it has only
been sharpened by what has happened in the Middle East. Obviously, I
can't assess magnitudes, but I think it's fair to say the dilemma has

-22-

8/21/90

been sharpened. My own judgment is that on top of all that--and one
could probably point to some other things that have gone wrong--the
likelihood of any progress on the budget has diminished as a
I would guess, although this is a double-edged
consequence of this.
sword, that we will see some kick to military spending before this is
all said and done. Now, that may help the real economy a bit, but I
just have a sense that there's an awful lot of turmoil out there and
that the dilemma, as I say, has worsened.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, first of all, in terms of the
national outlook, I think the staff has done as well as anybody could
possibly do in terms of trying to capture what might happen and what
For what it's worth, both our baseline
the contingencies are.
forecast and our alternative forecast are really quite similar to the
kinds of things the staff is talking about. About the only material
difference is that in the next two quarters we probably have the real
economy a bit softer and the inflation rate a bit higher. But over
the forecast period as a whole, the numbers both internally and
externally (on trade) are really quite similar to the staff's baseline
In the very short run the
forecast. There are multiple risks.
greatest risk or uncertainty, of course, is that the Iraqi situation
I've talked to some people who know
will turn into a shooting war.
something about the oil infrastructure in that part of the world and
the impression I get is that even if it were a very short armed
conflict, a guy like Hussein could do one heck of a lot of damage in a
very short period of time to the oil infrastructure in terms of
pipelines and that type of thing. So, again, even if a shooting war
were very short and very decisive for the good guys, the damage that
could be done to the oil infrastructure in a matter of days is quite
substantial, I gather.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
small area south of Kuwait.

It's all concentrated in a relatively

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. All the pipelines I gather are above
So,
ground even when they're far removed from Iraq or Kuwait itself.
they are just sitting there. And the potential for substantial damage
when you have a crazy guy like this guy is quite real.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you say crazy
it back to work and functioning within a year.

[unintelligible]

get

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. All of that would, consistent with
what Gary says, involve some substantial stimulus from a lot of
sources. Anyway, I think the staff's effort to try and capture both
the baseline and some of the contingencies is as good as one can do it
Leaving that aside, an interesting way to
in these circumstances.
think about this is to ask what was going on pre-Iraq and what
I have to say that my impression is that
superimposing Iraq means.
even prior to the Iraqi invasion the attitudes in the business
community--both big business and small business--were souring. My
sense is that the economy, if anything, was softer rather than
stronger and that even before the very latest CPI number the inflation
rate was higher rather than lower--not in any decisive way, but
certainly the hopes that the inflation rate was going to bend down, I
think, were fading. I agree with some of the others who said

8/21/90

-23-

that--again, even before the Iraqi invasion--expectations had soured
quite significantly in terms of the prospects for any kind of a
meaningful budget compromise. Obviously, the Middle East situation
has made all of those things worse, at least in the short run. What I
hear now is not only more overt talk about the risks of recession but
a crescendo of opinion about a vicious form of stagflation in which
the inflation rate, at least for the foreseeable future, could be
significantly higher in a context in which the economy is just sitting
there. Now, the good news in all of this that I detect rather overtly
in many instances is that there is a recognition in the business
community and maybe even on Main Street that, at least in the short
run, it's not something that is subject to any quick fix by monetary
policy. I think there is a recognition that all of this does put
quite a constraint on monetary policy. Indeed, I'm even surprised
about the number of people who talk overtly about not making the same
mistakes that were made in the 1970s when, in the eyes of many people,
oil prices and energy shocks were allowed to feed into the general
pattern of wage and price setting. So, there may be at least that
element of realism there. Nevertheless, I have the impression at this
point that things are very much on the gloomy side.
One quick footnote on the real estate situation: You can get
many different stories there; it depends upon whom you talked to last.
But what I'm impressed with is that my examiners--who I think are
pretty darn good, especially in real estate--are very much of the mind
that the situation had to get worse before it was going to get better.
And again, that was before any further problems were superimposed on
that situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. For the District, the most recent numbers, which
are second-quarter numbers, show a decided shift. Generally in recent
months I have been reporting that we have been out-performing the
national economy; in the latest period both absolutely and relatively
there is weakness in employment and weakness in non-residential and
residential construction. In talking to our directors and others
around the District, I have not picked up any sense that they have
noticed anything dramatically different. What's interesting is that,
despite reporting that things are pretty much as I have described them
in recent months, there is a lot more anxiety. Last week I had our
staff do a survey of business contacts throughout the District, which
was rather interesting. In general, it supported an outlook for
continued, albeit somewhat slower, expansion for the balance of 1990.
One surprising part of it to me was a good deal of optimism in terms
of retail sales, which either met or exceeded expectations. And those
sales were obtained without unusual price cutting; their inventories
were in good shape. Basically, 7 out of 9 retailers contacted
reported that their outlook was good or optimistic for the balance of
the year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

This [survey] was taken when?

MR. MELZER. Just last week. Now, we have relatively
sluggish job growth and some layoffs coming in the aerospace industry
--in St. Louis in particular--and in the defense industry. So,
whether or not that optimism by retailers holds up in the face of
slowing or maybe even declining employment growth and lower incomes

-24-

8/21/90

remains to be seen. Based on this survey and the views of our people,
in general we would expect weakness in autos and construction and some
strength in services, agri-business, and mining. That pretty much
sums up the results of that survey.
On a national basis, I would be in general agreement with
what the staff has forecasted. What's very tricky, if we come to
grips with monetary policy, is that there's an assumption in that
forecast of an essentially unchanged monetary policy in terms of the
funds rate. And, of course, given our operating procedure, an
unchanged funds rate in a slowing economy could in fact create a
tightening--from the perspective of monetary stimulus. And I think
that's something we have to watch pretty carefully. Now, I've
personally been encouraged by the pickup in money growth recently and
what's projected for August and so forth, but we have to watch that
carefully. The other general comment I would make is that I think the
July experience sort of showed us that we're not in an environment,
given the concerns about inflation, in which we can try to lead the
I think we're in a position where we have to follow
market lower.
behind market expectations in terms of policy actions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, [economic
activity] in the Tenth District is not a great deal different than
reported in prior meetings. We continue to have moderate growth with
mixed performance in individual industries within the District.
However, the higher oil prices will likely slow job growth in the
District, particularly in states such as Missouri, Nebraska, and
Colorado. And that will not be offset in our opinion by the
District's increase in energy production in states such as Oklahoma,
In the energy area, the District rig
Wyoming, New Mexico, and Kansas.
count did increase before the Middle East situation; the rig count
went up from 266 in May to about 290 in June, largely in the natural
gas area, however. That level of 290 in June is only about [20]
percent of the level in the peak years of 1982 and 1983 when the
number of rigs operating in the District was something over 1500.
Automobile manufacturing has been curtailed within the District,
principally in Missouri, as has been reported. For example, the GM
plant has been closed for two weeks' vacation related to a lack of
parts.
There is some suspicion that it's simply because the dealers
just don't want to take down additional inventory. On the other hand,
Ford has closed its plant for a week because of the slow orders from
dealers.
In the agricultural sector, there has been a very large wheat
crop, as I think everybody knows. Prospects for corn and soybeans and
other feed crops have been very good. As reported earlier, because of
a wet spring and late planting there is a good growing season, and it
appears that we will have a very good crop in all of these different
commodities providing we don't get an early frost, which would kill
One interesting thing
off this late planted corn and soybean crop.
that I'd like to report on is a second-quarter survey of farm land
But
values, which showed a continued increase of 3 percent overall.
that's a slowing in the rate of increase of agricultural land prices.
For example, in the same period in 1988 the year-over-year increase
was 5-1/2 percent; for the same period in 1989 it was up 4 percent;
and this year the increase slowed to about 3 percent.

-25-

8/21/90

Given all of that, we don't see any great deterioration of
economic activity, which is very much as it has been in the past.
What will happen with respect to the energy sector as a result of oil
prices is still uncertain, obviously. But as also reported earlier,
we will not be able to get back into a boom condition of drilling oil
wells simply because the level of skilled labor has vanished since
that earlier period and there is not the equipment to put in the field
to bring forward new wells.
With regard to the national outlook, as Bob Forrestal said,
in the interest of full disclosure I should report that our staff
believes the outlook is a little weaker than shown in the Greenbook,
marginally so.
However, I'm more supportive of the Greenbook
forecast. And it does show, of course, the kind of outcome that we
would hope for.
That's all given against the background of the great
uncertainty of the Middle East situation. Talking about a recession,
given what's going on in the Middle East and the prospects for a
shooting war, I don't know that we have any history of going into a
recession during a shooting war. As a result, this adds a bit more
uncertainty, but I come out [with the view] that the Greenbook
forecast is very believable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Monhollon.

MR. MONHOLLON. We think the baseline projections in the
Greenbook make up about as reasonable a scenario as anybody might come
up with, given the additional uncertainties created by the Middle East
crisis. The key assumption underlying these projections is that the
oil shock will be relatively brief and relatively mild. That may or
may not turn out to be correct, but it's certainly a reasonable
assumption given what we know now. But even the stronger and more
persistent shock assumed in the staff's alternative scenario produced
only a moderately different outcome. As has been discussed here, we
agree that the [range of] confidence around these projections is
obviously wider now than it was a month ago.
And the probability of a
near-term recession is correspondingly higher.
As a matter of fact, slowing economic activity in our own
District and rather pessimistic recent comments by some of our
directors and other contacts led us to think that the probability of a
downturn had risen a bit even before the Iraqi invasion. But we think
it's important not to exaggerate the downside risk to the economy.
Several points, some of which have been mentioned, come to mind in
this respect. First, the upward revision in the second-quarter retail
sales figures suggests that final demand in the second quarter was
stronger than we had thought, and the healthy increase in hours worked
by production workers in July indicates that the payroll employment
data may have overstated the weakness in the early part of the third
quarter. Secondly, both the United States and the rest of the
industrial world are better positioned, for a variety of reasons, to
absorb an oil shock now than in the 1970s. Third, the prospects for
continuing pretty strong growth in Japan and the European community
should hold up export growth to provide a partial offset for softening
domestic demand. Fourth, the absence of any widespread inventory
imbalances implies that if we do get a recession, it should be fairly
mild. And finally, the projected acceleration in M2 growth in August
holds out some hope that the extraordinary weakness in the growth of
the money supply in recent months may be ending. These observations

8/21/90

-26-

are certainly not intended to deny that the downside risks with
respect to economic activity have increased. But the purpose is to
help keep these things in perspective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Business conditions in the District really have
not changed much from the reports I've given you before, and we
continue to operate at high levels of economic activity. What has
changed, obviously, is what everyone has mentioned here already and
that is the uncertainty that people have going forward. In response
to that [uncertainty, the comment I heard] when I dug around a little
was that firms were not planning to reduce production now or to
curtail capital spending plans. Their plans had more to do in some
sense with anticipating slower growth out there and preparing
themselves for reductions in their labor force in the future. The
responses that some people seem to be making to the uncertainty about
the fourth quarter included: using overtime as opposed to adding new
people; letting attrition run down the work force a little; and using
contracted help. One response from a steel company executive was to
protect the company in the fourth quarter by exploiting opportunities
in Europe where steel demand is very strong and mills are booked out
through December. He has the opportunities for business in that area.
The only cancellation, or at least deferred sale that I know of, is at
a steel company that had a transformer on a ship to Iraq. I don't
think they're going to complete that sale for a while!
MS. SEGER.

Iraq really needs it, doesn't it?

MR. HOSKINS. They'll need it more later. In terms of the
national outlook, it's obvious what we face. The oil shock has given
us two outcomes for the economy: higher inflation in the near term and
reduced output. It seems to me also that one could argue that real
interest rates need to be--and probably are--somewhat higher to ration
or reduce the supply of output over time. With respect to monetary
policy, I think there's little that we can do constructively to get
more oil. And there's not much we can do constructively to lower real
interest rates. There is one thing we can do and that is to keep the
long-term inflation expectations from being built into this economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It does seem that looking at the real economy
provides some benchmark that we can use to make our estimates about
the future. But, certainly, the latest revisions make it very clear
that, when some quarters in 1989 that were originally around 3 percent
are revised to 1.7 percent, we have to be very careful about thinking
about that kind of precision. I am somewhat optimistic about the real
economy in regard to the performance of net exports. I think the
strong current dollar net exports in the second quarter will certainly
switch to very strong real net exports in the third and fourth
quarters, as the price patterns in the second quarter reverse.
The monetary aggregates now have fallen into the category of
being interesting. I used to think they were much more than
interesting, having had four years in which the growth of the
aggregates has been down, with M2 below 5 percent. Whether you're
measuring M2 over four years, three years, two years, or one year, its

8/21/90

-27-

growth is very close to 4-1/2 percent. But the fact of the matter is,
according to the staff forecast, we're probably going to end up with
the highest year-over-year CPI inflation since 1981.
That means the
results in nine years have been better than the results this year.
Certainly, for an old fashioned monetarist that gives one pause.
Now,
that doesn't mean that the monetary aggregates are not important; it
probably just means that we have to look to somewhat lower M2 growth
rates to achieve our objective than we first thought necessary. We
can also look at real interest rates, which I think are a very crude
check in regard to distinguishing between periods in which monetary
policy is apparently very easy, as it was in the 1970s, versus the
real interest rates that prevailed in the 1980s, which in general were
in the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range. Certainly, it seems likely, given
the tax changes with regard to the deductibility of interest, that
those real interest rates are consistent with inducing a change in
household savings patterns. And in a sense, I think all of us ought
to be much more enthused than we are regarding the level of consumer
spending. It seems to me that the saving rate in the United States is
not too high and that, consequently, some rise in the saving rate-which means a diminution in the rate of growth of consumer spending-is exactly what the doctor would order.
Now, it seems to me that a look at forward-looking indicators
really can [help one] begin to pinpoint a bit better when monetary
policy has been easy and when it has been restrained.
And those
forward-looking indicators clearly show that monetary policy in 1988
and after maybe the first three quarters of 1989 were indicative of
rather significant restraint. Whether you're looking at commodity
prices, the yield curve, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar,
you get a confirmation of the fact that the money growth prevailing at
that time did not enable enough liquidity to be out there to support
upward movements of commodity prices and it supported the exchange
value of the dollar. But, frankly, it seems to me that over the last
nine months we have moved--though not from a monetaristic determined
way of looking at monetary policy--from monetary restraint to monetary
ease.
I don't think it has been an abrupt move; I think it has been a
very gradual move. And we probably have not altered the real interest
rates significantly, or so dramatically as to [foster] too much
expansion in the period ahead. But I think it is quite apparent that
the yield curve is indicating that participants in the real market are
suggesting that the appropriate rates of interest are higher than we
may be providing. Certainly, [that can be seen in] commodity prices.
The staff did me the favor in Chart 7 of indexing these commodity
prices to the first quarter of 1986, which is in some way a little
embarrassing for me because I talked about keeping those commodity
prices within a range of 10 percent up or 10 percent down from where
they were in the first quarter. And when I look at all commodities,
the index at almost 140 means that we had an 8 percent annual growth
rate over a 4-1/2 year period. All commodities except crude oil show
a 5 percent annual rate of gain; and that's not stability in those
prices.
So monetary restraint does not seem to be characteristic of
this era. When you look at the bottom chart, all commodities except
food and crude oil--which takes out some of the variabilities of
agricultural policy--it looks like we have had a very significant
trend line of rising prices over the last 11 months.
So, there's
nothing there that gives me any indication that monetary policy at
this moment is too restrained.
Indeed, if the foreign exchange value
of the dollar continues to fall at the rate it has been falling--since

-28-

8/21/90

really over the last 10 months--it's a rather significant event, which
with the recent movements in gold prices I think could be an outright
devaluation. And that only occurs during periods of monetary ease,
not monetary restraint. So, I'm somewhat of the view that we have
already eased. And I'm of the view that that ease, if it takes hold
prior to the time that we get a breakout of the rate of inflation from
the rut we have been in on the down side, is going to give us one heck
of a problem in the years ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'll be brief because my
observations are very much in the mainstream of much of what has been
said this morning. In the area of inflation, pre-Iraq I think the
news was already disappointing in that we really had made very little
progress. And now post-Iraq, we have an oil shock that is a virtual
cinch to pick inflation up substantially. So, I believe we do have a
higher inflation outlook. There is some concern that it might be
In
substantially higher; that's a very clear and unequivocal threat.
the area of real economic activity, I think pre-Iraq we have been
getting pretty much what we had asked for--maybe a little on the soft
side of that, but no real nose dive that was in any way perceptible.
And today, we have even more softness in prospect as a result of the
oil shock. So, the recent events are certainly not a plus and they
certainly add to the risk and to the uncertainty. But at least there
is not yet much evidence that the economy is headed for the tank. So,
we do have an exacerbated inflationary situation and I think there is
a clear need that that be minimized in a way that is most sensible to
the rest of the economy and its progress. Economic activity per the
Greenbook may still be okay; I hope we get the Greenbook outlook and I
think that probably would be okay.
One question that I ask myself is: If we did try to help the
Would the medicine turn out to
economy through easing, would it work?
I'm not sure; perhaps
be as bad as the disease is in the first place?
I'm not sure what would happen to long rates
some percentage thereof.
I'm not sure what would happen to the dollar or the
in that event.
inflation rate. And I'm not even very sure whether we would get the
response we would be looking for from the consumer and on the
investment side if we did that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

In general, I would like to identify myself with
MR. LAWARE.
In spite of the fact that the consumer
President Boehne's remarks.
confidence figures are terribly volatile and not necessarily reliable
in the long term, they are cause for a reasonable amount of alarm on
my part because we have such a consumer-driven economy. I think we're
very close to the edge of that cliff; if it's not a cliff, it's a
steep decline. I'm concerned that if we do lapse into recession,
The real
certain weak elements in the economy could accelerate.
estate mess could be a real collapse on a much broader front than it
The further losses that a recession would imply for the
currently is.
banking system would further undermine the banks at a time when many
Corporate profits remain very
of them are on skinny ground as it is.
The debt burden of the private sector is heavy and,
disappointing.
obviously, the burden of servicing that debt in a declining economy is
I have no confidence that the oil price
going to be much greater.

8/21/90

-29-

rise will be contained or that it will begin to decline due to offsets
from Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, the United Arab Emirates, etc.
I'm not
sure that they really are going to come on stream as advertised and
that they will be sustained. Part of it depends on the duration of
the Iraq crisis and I think that's an imponderable. Short is
obviously good even if it's a shooter; long is very serious whether or
not it's a shooter because of the effect on the economy and the
possibility of permanent or at least longer-term impairment of the
flow of oil.
The dilemma is that the external circumstances have
threatened growth and at the same time stimulated inflation. And the
challenge for us is that movement against one exacerbates the other,
whichever way we go.
And the whole situation is seriously complicated
by the vulnerability of the dollar and the possible consequences of a
free fall in the dollar to the financing of the deficit--and the
deficit may be growing at the same time.
So, those are comments that
don't lead us anywhere, but they describe what I am thinking about at
any rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
My views on the nature of the economy, pre-oil
shock, are pretty consistent with what everyone else has described.
I
would consider it marginally gloomier than last time, but with no
really clear evidence of a recession, and brighter than the gloom that
pervaded after some of the statistics that were released a few months
ago.
I guess we're still pinning our hopes on exports. Looking back
over six quarters, if you ignore the first quarter of 1989 drought
distortions, we have had roughly six quarters of maybe 1.4 percent GNP
growth. That should be the equivalent of a couple of quarters of
negative 1 percent recession with the rest of them in the mid 2
percent range and you would think that it should have produced slack.
We don't see a lot of evidence of slack in the economy but we do see
some. Capacity utilization has edged down some and it's only high in
a couple or three industries, such as mining and primary metals.
Unemployment has increased and employment has fallen. The real
mystery is what happened to the 600 thousand to 1 million people who
left the work force. Clearly, if they were in the work force and if
the latter had grown at the rates we saw in the 1980s, unemployment
would be above 6 percent.
I think they are legitimately out of the
work force because we don't see the pressure on wages. And we see
other evidence in the labor statistics, such as aggregate hours
worked, that suggests there is not a lot of slack.
So, overall, I think we've seen very little progress on
inflation.
It is true that the June CPI number, which upset so many
people, had the owner's equivalent rent in it suggesting that home
costs were going up pretty rapidly at a time when other things
suggested they were going down. That was true in July as well, but it
was not the only factor in July; there were other concerns in July.
You can't help but believe that nearer term the recent months of slow
growth in money and credit should start to have an impact.
But I
would say at this stage that I see no hard evidence of progress. From
these levels of GNP growth I'm also not that confident that if we saw
a downturn we could do much to catch it in time, which is why I think
we need to look ahead and think carefully about the future. My
initial view of the oil shock was that it was not such a massive
event.
In terms of the increase in the price of oil it is perhaps 50
percent. In the early 1970s, oil prices increased by four times and

8/21/90

-30-

in the late 1970s by two or three times. This seemed a lot smaller,
although the news media tends to equate it with those two [earlier]
events. And I think the 1970s conditions were far different.
Certainly, we're going to see higher CPI numbers. As Governor Angell
mentioned, these will be the highest we've seen essentially in the
[last decade] and in fact the highest we've seen since the last time
an oil shock happened. One of the reasons we didn't see higher
numbers in the 1980s was because we didn't have oil shocks in the
1980s.
It's still not a very pleasant prospect; and it comes on top
The staff estimates
of not very much progress before this in the CPI.
a moderate impact on inflation, perhaps 1-1/2 percentage point higher
CPI numbers, and a transitory impact.
I guess that's consistent with
the notion that there is some slack in the economy.
The economy is
pretty weak and money and credit growth have been slow.
It's not too
likely that this would feed into some generalized inflation.
Yet the bond markets reacted quite negatively to this--and
around the world, I might add. The reaction was pretty similar in
bond and stock markets in the major industrialized countries. U.S.
long bond yields went up 50 to 60 basis points, and it's hard to
reconcile a transitory impact on the CPI with 30-year investors in
some crude sense saying 30-year inflation is one half point higher.
They are responding not so much perhaps to the projected median
inflation rate as to the small probability that the high consequence
I also believe some
outcome is letting inflation get out of hand.
important part of the higher yields is a real risk premium associated
Investing
with the uncertainty and the disruption in real economies.
in 30-year bonds is simply riskier in a world when small countries can
That disruption risk had been there
disrupt large economies at will.
in the 1970s. We went through the entire 1980s without one of these
events; indeed, we went through the entire Iran-Iraq war without one
of these events.
The cold war ended and now all of a sudden we have
real instability, which I think people will offset with a real risk
premium. There are some arcane measures which document the
volatility. The implied volatility on bond options has gone through
the roof. There are technical factors in the bond market. When you
have this sort of uncertainty the hedges come undone; it's more
expensive to be a 30-year investor.
Peter mentioned the problems with
the auction. And it's not clear to me that some of the other markets
that didn't have the auction problems went up quite as much. One way
I try to conceptualize the oil shock impact is to assume that it
hadn't happened but that instead we had a budget deal which involved a
$10 a barrel tax on oil with half of the proceeds given as foreign aid
to oil-producing countries.
It seems to me that the inflationary
impact of that sort of budget deal in some crude sense should be
roughly the same as what we've seen.
But I suspect the markets would
have responded far differently. And it seems to me that difference in
response has a lot to do with the uncertainty and the potential for
future disruptions of this type. So, I wouldn't read-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But the difference is who imposes the

tax.
I think the yield curve is going to be more
MR. MULLINS.
steeply sloped for some time to come because of an uncertainty premium
in it. What bothers me most is the impact on the real economy. This
is a contractionary event. People are poorer; they have less money to
spend; their wealth is reduced. Because the magnitude of the impact

8/21/90

-31-

is not that great in terms of the percentage increase in prices, the
impact in the Greenbook is relatively small--less than 1 percent
reduction in GNP. And we don't have a lot of GNP to give up now; we
come out projecting .5 for the fourth quarter, which is a pretty small
margin of error. I've already alluded to my major concern in this
area, which is the fragility of consumer confidence. I'm a little
concerned that we may see the increase in the saving rate that
Governor Angell talked about if we start a shooting war over there.
I'm also concerned that we haven't thought a lot about how this is
likely to end. We discussed it a little here. The outcomes aren't
that encouraging from the point of view of consumer confidence. We
could be lucky enough to have an efficient coup. But when you think
about the scenarios, it leads to a pretty sour mood. This on top of
an already fairly weak economy suggests to me that there's certainly a
possibility that the contractionary consequences could be greater than
projected in the Greenbook.
I'm still a little concerned about the slow growth in money
and credit. We have had very low growth in the past four or five
months, including last month, despite the absence of RTC activity. I
guess growth is picking up in the first couple of weeks of August, as
we apparently have scared people back into money. Money market mutual
funds have gone up and we're apparently exporting currency again at a
rapid pace. Obviously, some of it could be demand; but there also is
some fragmentary evidence on the supply side. The lending officers
survey continues to show tightness; and finance company lending went
up pretty dramatically recently, which is consistent with the notion
of some borrowers having to search for alternatives to bank credit.
I'd be particularly concerned about where the low investment grade
borrowers are going. The junk bond market is gone; the banks are not
forthcoming. You don't see the substitution effect in the commercial
paper market; high-grade credit has gone down as well. The other
concern I would have is the fragility of the banking system. If we
have a sharp downturn, we could have some real problems there and the
FDIC could have some real problems as well. So, I see a fairly weak
picture to begin with--with this shock making it weaker--and with the
certain prospect of higher numbers on the CPI as inflation works
itself through, the specter of a real possibility that the consumer
could pull in his or her horns. This presents us with a difficult
dilemma for setting policy; people have extended their pity on our
tough dilemma. What concerns me is that I think it's likely to get
more difficult before it gets easier. As the numbers actually start
to go into the CPI and as the impact on the consumer becomes clearer,
the policy options down the road may be at least as difficult as the
ones we face now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Every time I come to one of these meetings I am
reminded of how difficult it is either to analyze the economy
currently or to forecast it. This time we've just come through a
period of having received these major revisions in the GNP numbers
which, at least as I read them, show that we had weaker growth last
year than most of us thought we had had. Also, the numbers for the
first two quarters of this year look rather weak. In doing our
forecast, I think the uncertainties are really tremendous. I
mentioned a couple of them in my questions for the gentlemen at the
end of the table: primarily, the impact of the Middle East situation,

8/21/90

-32-

the budget summit or what might come out of the summit, or how GrammRudman will work and whether or not we'll have a sequester. All of
I certainly don't pretend to
those are key unknowns in our forecast.
It is
have any answers that are any better than anyone else's.
interesting for someone who has been rather concerned about the signs
of weakness in the economy, as I have, to be able to add some more
A number of them have been
indicators to my list this summer.
mentioned, so I won't repeat them. Also, I think it's interesting
that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has now come up with, and made
Solomon Brothers
public, a recession forecast for this year.
economists also are now forecasting a recession.
As I compare my own views with the Greenbook presentation,
One is the area of
there are a couple of things I would mention.
I'm somewhat more negative about that than our
consumer spending.
official forecast, primarily because of the debt situation. Consumers
And I think
are really loaded up to their eyeballs, I would argue.
this Middle East mess and what that's doing to consumer confidence is
going to result in a chance that their debt problems may even worsen
with defaults and delinquencies and those sorts of things. Also, I
never hear anyone mention the impact of these declining real estate
[values] on consumer spending. John LaWare and I have talked about it
in the past as an influence on the health of the banking system and
But for the average person, at least the average person I
S&Ls, etc.
know, the equity in their home is the biggest single item on their
And when the bombs dropped on the values of
personal balance sheet.
those homes--they actually are facing declines in real estate values
in many parts of the country, except maybe where Bob Parry lives--it
I think that is a bigger impact on the
made them feel more poor.
consumer sector than the October 1987 stock market decline. The
latter impacted people who owned equities, but a lot of other people
I think
didn't even know there was anything going on on Wall Street.
the decline in real estate values is far more serious to the consumer
and will be a future influence on consumers' willingness and ability
to spend.
Also, I'm somewhat more concerned about housing and other
kinds of construction because I don't think the financing problems
that are out there in the real world have been fully reflected in our
statistics, particularly the needs of contractors to locate funds to
do their construction work. I know we've discussed the credit crunch
primarily in the context of banks, but it also relates to S&Ls and to
the closing of S&Ls and to the limits on loans to a single borrower.
That is coming in through the back door and impacting on the
I'm also
construction of single-family homes, multifamilies, etc.
more concerned about what's going on in state and local governments
I think we're likely to see either cuts
and their budgetary problems.
in their expenditures or still more hikes in their taxes. We've
already seen numerous instances of that but it wouldn't surprise me to
see still more. And that, of course, impacts those folks who have to
pay the tax bills.
In terms of why I would just as soon not let us go into a
recession, the fragility of the financial system is certainly the big
I'm sure that the problems that already exist would be
part of that.
made much, much, much more difficult. And a recession would make the
U.S. budget far more difficult to deal with and would make the budget
deficit much, much bigger. As for inflation, if you could guarantee

8/21/90

-33-

me that a trip through the wringer would cut our inflation rate in
half, I might sign on for the ride. But I haven't heard anyone try to
Consequently, I am unwilling to take the risk of
make that argument.
a recession to get what may be a very modest cut in the inflation
rate.
So many of the sources of inflation that I see are just out of
our reach, period--whether it's an action by government or whether
I
it's something that has to do with OPEC or Mother Nature, etc.
think we have some impact but we certainly don't have complete
control.
So, I hope that we can come up with a good decision
today--one that will help to keep us out of a recession if we're not
already in one, though be responsible on the inflation-fighting side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

I think we all need some coffee.

Good idea.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Mr. Kohn.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Mr. Kohn?

MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about what you
referred to as the "felicitous" outcome involving an unchanged
[nominal] income path after the shock which, of course, leads to an
[un]changed interest rate path and M2 path. To me that has critical
implications for the policy decision we make here. What bothers me a
little is that it seems to me a bit counter-intuitive; also, I know a
couple of models at least where there are different results.
It would
seem more likely, with an oil shock of the magnitude we're talking
about, that in the first year we probably are going to see more of the
impact on higher prices than on the real side. That would suggest
that in order to get the same path for nominal income growth we would
need higher interest rates and somewhat slower growth of M2.
And if
indeed the same nominal income path is what we want now, this is a
very critical difference.
I don't know how much effort was spent in
trying to verify this or to look at it in different ways, but assuming
an unchanged nominal path is what we want, it's critical which
interest rate path is consistent.
MR. KOHN. Well, let me make one or two comments and then
Dave or Ted may want to comment as well. One is--and this follows the
conversation we had before--that I think it's important to distinguish
between GNP prices and the CPI.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. You get a lot more [effect] on the CPI, given that
it has imports in it and given that it has a higher weight on energy,
than you would on GNP prices.
Secondly, it's sort of a function of
the model; it falls out of the model's parameters, which are based on
past experience.
I think you could argue that past experience was
distorted; we had controls in certain cases and things like that.
So,
I think it is particularly difficult to get a reading on what's going
to happen now.

8/21/90

-34-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's also an interesting change in
the translation from crude oil to product prices this time relative to

the last time.

We used to have a long lag; now it's instantaneous.

MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.

Well, we had price controls.
Yes, everything was distorted by the controls,

certainly in the first period. So, my thought is that past experience
may not be that good a guide. And that simply reinforced my own
feeling that one can start with the staff forecast as a first
approximation, but this is probably a period in which the odds on that
coming through are less than I would usually say is true for the staff
forecast and, therefore, that one needs to be somewhat more adroit and
alert in changing policy if in fact the incoming information is not so
suggestive--

MR. STOCKTON. It isn't the case that our forecast is
constrained by this particular feature of the model--that somehow the
energy price run-up would naturally lead to offsetting price and
output effects with unchanged nominal income. As Don pointed out in
his briefing, it is a function of the parameters of this specific
model and not a theoretical feature of the economy or something that
is anything other than a summary of past historical experience.
MR. PARRY. It seems to me that we made one major judgment
that interest rates should be the same or lower, but I have a feeling
that we shouldn't take too much confidence in that result. It seems
to me quite likely that if we make that judgment then we're probably,
in effect, going to see higher nominal income and it's probably going
to be primarily as a result of greater inflation. I think the risk is
there and it's a significant risk.
MR. PRELL. I think the sense in which this nominal GNP
concept is attractive is as sort of an automatic stabilizer.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. PRELL. But you don't necessarily have to constrain
yourself to that automatic response. So, there's nothing magical
about this.
If you were concerned about any acceleration in inflation
in the short run, you might want to have a lower nominal GNP path or
even--

MR. PARRY.

Oh, that's true.

MR. PRELL. So it doesn't do the work for you here in terms
of the policy decision.
MR. PARRY. But it may cast it in a somewhat more
[unintelligible] way if indeed the underlying relationships are
different than as portrayed by that model. But you're right: It
depends on what you want to set as your objective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Don, what do you project for M2 growth in the
fourth quarter given something like the baseline assumption?

8/21/90

-35-

MR. KOHN. We have 4 percent quarterly average growth in the
fourth quarter. But I believe the monthly numbers, which I don't have
right in front of me, are lower than that. We come out of the third
quarter higher, so I think we're looking at rates more like 3-1/2
percent on a monthly basis in the fourth quarter. And partly because
we have the RTC activity picking up at the end of September, once
again that starts depressing M2 growth early in the fourth quarter.
And then we have opportunity costs perhaps even widening a little as
banks and thrifts reduce their offering rates in lagged response to
other rates. So, we don't have any big push in M2 for the fourth
quarter. We did raise the projection for the year to 4 percent based
largely on incoming data, revisions to past data, and how we saw the
third quarter. We didn't really strengthen our outlook beyond the
third quarter very much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else?
If not, why don't I get
started and try to cut through some of this. I must say that this is
about as difficult a policy discussion as I have ever been confronted
with, and I've been around these policy woods so to speak for 40
years. Let's start with where we are. I think there are several
things we can stipulate with some degree of certainty: namely, that
those who argue that we are already in a recession I think are
reasonably certain to be wrong in the sense that we do have weekly
data that suggest, as others have mentioned, that up until perhaps a
week or so ago there was no evidence of deterioration in what was a
very sluggish pattern. The insured unemployment data are as broad as
any set of numbers that we have for the economy as a whole. They
don't get revised. Sometimes they are a little unstable, but in
general they do give an unfailing measure of where we have been. And
I think where we have been in the first half of the third quarter is
clearly some small plus. The whole thing may fall on its face next
week, but I think at the moment it hasn't.
On the inflation side, those who argue that the goods
inflation is suppressing the problem on the services side are clearly
looking at the numbers [but] I find the numbers a little difficult to
read. I think the crucial issue here is not the services inflation
numbers but the wage rates which--however one looks at this inflation
trade-off--clearly have not been coming down and show a slight upward
tilt. Although there is still the possibility that that could turn
around in the third quarter, I wouldn't want to count on it given the
type of environment we're in. The services inflation problem has a
lot of tricky things to it, which is what I think David Mullins was
raising--especially when you try to substitute existing house prices
for the cost of house operations for the owner or renter. So, it's a
mixed bag.
What I am saying, essentially, is that there's a degree of
apparent certainty out there in forecasts and judgments, which I think
is suspect. The crucial issue confronting us right at the moment is
that the odds of an actual war in the Middle East are 50/50. If you
look at the form of the buildup that we're engaged in there, it's
fairly apparent that this is not a military establishment that is
going to sit there for a very long period of time. We are bringing in
fairly significant tactical offensive weapons. The chances of this
all positioning itself and doing nothing and Saddam backing down
easily has to be on the low side of the probability [spectrum].
And
the crucial issue here is that if a war does come, we have a very

8/21/90

-36-

serious question--as I think Jerry mentioned--with respect to the
state of the Saudis' oil facilities, a very substantial part of which
are concentrated directly under Kuwait off Ras Tanura and to the north
of Bahrain. And that is not all that far away from a couple of
kamikaze raids, which some Iraqi pilots have already volunteered for.
Frankly, I don't think it's an issue in the next week or so. We are
still building our military forces and it's extremely unlikely that
anything will be triggered until we are positioned. We are nowhere
near there because of the lead times it takes to move our equipment
and troops. And while we have a formidable force--enough for
inhibiting any adventuresome activities--I don't think we're yet
anywhere near the level that the reported flow of materials suggests
we are.
As a result of that, in an odd way where the economy has been
is a very interesting statistic, but I'm not altogether certain it's
as crucial as we probably would like it to be. We obviously have a
major budget problem, not so much in the additional costs but I think
in the reduced probabilities of getting an agreement, which I think
clearly have declined significantly. In Gary Stern's terms, we are in
a sense in economic/political policy turmoil.
In that type of an environment, it is crucial that there be
some stable anchor in the economic system. It's clearly not going to
be on the budget side; it has to be the central bank. It's got to be
we! I think we very clearly have to preserve--which is our
fundamental role, mainly--the value of the currency both internally
and externally and, in a sense I suspect, be more involved in damage
control than in trying to implement a policy that is apt to do
something of very significant dimensions. I personally would feel
very uncomfortable if we exhibited any evidence that we were going to
accommodate the increase in nominal GNP that we would like to come out
[unintelligible] with the price rise. As Lee Hoskins mentioned, the
experience of the 1970s is something that very clearly has to be
avoided. When we get uncertainties at the level that we currently
have, I think we have no choice but to go to where our fundamental
policy issues lie, mainly in trying to maintain as closely as we can a
stable credit and monetary environment.
I must say, I disagree with Wayne Angell's pessimism on M2.
I would be more inclined to explain the fact that we have had a very
low rate of M2 growth in the last three or so odd years--in the
context that inflation was not coming down more--in terms of the P*
model that we set up. That would show in 1986 that adjusting the
money supply relative to the price level indicated that the price
level was down here and the long-term parallel real money supply was
up here. What we have been seeing essentially is a gradual narrowing,
with the price level coming up and essentially burning off the excess
money supply. And it's only very recently that the lines have
crossed. I certainly would say that if the inflation rates were to
continue [moving] up as money supply stayed stable, then the pessimism
that you're exuding has some reason to be focused on. But at the
moment I think it's premature; I think we have evidence that this
system fundamentally still works. And I think that we have to be
focused on essentially where the credit aggregates and the money
supply growth are. While at our last meeting we were getting clear
indications that the markets were tightening more than we had
anticipated, I had hoped that the money supply numbers we were looking

8/21/90

-37-

at in recent weeks were suggesting that that basically is simmering
down. As I recall, Bob Forrestal mentioned that he was hearing less
about a credit crunch and that may in fact be what is happening; it
may well be that what these money supply numbers of recent weeks are
showing us is that the cumulative pressure coming in the credit
markets in an endeavor essentially to preserve capital has reached the
point where that continuing tightening has at least flattened out.
In today's environment we have to recognize that there is a
rather limited chance of affecting the economy in a significant way.
I would suspect at this point that the Pentagon has more policymaking
clout than we do, because it's fairly obvious looking around the world
that if oil [prices] go up and oil [production] comes down, that will
have profound effects on the system. And if Saddam is perceived to be
increasing his power and his clout and his control over the West, he
is going to be able to name OPEC's level of output--including his own,
which will be up there and everybody else's, which will be down. And
his control would be more than just strictly the Gulf states because
he has terrorist groups out there and he can control Indonesia and
every far flung oil producer in the world. Consequently, our ability
to divert this guy probably has far more implications with respect to
crude oil output, prices, interest rates, the world economy, and
specifically the United States economy, than anything we can do
sitting around this table for weeks.
So, I would suggest at this
particular stage that we ought to have a more modest view of what it
is we're going to be able to accomplish.
I don't think it is in our
power to either create a boom or prevent a recession or vice-versa.
At this particular moment and for the period immediately ahead our
tools are limited. Therefore, I would suggest that perhaps the
greatest positive force that we could add to this particular state of
turmoil is not to be acting but to be perceived as providing a degree
of stability. And I would hope that to the extent our foreign central
bank associates will feel the same way, we might be able temporarily
to put some degree of stability at least somewhere in the system.
Having said that, if one looks through to our next scheduled
meeting on October 2, I think it's more likely that events will
materialize in a manner whereby we eventually will feel more
comfortable easing than we will tightening. So, I would still like to
stay where we have been which is "B," asymmetric toward ease. But
this is such an uncertain period that I think we're going to have to
be auditing it quite considerably. And under any conditions, I would
recommend that we not go more than two weeks before we meet again on
the telephone because I do think that within the next two-week period
something is very likely to emerge that will require a general review.
I don't know anything specific about whether or not [our military] has
built up to an offensive technical capability or not.
Frankly, if I
had to guess, I would believe that the President has not made that
judgment yet.
To know that we have the capability, one only needs to
watch the television tube for any protracted period of time and know
something about what types of armaments are used for what types of
purposes. Now, if this is strictly a limited police action, there are
just too many policemen. So, let me stop there with that proposal and
see where everyone would like to go.
MR. HOSKINS.

Just a point of clarification.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

-38-

8/21/90

MR. HOSKINS.

In the context of what you said on asymmetric

language and the conference call, are you suggesting that you are
suspending what I guess has developed into a tradition recently of

asymmetric meaning you have two calls of your own of 25 basis points,
or would you confer?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, this particular period I would view

somewhat as a special case. I don't know how I'm going to answer that
frankly at this stage. I haven't given it thought. The authority of
the Chairman under this proposed directive I think has to be evaluated
very carefully. Certainly, this is not the same view that I held last
July when I put it the other way around.
I think we need something

very significant to move from where we are.
MR. SYRON.

President Syron.

I guess the first law of medicine is do no harm.

It seems to me that you're suggesting that that might be the first law
of central bankers in these circumstances. I have a lot of sympathy
with that. I think of the whole situation in a sort of "BS," before
Saddam, and "AS," after Saddam way. I must confess that before Saddam
I was somewhat inclined to think on the basis of the data we had
coming in--the GNP revisions, other developments, and the financial
situation--that some moderate easing along the lines of 25 basis
points might be appropriate. But in the wake of what has happened in
the Middle East, with the further steepening of the yield curve and
the intermingling of the concern of inflation expectations for a
variety of reasons and also what has happened in the foreign exchange
market, it's a somewhat hazardous course to make any change at this
point in time until we have somewhat more certain information about
what's going to happen with the dominant event. As you point out, the
dominant event will be something not determined in this room. I must
confess to being somewhat dismayed by your odds. I'm not disagreeing
with them because I'm sure you know more than we do, but still it's
fairly discouraging. I agree with the "B" asymmetric; and because it
is a long time in this environment until October 2nd, I think we may
need some consultation before then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, in light of the uncertainties and
concerns that you mentioned, I certainly would be supportive of
Bluebook alternative B. In terms of my own viewpoint, though, my
concerns about higher inflation are equal to my concerns about
recession. Consequently, if I had my druthers, I'd prefer symmetric
language as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I'm encouraged by your confidence in M2 and, Mr.
Chairman, I want to believe you're right. I think [your proposal] is
in a somewhat acceptable range and I certainly do agree that we need
to have more information to move. Although somewhat satisfied with
the range that you stated, my preference would actually be "B" with a
tilt toward restraint. But I don't know that that restraint would
need to take place by an increase in interest rates. I just believe
that there's some confusion in the marketplace in regard to what it is
that we are about. And if there were some way of communicating your
call for stability, and that includes price level stability, then I
believe that we would have a much better chance to get long-term

8/21/90

-39-

interest rates down. My guess is that if we were to move the fed
funds rate up 25 basis points that that would be quite a surprise and
that it would be taken as an indication of our not accommodating this
oil price phenomenon. And frankly, I would expect long bond rates to
come down as much as short-term rates go up. Now, I realize it's a
lot easier to suggest that when you're not Chairman than it is when
you are, but that's my guess. In periods of low growth in which the
housing industry is under such a serious restraint that it does make
other consumer goods areas vulnerable to the downturn, it is important
to have lower long-term rates; and those lower long-term rates come
with reduced inflation expectations. I believe if the world knows the
Federal Reserve stands as the guardian of the value of the U.S. dollar
in purchasing goods and services in our market, which also includes a
stable value of the dollar abroad, then we would do wonders for
interest rates and actually increase the chances for the higher real
growth that I think some of you would like to see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I absolutely agree with the
solution that you describe in what is at best a very difficult
situation. Therefore, I would support alternative "B" with asymmetric
language toward ease. I have one minor operative difference, and it
relates to the question that Lee Hoskins raised. Looking ahead, I do
think the chances are that we will be easing policy sooner than we
will be tightening it. And it seems to me that these kinds of
situations happen very, very quickly and that there are brief windows
in which we would have an opportunity to make a change. Therefore, I
would not be uncomfortable--if you were to become aware of something
and you felt we did not necessarily have time to bring the Committee
together--if you were to go ahead and make a change without a phone
call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[changes],

Lee was raising a question of two

is that correct?

MR. HOSKINS. Yes, that was what I understood it [meant]
around the table when the language was asymmetric. But my question
also relates to-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I recall we always really interpreted it

as one.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KEEHN.

One.
Yes, that's how I interpreted it.

MR. HOSKINS. Well, I always interpreted it as that you had
[as Chairman the authority to make] a 25 basis point move either way
if the directive was symmetric. That was my understanding. If it was
asymmetric--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think that has ever actually
been formulated by this Committee, at least-SPEAKERS(?).
[Secretary's note: Unintelligible because
several people were talking at once.]

8/21/90

-40-

MR. BOEHNE.

I think we shouldn't do it today.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think it's the appropriate day.

MR. BOEHNE. I think we have to have some confidence in our
Chairman to use his discretion, particularly in periods like we're in
now.

MR. KEEHN.
SPEAKER(?).

That's my point.
That's the point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I appreciate that.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the pre-Iraq invasion
environment I was beginning to feel that we were at the point where we
should consider some easing of policy, and I must say that the events
in the Middle East have tended to confirm my feeling that that is
probably the appropriate stance for policy. I'm not at all convinced
that the price of oil is going to be maintained at the $25 level that'
the staff is forecasting, in the context of your remarks--which I tend
to agree with--that there's a 50/50 chance that we're going to get
into a real shoot-out here. All of that I think is going to reduce
aggregate demand in the economy and it's going to have a greater
effect on the real economy and on output than on prices. My view is
that we should do what we can to avoid a recession for reasons that
we're all familiar with and that Governor LaWare articulated very well
a few minutes ago. I think one can argue that we can attain greater
stability by moving at this point and giving greater confidence to the
people at large that we are not going to be moving into a recession.
And I say that with full recognition of the effects on inflation and
the exchange rate. But having said all of that, your argument is
quite persuasive. As you said, it's a very, very difficult call-probably one of the most difficult we have faced in a long time. So,
I can support your prescription with some reservation. My preference
would be to move slightly to give a psychological boost, if not a real
boost, to the economy. But if I were a voting member I would not
dissent from your prescription.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOYKIN.
position.

President Boykin.

Mr. Chairman, I'm fully supportive of your

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I support your position as well. I think it's
the right prescription for these circumstances. There might be
something to be said for a symmetric directive, in part because that's
my usual preference and in part because of all the uncertainties and
risks. But I don't feel very strongly about that at the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I also would support your
proposal. I think the most important thing that you may have
indicated is the need for stability. If we were to move, it seems to
me that the markets would read it as sort of a double whammy. On the

8/21/90

-41-

one hand, I would assume a move toward ease would indicate to some
that we are more concerned about a recession and, therefore, people
will accumulate the thoughts [and tend to react in ways] that will
make it come true. On the other hand, another part of the market
would read the easing as being inflationary over time and that will
I think nothing good could come out
build inflationary expectations.
of a move right now. And as a result, stability is where we should be
and where we should stay unless some very dramatic changes take place
in the near future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, doing nothing so as to do no harm is one
I think
The other side of that coin is paralysis.
side of the coin.
it might freeze us into avoiding opportunities to make some positive
contribution. And I think we need to be aware of that paralysis risk
I agree that at this point
as we go through the next several months.
we cannot change policy, if for no other reason than what's going on
in the financial markets, both the bond and foreign exchange markets.
But I feel that the real economy is going to need some help; it's
going to need some help from us in the coming weeks and months and I
So, I prefer
think we ought not to shy away from providing that help.
an asymmetrical directive in the direction of ease but I think I would
be more active with that asymmetrical directive than I sense you would
be.
I would look for opportunities to ease in the intermeeting period
when financial markets would be more favorably disposed to accept such
I view this as a tactical maneuver rather than an
an action.
abandonment of our basic strategy of restraint to bring down
inflation. My expectation is that whatever easing moves we make in
the coming months will likely have to be reversed once the economy
begins to strengthen.
We hark back to the lessons that we learned in the 1970s, but
In the first episode in
I think we learned lessons on both sides.
1974 we underestimated the amount of weakness in the economy that was
in the background when we had that first oil shock, and we ended up
with a very, very deep recession. On the other hand, in the later one
in 1979, we wanted to avoid the first mistake so we tended to err on
the side of ease and we ended up with one big inflation that led to
recession. So, there are lessons on both sides.
And while I agree
with you that this is not the time to move, let's not get an
inferiority complex in this big world and get paralyzed into doing
nothing when opportunity knocks at the door.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I would agree with what you recommended here.
I'd make three points.
First, in this kind of environment, while I
don't think we can rely exclusively on it, I really do think as Don
Kohn suggested that we need to watch what money is doing because I
don't think we can assume that an unchanged funds rate is an unchanged
policy. Secondly--I've said this before as well and I think Don
suggested this too in his remarks--I don't think that we can pretend
to lead markets in this kind of environment; we really have to follow.
Now, we don't always have to buy what markets are doing in a volatile
period, but I'm suggesting that unless there were expectations of ease
evidenced in financial markets, it would be very difficult for us to
ease and get away with it given the concern about inflation that's out

8/21/90

-42-

there. And the final point I would make is that if a recession is
imminent--if we're going to go into recession in the fourth quarter--I
don't think we can do much about it right now. Even in the face of
weak incoming data, if we feel that we're on a monetary policy course
that is consistent in the long run with sustainable growth and
progress toward price stability, that's about all we should do.
I
worry about overreacting--not on your part but just in general--to
incoming weak data on the thought that somehow we could pull this
economy out of recession in the short run. I don't think we can.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, instinct and intuition both tilt me toward
ease and sooner rather than later. But the cautionary comments that
you made persuade me that, as long as we monitor the situation
carefully and closely and are prepared to move quickly, your
recommendation is appropriate. So I join in supporting it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I fully support your
recommendation for "B" asymmetric toward ease, but I'm not as sure in
my own mind that we really are locked into an eventual ease.
I think
we may be surprised with the strength of the economy.
I also think
that if we do contemplate ease, we're going to have to assess that
very carefully to make sure that it is efficacious if we do ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I also would support your
formulation.
It's probably fair to say in my case that prior to the
Iraqi developments, I would have leaned to easing in any event.
As
things stand right now, I probably would come fairly close to
associating myself with Mr. Boehne's definition of the situation. But
I also think it's so uncertain that it could easily go the other way.
I could easily envision unpleasant circumstances where we might have
to tighten monetary policy. I say that not because I favor that, but
only because it captures the range of emotions that I think is really
on the table. As I say, your formulation is fine with me as things
sit right now. I would lean toward Mr. Boehne's prescription, but
depending upon what happens I might be a lot more cautious about
seeking out an opportunity to ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Monhollon.

MR. MONHOLLON. I think there's a serious risk that if we
were to ease now, we might be misread by the public and by the
markets.
It might decrease our credibility and might produce sharp
negative reactions in both domestic bond markets and foreign exchange
markets.
It might make our longer-run objectives more difficult and
more costly to achieve.
So, I have a strong preference for "B," Mr.
Chairman for those reasons in addition to the ones you've outlined. I
don't have a strong feeling about the symmetry question, but I have a

slight preference for symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

8/21/90

-43-

MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your analysis this
time almost wholeheartedly with respect to what monetary policy can
and can't do. As I said before, we face the fact that there is an oil
price shock, that output is going to be less than it otherwise would
have been, and that inflation is going to be higher than it otherwise
would have been. There's not a lot we can do about that. The one
thing we can affect, however, is how people in the marketplace view
the future for inflation--that is, inflation expectations. My view
would be that we should look at that more carefully or at least give
This is a policy
it more weight than perhaps we have in the past.
It does offer us a chance
mess, but there is a silver lining in it.
That would argue
to regain some of our credibility or to increase it.
One could make a case on
for a position very close to Wayne Angell's.
those grounds, I think, for a token tightening. But since the market
already expected an easing by us, that would argue in my mind for
But I do think we are at
staying where we are for stability reasons.
risk with respect to our credibility in terms of pursuing price
stability. My preference would be that we have symmetric language in
"B" and that hopefully we would have a Committee discussion before a
move is made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I would support the proposal, although I'm
leaning more in the camp with Vice Chairman Corrigan and President
Boehne. Without this [Middle East situation] I think a case could be
made for some easing, especially if money and credit growth had not
It still bothers me when we go through
picked up a little in August.
a period of months with low growth in money and credit because history
I would agree that in the
suggests difficulty a bit down the road.
current setting stability is important.
I do think, though, that
there are some risks in waiting and that it's not likely to be a lot
easier down the road. What concerns me most is that we might find
ourselves in a position where we're trying to play catch-up, requiring
larger moves, which would make me uncomfortable because of the risk to
stability. I believe there's great merit in gradualism. Also,
looking down the road, I would suggest that at some stage it wouldn't
be too bad an idea to get the market used to somewhat more movement in
the fed funds rate instead of the assumption that it's chiseled in
marble.
That's something we should think about as well. But in the
current climate I would support "B" asymmetric toward ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I know these are very tough times and it's
difficult to come up with accurate forecasts and it's difficult to
make good policy. And I appreciate your point about the need for
stability and the need for some sort of anchor in Washington or
something that is viewed as an anchor. But having lived on a river
for 13 years, I remember that even boats that are anchored move a
little; otherwise the line snaps.
So I think we could move a bit and
not be viewed as either irresponsible or reckless and also that it
wouldn't turn the financial markets on their ear.
In fact, it seems
to me that a modest move--to me 25 basis points is modest--would
offset some of the availability problems that I see in the credit
markets. And at the same time it would make it easier to do further
modest moves in the future as we see the need. So my preference would
be for some sort of a move that would resemble "A."

-44-

8/21/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think I have asked specifically
for support in a large number of meetings, going back a number of
years.
I'm not saying that people should violate what they think are
their principles.
I merely indicate that at this particular meeting
it's important for us to have as large a consensus as we can get.
Obviously, I'm not asking anyone to go against his or her particular
view of where you would like policy to be, but if you can find your
way clear, this is the type of meeting in which it would be helpful if
we had a very substantial consensus.
Having said that, I'd like to
request the Secretary to put to a vote "B" with the language
asymmetric toward ease.
MR. BERNARD.
I have a question. On the asymmetry toward
ease, we [now] have "slightly greater reserve restraint might or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would...."
Stay with the "would"?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes,

I'd stay with exactly what we had.

MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
Taking account of progress toward
price stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior
of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint might
or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from June
through September at annual rates of about 4 and 2-1/2 percent
respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10
percent."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
Governor Seger
President Stern

2nd.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let's break for lunch.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes, with careful writing of
the minutes.
Yes

Thank you.

END OF MEETING

Our next meeting is October

