Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 15, 1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 15, 1990, at 2:00 p.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Johnson
Kelley
LaWare
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,
Promisel, Rolnick, Siegman, Simpson,
and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach, Beebe, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,
Mr. Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, San Francisco,
Richmond, Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Cox, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 15, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Will someone move approval of the
minutes of the March 27th meeting?
MS. SEGER.
MR. KELLEY.

I'll move them.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
bring us up to date on Desk operations?
MR. CROSS.

Mr. Cross, would you

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?
If there are
no questions, would somebody like to move the ratification of his
transactions since the last meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Sternlight?

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see

Are there any questions for Mr.

MR. HOSKINS.
Peter, in March I asked about collateral to
back the Federal Reserve notes. You thought there might be a problem
Or do
in May, but I guess the Treasury balance situation solved that.
you see a problem coming up soon?
MR. STERNLIGHT. We had thought that there could be a problem
in May. Our subsequent reviews suggest that it doesn't look as tight
for the balance of this year as we had thought a month ago. That's
not to say that the problem may not still be there; but it's not going
to be as severe for the rest of this year as I might have thought some
6 or 8 weeks ago.
MR. BOEHNE. The change in sentiment in the market was an
extraordinary swing in mood. Yet I found that in the previous couple
of months or so the national statistics that we were getting didn't
seem to coincide with what I was hearing from the business community.
The current numbers seem to me to be more consistent with what I hear
from the business community. My question is: Is the marketplace so
dependent on these published statistics or is it also relying some on
the kinds of ad hoc information that it gets from the business
community generally? What a difference one number made!
It just
struck me as extraordinary.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There was an enormous change in sentiment
just about the time of that one set of employment numbers in early
May. I think more went into it than just that number.
It wasn't just
any single number; it was the unemployment rate as well as the flat

5/15/90

report on nonfarm payrolls and information that looked more comforting
on employment cost measures all wrapped up together in that.
MR. KOHN. Part of the issue is what they think the Committee
is looking at, President Boehne. They are trying to guess what the
Fed is going to do and they think that the Committee pays a lot of
attention to those numbers.
MR. PRELL. To add another two cents worth: My own impression
from talking to people who are with dealer firms and looking for some
insight into what the business community is saying is that the traders
and even the economists in many of these firms don't have all that
much exposure to anecdotal evidence directly from the business
community. I have been disappointed regarding the paucity of such
information, at least among economists in banks and industrial firms.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
If not, would
somebody like to move approval of the actions of the Desk?
MR. LAWARE.

I'll move it.

MR. JOHNSON.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Pause.]

Mr. Prell.

[Statement--see

There must be questions!

MR. BOEHNE. I have a couple of questions. On page 4 in the
Greenbook, you have laid out the monetary policy assumptions about
bringing inflation down over the next couple of years. We have an
environment in which there is not very much support--certainly no
national support--for this kind of firming in monetary policy, as best
I can tell. But even besides that, going all the way out to the end
of 1991 we have a 6-1/4 percent unemployment rate and then that slack
continues into 1992. You don't indicate what the unemployment rate is
in 1992. I presume it goes up another half point or three-quarters of
a point?
MR. PRELL.
of 6-1/4 percent.

No, we're thinking it's within a small fraction

MR. BOEHNE. But even after we have done all of that
[firming], we have not done much more than keep inflation from
accelerating, at least in terms of the numbers that you have. There
is some deceleration, but inflation is still largely in the 4 to 5
percent area that we have been talking about. Now, presumably, if you
carry this [forecast] out to '93, '94, and '95, you begin to get some
results. But to me that calls into question the whole logic behind
this approach that we can gradually squeeze inflation out, as
desirable as that goal is. Somehow this paragraph brought home (1)
the difficulty of it, and (2) how unreasonable it may be even to think
that we can pursue something like this in the kind of world that we
live in. I don't know if that's a question or a comment, but I guess
I'd like you to disagree with me.

5/15/90

My second question has to do with this credit crunch
phenomenon. We've all looked into it; we've put together these
anecdotal reports, and every report suggests that there's less of a
credit crunch than is talked about popularly in the general press.
I'm just wondering if you have any insights as to why we have this
dichotomy between what is said loosely and what we find when we try to
It doesn't seem to be the same problem
zero in on the extent of it.
that is often reported.
MR. PRELL. Well, on the latter question, I'll offer a little
I'll repeat one conversation I
anecdotal information on anecdotes.
had with Bill Dunkelberg, who conducts the survey for the National
Federation of Independent Business. That survey has shown very mild,
if any, changes in the credit picture for that constituency. He
related to me that he had been contacted by The Wall Street Journal
before they published their lead story on the credit crunch and he had
told them that.
If you look at that story, he wasn't quoted. The
reporter obviously thought it would be better to discuss the negative
news than what Dunkelberg's survey suggested.
That isn't to say the
Dunkelberg survey is absolutely reliable. But I think one finds that
sort of bad news orientation in the press reports. One also needs to
look carefully at the geographic detail and the sectoral detail that
is being addressed. Everything we have seen suggests that in the real
estate area, particularly the construction side of the market as
opposed to permanent financing of residential real estate, there has
And I
been a substantial change in the tenor of credit conditions.
don't see any conflict with the anecdotal information in that area.
As for small businesses, the senior loan officers opinion survey does
suggest that there has been some tightening. It hasn't been just
recently; it has been going on for the last year or so perhaps. And
it's affecting small and medium size businesses, particularly in
[unintelligible].
It isn't showing up in rates; it isn't showing up
as businesses not having any access to credit, at least not in terms
of figures [unintelligible] cut back existing customers; but it's
showing up in the standards that are being applied and the collateral
that is being used. The question is: What does that all amount to in
the end?
In terms of GNP we think that the only significant effects
are going to be in the construction area. We would have had a marked
weakening anyway in that sector, particularly in the commercial area,
because of the overbuilding.
On the inflation front, I don't want to repeat the entire
presentation that we gave a few months ago, but this is basically
consistent with that.
In fact, I'd say this could be regarded as a
relatively favorable short-run sort of Phillips curve trade-off. We
are getting a lot of disinflation for what we perceive to be the gap
relative to the natural rate.
It does presume that history is telling
us that we can get there gradually, but the effects are not linear.
In a sense, you have to get sharp absolute declines in activity in
order to get these effects, but we can do it gradually over a period
of time. I don't think we have historical episodes to go back to and
say "Yes, we had periods where the economy moved slowly, the
unemployment rate was perhaps slightly above the full-employment rate,
and we got a gradual diminution of the rate of inflation."
But the
evidence that exists suggests that we ought to be able to get some
progress over time. As I hinted here and said in my briefing, we'd
like people to perceive that it's headed in that direction and that
the Fed is persisting--accepting whatever slack there is, presumably

5/15/90

leading to some rise in the unemployment rate to 6, 6-1/4 percent.
Frankly, people thought that was looking pretty good coming from where
we were. Maybe we will get to see some of that developing and the
tradeoff will look better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. Did the recent numbers change your outlook any?
I gather that you put a lot of this together before the most recent
numbers.
MR. PRELL. The employment numbers led us to show a weaker
second quarter than we might have otherwise. We didn't feel
comfortable pushing the numbers much further than this.
I must say
that there certainly are arguments--looking at what's going on in the
automobile sector--for a larger second-quarter number. But this is
something we feel comfortable with.
MR. JOHNSON. The other question was on the budget. You
implied that strong action on the budget would restrict the economy.
Is that assuming that what goes with it is a drop in real interest
rates? I just wonder: Wouldn't that be a source of stimulus to some
degree too? How are you coming to this restraint view?
MR. PRELL. Well, this is a complicated question, obviously.
Part of the issue would be whether this was just a one-shot effort to
hit the Gramm-Rudman target for this coming fiscal year or whether it
was something that would dramatically change the outlook for the next
series of years and greatly change expectations. When you open up
that latter door you're somewhat at sea in terms of an econometric
model. One can come up with rather interesting results with that,
such as long-term rates going down appreciably in anticipation of less
pressure on credit markets throughout the coming years. But if that
opened the door to a great deal of investment activity and it happened
very quickly, we could even in the extreme get a net increase in
aggregate demand in the short run; and short rates might even have to
rise some in response to that to keep things on a desirable path.
Falling short of that, if the Federal Reserve is accommodative in
terms of trying to hold real GNP close to the path it would otherwise
have been on, I think the fiscal shock has to be one that tends to
lower interest rates. The degree would depend in part on how much
forward expectation there was and how much bond yields move as well as
short-term rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mike, if you pursued a gradual reduction in the
rate of inflation, it's quite likely, isn't it, that the noise may at
times obscure any trend of progress? That's more apt to happen in a
gradual reduction approach than if there were a significant recession.
MR. PRELL.

Well, in addition to that--

MR. ANGELL. So, even though in some ways this may not give
the Committee a sense of a lot of achievement, you think it would be
different than that if we did not pursue this course?

5/15/90

MR. PRELL.
Correct. Our suspicion is that if you hold to
the current money market conditions, economic activity will gradually
pick up.
You will not see the unemployment rate rise much, if at all,
over the coming year or so.
And since we believe that right now the
pressures are such that the tendencies for inflation point up, we
would make a new course and head in that direction. So, instead of
heading south to 4 percent a couple of years from now, we feel the
risk is that inflation would be heading north to 5 percent.
That's a
significant difference and I'd hate to make it more precise than that.
But as we've said, we felt there was noise affecting the reading of
the trends [unintelligible] a variety of special factors: the
surprising strength of the dollar earlier in the year and so on.
It's
always difficult to read these [unintelligible].
So, that's the basic
thrust of our assessment at this point.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, I appreciate very much your laying out the

policy options for us that you have.
MR. PARRY. My point was somewhat similar to Governor
Angell's. The sentence on page I-3 [of the Greenbook] says: "The
recent data reinforced the view long embodied in the staff forecast

that restoration of a disinflationary trend is unlikely at current
The implication is that if we stay
levels of resource utilization."
where we are for a very long time, there is only a very small chance
of restoring the disinflationary trend and, in fact, it might even
produce an increase in inflationary pressures. That's the
implication.
MR. PRELL. That's what we are saying. Now, there's a second
part to this and that is: Will the Federal Reserve obviously let
financial conditions go, maintaining the historic growth path of
resource utilization numbers where they are? And that's the second
projection. One is the implication of the resource utilization level;
the second is about what financial conditions are compatible with
resource utilization levels. I guess I'd say I'm a little less sure
about the second than I am about the first and there's a good deal of
uncertainty on the first.
MR. PARRY. One get's the general feeling, though, that the
public feels that if we were to stay where we are we would have a
continuation of growth rates of around 2 percent and a gradual
[reduction of inflation]. What you're basically saying is that if we
stay where we are, growth rates are likely to pick up and we will not
be able to restore [unintelligible].
MR. PRELL. My sense of the consensus of business economists
is that the economy probably is going to run with 2, 2-1/2 percent
growth going out the next year to 18 months and inflation is going to
remain roughly in the 4-1/2, 4-3/4, 5 percent zone.
MR. PARRY. But they would not be assuming much in the way of
interest rate pressures?
MR. PRELL. No. My sense is that they probably are expecting
very little [change in] inflation, maybe some slowdown-MR. PARRY.

That's my point.

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
I have two questions, Mike.
One has to do with
an earlier period--1988 and early 1989--when we raised the funds rate
300 basis points, I think. I'd like you to contrast how you view that
tradeoff now. We raised interest rates a lot and not a lot happened.
You have built into your forecast an increase of 125 basis points or
so and are expecting to get some bang for that at the end of 1991.
I'd like you to compare those two periods if you can.
MR. PRELL. Let me just go back to a factual matter. What we
have built in here is a rise in the funds rate of about 200 basis
points but then we have it coming off [some] in the latter half of
next year as pressures begin to abate.
MR. HOSKINS.
Okay, that narrows the tradeoff down a little.
The point I'm making here is that we acted fairly aggressively at one
point in time and did not get much, as viewed by some people, in terms
of [lower inflation] rates. We did not necessarily get disastrous
results either in terms of slowing growth, but also we didn't gain a
lot. We kept the inflation rate roughly where it was.
I guess it
could have gotten a lot worse had we not done something.
I don't know
if you see any difference between those two periods that would
enlighten us now--perhaps not.
The second question has to do with the
deficit issue.
If you argue that we could get some benefit from a
lower deficit in the future, and if you've revised your 1990 deficit
up, then couldn't you argue that we might need to tighten to take
account of that now instead of in the future?
MR. PRELL. Well, a large part of that revision is RTCrelated and we don't think that's a real-MR. HOSKINS.

It's not real debt!

MR. PRELL. Our measure of this shows a shade less restraint
in the current fiscal year than it did previously and that's mainly a
reflection of our reading of the information on what occurs on the tax
side.
It does look like tax revenues are running a bit weaker than we
had anticipated. What seems to have come out of tax reform, reading a
lot into the 1989 experience, is that revenue falls a bit relative to
what we previously had anticipated in our forecast. So, we do have a
little less restraint but it's a marginal difference, although that's
[unintelligible] factor. Looking back at the 1988-1989 experience,
there are many things that are different; and one has to make very
difficult judgments about the timing of various effects. At that
point we were coming off a dollar depreciation that was causing
considerable improvement in our export growth. Exports were growing
much more strongly than they are now. That probably worked against
that restraint. We didn't have, perhaps, quite the debacle we think
we have now on the construction side, though office building has been
going down significantly for a while now and it wasn't at that point.
Perhaps we are closer to demographic requirements in housing
construction [unintelligible] some cushion here on interest rate
effects.
The levels are somewhat different.
I think there are
parallels in the two periods, but there are differences; and I have a
very hard time drawing a particular lesson. Our sense is, as you
said, that we did contain the rate of inflation. Whether that slowing
in the economy and leveling of the unemployment rate that occurred was

5/15/90

attributable to the rise in interest rates or to interest rates and
other factors is difficult to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I hate to sound like Ginny Dimwit today, but
would you walk me through one more time the sectors that in the next
two to four quarters would be taking off, or would be much stronger,
with a status quo monetary policy? In other words, exactly which
sectors are the ones that we have to restrain? I'm having a problem
finding such sectors out there.
MR. PRELL. I wasn't trying to characterize the current money
market conditions alternative as one which led to a take off, but
merely a gravitation back to the recent trend of potential output--a
sort of natural tendency in the economy in any event unless there are
countervailing forces. But in the short run we think that we could do
a little better due to some pickup in inventory accumulation relative
to the significant swing we have seen in a negative direction in
inventories. And without that, the final demands in the economy
should show through ultimately to output growth. If we didn't get the
rise in interest rates, we would have in our forecast a stronger
housing sector than we have. If we didn't have the restraint, we
would expect investment to be stronger. So, if we start removing the
restraint, the interest sensitive sectors would look a bit stronger
across the board and we'd probably add on top of that some leaning
toward a moderate, or higher than we have, level of inventory
accumulation. And if the dollar were to be weaker than we have in
there--

MS. SEGER. I would just as soon see us export more, but
that's a personal bias.
MR. PRELL.

Then, I'd begin looking for the fiscal policy--

MS. SEGER.

Right.

MR. PRELL.

That's the [unintelligible]

shift.

MS. SEGER. What amount of attention are you paying, then, to
the availability of credit in the housing situation?
I just hear so
often that it's not the price of money or the price of credit as much
as it is strictly unavailability.
MR. PRELL. Well, as I suggested, the commercial real estate
market may be more affected by this. We have built into this
[forecast] some effect, showing the availability of credit to builders
at a reduced level in the residential sector. I wouldn't say that
it's large; it's not hundreds of thousands of starts in this forecast,
but there is some mild effect. We think that would abate over time as
builders make connections with new lenders and as lenders find ways of
participating loans and some other arrangements. Over the next year
or so we think we probably will see some abatement of these problems.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I hope you're right.

Further questions for Mr. Prell?

5/15/90

MR. SYRON. Mike, just a technical question: The inventory
situation seems to be depending on how one looks at it.
Are we going
through any sort of structural change over time?
How much weight
would you put on structural change toward just-in-time inventories and
that sort of thing?
Or are you thinking it's still a pretty accurate
reflector of [unintelligible]? My own view of inventories is that
we're likely to see a bounceback. But do you think there's an
argument against that and that [businesses are moving to] permanently
lower levels of inventories?
MR. PRELL. My judgment at this time is that I don't see
inventories as an impediment to the growth of production.
I'm not
inclined to read it as a really strong bullish factor, in part for the
reason that you suggested.
I think there's still some effort,
particularly in manufacturing but in other sectors too, to decrease
inventories in relation to order/shipment ratios. And we view this as
still having some way to go.
An industry economist at a meeting I
attended recently said: "Boy, these numbers look great; but my boss
thinks these inventories are still too high."
So, I think the target,
in effect, is continuing to drift downward. That was one of the
reasons why in the past year when we saw manufacturing inventory/sales
ratios essentially just level out we didn't move up [our forecast]
very much. I thought that was a concern and would likely lead to some
effort to restrain inventories. And I think as [it turns out] that's
the pattern we've seen.
I think we're in much better shape now; but
still, my enthusiasm for thinking we're on the verge of a boom is
[unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, they are leaner than I think
the numbers show because our conventional measure is inventories over
domestic sales, whatever they are.
But [unintelligible] the
proportion of the inventories of imported goods. While one can't say
that excess inventories of imported goods will have no effect on
domestic production but only an effect on production at foreign
facilities, there is an element of truth in [the latter].
So the
estimates that we're making for wholesale and retail trade
inventories, for example, have a rise in the ratio of imports to
total, all at factory gate values, from 20 percent in 1980 to 25
percent now. Assuming you also have the data for manufacturing, if
you make the adjustments to have some form of weighing toward imports
and take them out or put final sales in or total imports in, the
inventory/sales ratios are much lower [now] than they were on an
historical basis.
So, they are already pretty far down. But, as Mike
says, when you speak to purchasing managers they still have a way to
go because they still think that there is significant improvement yet
[to be achieved] in the quality of production.
So, if the reject rate
can go down, which means they can bring the safety stocks back [down],
well, it's really quite an extraordinary change.
MR. JOHNSON. Could this trend also be in addition to the
improved efficiency?
That would be a good sign on the inflation
expectations side.
It could imply that the real cost to carry is
pretty high and that there's no speculative inventory built in.
That
would be consistent with-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you look at the lead times, the
April lead-time numbers were the lowest in I don't know how many
years.
For production materials they're at the bottom of the chart.

5/15/90

MR. PRELL. That would suggest the need to stock up in order
to have supplies, so that's the argument against the big boom. With
the firming of materials prices in [unintelligible] sector, the
carrying cost might not look quite as formidable as it did months ago,
but it's still substantial.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The other issue is that there is
increasing access to foreign facilities for materials, so that lead
times don't have to be bunched up every time there is a contraction in
excess domestic capacity. And it was the contraction in excess
domestic capacity that used to trigger the lead time stretch-outs in
inventory accumulation and [thus a] crash. At the moment one rather
positive aspect of the big share of imports to domestic demand in this
country is that it implies that we have access to facilities all over
the world. That really makes a difference. Any further questions for
Bob.
Mr. Prell?
If not, who would like to start our tour de table?
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, it's not too often that anecdotal
and statistical information seem to be pointing in the same direction,
but in our case for the first time in over two years they are
beginning to match. In contrast to previous reports that I've been
giving, where District performance had been marked with some strong
and some very weak sectors, there is now improvement and it's more
broadly based. District manufacturing continues to outperform the
nation. We had increases in manufacturing employment in the fourth
quarter of 1989 and the first quarter of 1990 while it was declining
In wholesale and retail trade, District employment
nationally.
increased at about a 4-1/2 percent rate in the first quarter.
Employment in the services sector is still growing at a healthy rate,
with particularly strong gains in the areas of finance, insurance, and
In the energy sector, all field activities continue to
real estate.
improve; as for the long-term outlook, there is considerable optimism
for continued improvement. District construction activity has been
strong recently, though it's likely to slow some from its current pace
of nearly 10 percent. Recent rains have improved the outlook for
agriculture except, of course, in those areas where we've had some
very, very severe flooding, which I'm sure you've seen on the news.
Our bottom line is that we do appear to be coming out of what
we call our great recession in the District, and the improvement and
growth seem to be widespread. Also, I think it's becoming quite
evident that our economy is much more diversified. Having said that,
I'm inclined to conclude that we may be getting away from the
historical boom-bust type of activity that we've had.
There may be
some disappointment for those who are waiting for the next boom,
having gone through the bust. But I'm inclined to think that for the
longer term it's going to be a much more healthy situation
economically.
With respect to the national picture, we're in substantial
agreement with the forecast that you have, Mike.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we think that the more restrictive
monetary policy that the staff is projecting is going to be needed if
we're going to generate greater projected disinflation as appropriate.
What's striking and disappointing to us is that this assumed tighter

5/15/90

-10-

policy is expected to produce only a small improvement in the
inflation outlook, at least through 1991, but a fairly substantial
reduction in GNP next year.
I think most of us would agree, and
indeed this was an import of the excellent memorandum distributed to
us sometime back, that there are different kinds of models on this:
those that are forward-looking and those that are backward-looking.
I
assume that most of this is based on the MPS model.
If you used one
that is more forward-looking, I think that would suggest a better
tradeoff, with more disinflation at a smaller cost.
Of course, the
staff readily acknowledges this in saying that the assumed tighter
monetary policy could yield a much bigger payoff if it increased our
credibility. And that, of course, is a very important issue from the
standpoint of our policy decision later on.
I don't think most of us
would be willing to argue in favor of a tighter policy if we thought
the payoff on inflation was going to be quite as small as what has
been projected in the Greenbook.
My own feeling is that the payoff would be larger because I
think people are becoming more and more forward looking.
If we can
demonstrate to the public that we really have a strong commitment to
[reducing] inflation, then I think perhaps we could have much better
results than the staff is projecting on the inflation side.
Now, we
wouldn't quarrel much with the staff's near-term projections for the
second and third quarters. I would guess that the near-term risks
might be skewed a little toward the down side because I think there
really is something to this real estate credit crunch. We hear this
from too many places. We had an interesting statement by a major
regional developer
who is a very astute man, I think. He
said that funding has virtually dried up; he cited one large city in
the country where only one out of eleven major real estate developers
can get any credit at all. And if that is true, of course, then it
could have some early impacts and would bias the next couple of
quarters to the down side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth District
economy remains pretty strong despite slower growth in recent months.
Employment in the West grew 3.2 percent in the past year, which is
somewhat slower than the kinds of growth rates in employment that we
were seeing in 1989 when they averaged 4.1 percent. All of that
slowing in growth can be attributed to the state of California.
California's growth in recent months has been quite similar to that of
the rest of the nation but the other states are doing extraordinarily
well.
For example, if you look at the seven fastest growing states in
the nation, all seven of them were in the Twelfth District.
The
outlook for western agriculture is positive overall, although this
summer's harvest is unlikely to be as profitable as those in recent
years.
Inventories of many agricultural products are higher than they
were a year ago and the acreage that has been planted in the West is
high as well. Even drought-affected crops such as cotton and rice are
only going to be cut about 10 percent, so we'll see a large increase
in output. At the same time, costs for some farm inputs are up
dramatically. In California we're in the fourth year of drought. And
in California that means you irrigate in a different way.
Instead of
using surface water, you go to well water or ground water; and that
costs a lot more money and is going to cut substantially into the
profits of farmers.
In a state like Idaho where they also use a lot

-11-

5/15/90

of irrigation, they have a shortage of water and the difficulty there
is in obtaining irrigation pipe. Apparently, it costs three times as
So, the
much this year--if you can get it--than it did last year.
agricultural situation really isn't that bad overall, but it's quite
likely that agriculture won't be quite as prosperous financially as it
was in the last year.
I might note parenthetically on this issue of credit
availability to farmers and to small businesses that we had two banks
give us some very interesting observations, and I'd be interested if
others ran into the same thing. One of the large banks said that
there is a substantial restriction on credit to small businesses.
Another banker said there were restrictions to agriculture, but he
said it wasn't related at all to what has been happening with regard
to regulators' views or associated types of events.
He said it's
related to environmental concerns. Banks, whenever they take over
collateral when there's a default on a loan, are then responsible for
So his bank, for example, which is a
the environmental consequences.
large bank, was no longer making small business loans to any gasoline
stations, dry cleaning establishments, or any farms which had inground gasoline or diesel tanks. And any time they were doing large
projects they would have to send out an environmental appraiser as
well as a value appraiser. He said this was having a very significant
effect on lending. My understanding is that apparently this is such a
hot button with the industry that there are a couple of Congressmen
who are now in the process of introducing legislation that will
It's a little different wrinkle that I hadn't
rectify this situation.
heard before but apparently, at least among our bankers, it's very
significant.
Turning to the national economy, our outlook for the year
1990 is very similar to that of the Greenbook. We do part a bit in
1991, but it's a result of the difference in monetary policy
assumptions. We don't have the federal funds rate rising as rapidly,
and we get a result which actually is quite consistent with the
Greenbook's results. With an increase in rates of about half of that
in the Greenbook we get growth in 1991 of 2 percent and, indeed, there
Thank
is no basic drop in the underlying inflation rate until 1992.
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think we have to find a way of
producing excess crude oil and just [unintelligible] into the market;
that did wonders in 1986.
President Syron.
MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, you know where
the strongest growing states are; I can tell you where some of the
weakest growing states are.
MS.

SEGER.

It isn't Massachusetts any more?

MR. SYRON. No, it's New Hampshire, actually. The economy in
the region continues soft, although it's not in a steep decline.
We expect it to fall by
Employment fell about 1 percent in 1989.
another 1 percent in 1990 and we expect the unemployment rate regionThese assumptions are based on a model
wide to go north of 6 percent.
that was run without incorporating a national model with as much
Actually, it's
credit tightening as the Greenbook has in it.
interesting that by state, New Hampshire is by far the softest,

5/15/90

followed by Massachusetts and then by Connecticut. The reason for
that, I think, is that construction has turned down so much.
Construction [spending] region-wide has fallen about 10 percent, but
it has fallen 25 percent in New Hampshire. This is really micro data,
but with it being a very important industry in southern New Hampshire
particularly, and becoming almost an economic [unintelligible] in its
own right like a traditional manufacturing industry, that's a swing
that couldn't be avoided. There is a substantial real estate overhang
in the District. Housing sales activity remains soft; housing
inventory stays high. I think housing remains soft in part because
people are very unrealistic in pricing. We don't seem to be getting
real price adjustments. Using the ultimate in anecdotal information-what I am doing myself, and I just sold a house--I think you can move
houses but you have to sell them for about 18 to 20 percent less than
the price at the peak. And people just generally aren't willing to do
that. I think it's going to be slow to come back because we're at
quite a regional disadvantage now in terms of wages in light of the
very strong growth that we had for some period of time. And,
obviously, we have serious tax problems; they are worse in
Massachusetts but there are tax problems in Connecticut as well as
some in New Hampshire. To some extent, in a regional sense, there was
no one to take the punch bowl away and what happened was that the
region just got carried away.
Going to the credit crunch issue, we think there is something
there but it's very specific to small-to-mid-size businesses and to
the construction area. It's hard to say that in the construction area
it's because of tighter supervision [of lending institutions]; we had
other problems in that area. In the aggregate data a lot has been
made of the System's preliminary data saying that lending in New
England is down 8 percent over last year. We actually took that data
and then adjusted it for two or three different things: the large
volume of loan sales by some of our large banks that are in trouble;
the sale of credit card portfolios; and the writing off of some of the
other real estate owned and other adjustments. All that gets the
reduction down from about 7.9 percent to about 1 percent. So, credit
is growing more slowly but no way near as slowly as the data indicate.
Outside the computer area, where I think we have specific problems, a
large number of firms report that sales, while they haven't kept up
their strength, are not off dramatically either, particularly in the
national market. Interestingly, our large [unintelligible]
producers--and by that I mean firms such as Ratheon, General Electric
and United Technologies--are anxious about the outlook and they are
planning for a slowdown; but given lead times, they haven't felt much
effect on production. And they have had some success in converting
plants to other products. Interestingly, they find their export
business and even import substitution are actually quite good. For
example, United Technologies just became a preferred supplier for--I
guess we call them transplants--foreign-name plants producing modulars
for doors and different things like that. So, the export business is
becoming more important to us, both directly and indirectly. When we
talk to people around the District, we're finding that inventories are
quite lean. Again, it's hard to sort out exactly, but they are quite
lean at the retail level as well as at the manufacturing level.
As far as the national economy goes, we're in substantial
agreement with the Greenbook. We had thought perhaps that inventories
might affect us--that there was a chance for some breakout on the up

-13-

5/15/90

side in inventories because we think things are potentially a little
stronger. We're inclined to discount the retail sales report because
of the noise and just see what happens when we get the next PCE
report. We're encouraged by the improvement in the PPI but it's still
obviously [unintelligible] with substantial problems of inflation
fourth quarter to fourth quarter.
In looking ahead--and this was a
question I was going to ask but it was asked by Governor Angell among
others--if we assume essentially no change in monetary policy, our
feeling is that an already discouraging Greenbook inflation forecast
would be significantly worse with the prospect of being substantially
worse. And in that context, we'd be concerned about labor
compensation given some of the [upward] creep we've already seen in
that area. This will be covered during our policy discussion, but it
may be easier to take out an insurance policy now rather than to wait
until we get into a situation where we really have to crunch
significantly later on.
I think it is true that credibility is
important and can make it easier for us on the way down; but I'm
starting to become concerned about losing credibility with inflation
creeping up on us and our not having been able to change materially
That will increase the cost of our ultimately
the direction of that.
having to deal with it, and I think we ultimately will have to deal
with it.
This is a speech, and I guess I should omit that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, overall conditions in the District
are pretty much unchanged from the last meeting. We seem to have
stabilized at a level reasonably consistent with our outlook for the
balance of the year, namely sustained growth at, say, a 2-1/4 percent
rate.
I have a couple of specific comments.
First, on the auto
sector, which Mike has covered: At this point it looks as if some of
the uncertainties in the industry early in the year have been
clarified, with the very large unsold inventories having been worked
down now to I think reasonable levels, particularly for this time of
the year. Production levels in the second quarter will be lower than
last year by about 12 percent on average but significantly higher, of
And the early outlook for the
course, than in the first quarter.
third quarter is that production levels will be higher than was the
case last year, but last year's third quarter was comparatively a
quite weak quarter. I think there's a slight change in sentiment
among the auto dealers. They have gone from being very, very negative
to at least being cautious. But my understanding is that on a
national basis some 50 percent of them are still losing money. And
The
clearly, it takes very big incentives to move cars at this point.
sales outlook for the year--adding cars and light trucks together--I'm
They think that's
told by the industry is about 14-1/2 million units.
But having said that, they think their trend line
very disappointing.
is about 15 million units; so it seems to me that on a broader
prospective 14-1/2 million in sales is a pretty reasonable year. A
major uncertainty, of course, is the labor negotiation coming up in
the fall.
It is just far too early to tell how that's going to work
out.
It certainly does have the potential to have a big impact on
production.
The steel business seems to be reasonably good; production
Sales of some steel products
levels are in the 85 to 86 percent area.
are coming in at about 100 percent of capacity and backlogs have now
moved up to 82 to 83 days. As a consequence, we are seeing some price

-14-

5/15/90

increases in the steel business and, given these kinds of pressures,

those increases are sticking. The expectation is that prices will go
up about 5 percent on average next year. In construction,
surprisingly, both commercial and residential numbers in the District
But I think we're
continue to move ahead of the national numbers.

going to see a big change and that there will be some reduction.
Clearly, there is a curtailment of credit for commercial projects.

But everybody I talk to says it's simply a result of having had far
too much money going into too many projects and it's going to take a
while for the absorption rate to dig into the vacancy rates. While
the construction numbers probably will be a little lower than was our
early expectation, offsetting that is our expectation that the

opportunity for exports for the year will be a little better than we
might have guessed. The level of the dollar has not been impeding
sales and any reduction in the dollar along the lines that Sam
suggested simply will add to a more positive outlook there.
In the agricultural sector, I was really pleased to hear that
In fact, in Iowa a number of
planting conditions have been excellent.
people describe conditions as the best they've seen in a good many
years. The corn crop is largely in; the soybean crop will go in
within the next two weeks. These better conditions will be reflected
in a good increase in the demand for agricultural equipment. Industry
sales of large tractors and combines are running significantly ahead
of last year.
On the inflation side, the outlook is certainly less clear;
it's difficult to tell how the first-quarter aberrations are going to
work out as we go along here. But we are still, I think, a bit more
optimistic than Mike in that we see some improving trends in inflation
as we get out toward the end of the year. Market pricing for
manufactured products continues to be very, very competitive. There's
a lot of pressure [to hold down] price increases, given capacity
additions as well as foreign competition, [but] I think we're going to
continue to see some price pressures. In the services sector, though,
there are some increases that are more disturbing; that would be most
particularly true in regard to health care. But on the wage side,
basically increases seem to be continuing okay. One very unusual
example: I talked to somebody who negotiated a six-year contract with
the machinists union the other day, which provides for an annual cost
increase of 2 percent and some unusual features. I think that's an
indication that wage pressures continue to be pretty tight.
On a national basis, we think that the outlook for growth
continues to be positive. But certainly we're going to need to see
some improvement in the inflation rate. We continue to be optimistic,
as I say, but pretty soon we're going to have to see that evidenced by
better numbers on the inflation side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Since our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, the
economy in the Sixth District seems to be doing a little better. For
example, the unemployment rate in March for all of the states combined
was the lowest that we've had in 15 years. That was mainly
attributable to better performance in Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana, resulting from stronger agri-business as well as offshore
energy exploration and development. We're also benefiting in the

5/15/90

-15-

Southeast and particularly in Atlanta from job relocations, which are
significant in some cases, to the area and to the city. Otherwise,
the weaknesses and strengths in the District are pretty much the same
as in the country as a whole, and I won't repeat those. We have very
little real evidence to contribute from the credit availability survey
last month to suggest that there were any major credit problems. But
I must say that the bankers in the District don't miss any opportunity
to remind me about the problem that they're having. They indicate
that loan officers are increasingly reluctant to make commitments and
to approve applications either because the bank has had, or is
anticipating, an examination or because of the publicity. The data
for District banks do show some deceleration in loan growth, but I
would repeat that we don't find evidence of any substantial problem.
Business contacts, and this includes our directors, seem to
me a little less concerned about a recession than earlier this year,
but they are complaining that the deceleration in growth is placing
them under pressure within their own businesses. For the most part
they have not seen price pressures accelerating and from this point
they don't see inflation as a problem. As I've said several times
before, many of the people that I talk to are not convinced that
there's anything wrong with the current inflation rate, and that
continues to disturb me a little. And they are worried, too, about
our reaction and what will happen if we seek to bring inflation down
too aggressively.
Turning to the national economy, we did not as usual assume
any policy change over the two-year time horizon, so our forecast is
not especially comparable to the one in the Greenbook. But as I look
at both of those forecasts, I think our forecast has a slightly more
positive and optimistic view about the underlying rate of inflation.
Some of the unanticipated increase in consumer prices in the first
quarter we see as basically temporary and not so much of that is
carried forward in comparison to the Greenbook. So, we're continuing
to forecast the CPI to turn out between 4 and 4-1/2 percent over the
next two years. Beyond that we see very little improvement and
perhaps even a deterioration as we look past 1991; obviously, in the
Board staff's forecast that improvement occurs later on. I think the
Greenbook has done a very good and very reasonable job of distributing
the weaknesses that result from a policy tightening.
I'm anticipating our policy discussion to some extent, but I
think that a case can be made for some policy tightening at the
moment. One argument would be credibility to be sure. Another
argument that has some appeal is that it probably will be increasingly
difficult to make a move later on this year. Having said that, I
don't think the timing is really right at the present time. There are
still enough pockets of weakness both nationally and regionally that
the risk of a downturn could be fairly high. The April data suggest
to me that there's a bit more weakness out there than is built into
these forecasts and other forecasts. The current concern about credit
availability adds to that concern. And finally, it seems to me that
with the budget summit that is starting today, a tightening of policy
before this meeting is concluded might very well reduce the pressures
on the negotiating parties to actually restrain the budget, meaning
less would be done. So, to me the arguments are persuasive that we
ought not to move at the present time.

-16-

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. The District economy looks largely like the
national economy. There are distinct pockets of great weakness,
although overall I think it's probably continuing to perform, as it
has for some time, a bit better than the national economy--whether you
look at the overall growth of nonfarm employment or at specific
industries that continue to perform very well, such as paper and
forest products, mining, and tourism. There are some other surprising
bits of positive news that I'll just pass on.
One is that major
retailers, at least in the District, continue to post very good
results. And home sales in the Twin Cities in the first quarter were
running 15 percent above last year's first quarter and that had been a
steady number month-by-month. So, there have been some pretty good
numbers there. Also, the extent of the drought in the District has
been narrowed as a consequence of some fairly heavy rains in March and
April and so far in May. And there's some [unintelligible] number of
good reports not only of crop prospects but about capital spending in
agriculture for this year.
I might as well give you my two cents worth on the credit
crunch. We're certainly hearing a lot fewer and a lot lower volume of
concerns from agriculture and small business than we were hearing a
few years ago when the Farm Credit System was in distress and when
there were serious problems in agriculture and so forth. That's when
we heard a lot about it.
I must say today, relative to that period,
it's absolutely quiet for the most part out our way. A major national
developer that we're close to has reported difficulties--not his own
but of competitors--in obtaining credit.
In fact, he has reported
that on a couple of deals where he was not the low bidder and did not
get the contract initially the low bidder couldn't get financing so he
wound up with the contract.
In terms of economic activity, of course,
there is no depressing effect.
The project is going to get done; it's
just a question of who is getting the credit.
MR. LAWARE.
MR. STERN.

At a higher price.
And he's rather happy.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
higher prices!
SPEAKER(?).

In other words, tighter credit leads to

The high deal wins.

MR. STERN. Well, from the point of view of GNP you get a
little more! As far as the national economy in concerned, I certainly
agree with the underlying thrust of real growth as presented in the
Greenbook. On the inflation side, I take that message to heart as
well. Having said that, though, I must say that I don't have any
anecdotal evidence suggesting that inflation pressures are building at
the moment.
It seems to be pretty much the status quo. And some
business people at least are concerned that an effort to bring
inflation down from 4 or 5 percent or wherever it is would be bad for
their business because, of course, what they envision is that a
recession would accompany it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

5/15/90

-17-

MR. MELZER.
I would say that in terms of our broad view, we
wouldn't be as concerned as the Board staff about monetary policy
being somehow badly out of position here.
Our outlook is for modest
growth, containment of pressures in the short run, and gradual longterm progress.
But we wouldn't envision the kind of tightening that's
implied; in fact, I think it's much too early to tell.
If you look at
page 5 of the Bluebook and what has been happening to money, credit,
and reserve aggregates over the last couple of months, you have to
wonder whether there's a significant tightening going on already with
the funds rate at a constant level.
Again, having said that, I think
a month or two is much too short a period of time to react to.
In
general I think we've been well served this year by not letting very
volatile expectations whip us around.
I think our "steady-as-it-goes"
policy has been quite good.
On a District basis, I would say we're growing modestly
Even without auto workers coming
better than the national economy.
back, we've had growth in manufacturing jobs.
On the agricultural
front, the flooding in Arkansas has created some problems, although I
don't expect them to have national implications.
I think some wheat
crops will be plowed under and some cotton, rice, and corn crops will
be late getting in.
But basically at this stage, there hasn't been a
major impact.
On the price front, I haven't picked up much commentary
about the minimum wage [increase].
I did pick up some comments in
Arkansas where firms have below minimum wage employees; they are
complaining about the compaction effect on their salary scales and the
fact that it has a much broader implication in terms of their costs
than just on the people below minimum wage.
A couple of people said
the way they are dealing with it is with gradual, phased-in price
increases over the first six months of this year, so they aren't faced
with a step increase in their prices around midyear.
One final
comment: Our large reporting banks in the three-month period ended in
April have actually had a decline in loans outstanding.
It's in other
categories.
There is still growth in real estate and C&I loans, but a
decline in personal loans and big declines in some other categories.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
In the District, commercial real estate varies a
good bit, but on the whole I think it's a major drag on the economy in
some areas.
I think the risks in the District are on the down side.
In retail sales we're seeing some small increases, and capital goods
continue to be a positive.
Manufacturing generally is still slumping,
but there's some sense that that slump may be bottoming out.
Overall,
I'd say we have modest growth.
On the national economy, I come out about where Tom Melzer
just did.
I think our "steady-as-you-go" policy has served us well.
We've resisted being jerked around.
My own sense is that the risks to
the economy continue to be about even.
There is a risk that inflation
may accelerate, but I think there is a risk that the economy may not
be as strong as it is currently.
I sense that the business community
still feels that we will avoid a recession, but I must say that I
think it would not take a lot of monetary tightening to change that.
My sense is that we ought to push the "steady-as-you-go" policy
another couple of months.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

5/15/90

-18-

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth District,
the economy continues to grow moderately slowly. Recent developments
have been somewhat mixed. There has been a good deal of press given
to the agricultural sector. The wheat crop, for example, has been
estimated by the Agriculture Department as being near double last
year's crop. That optimism isn't totally shared by some of the wheat
growers themselves, although we're within probably 30 days of harvest
in much of the Tenth District area. It does look very good, and I
think the farmers are pleased with it.
It's a question of how it
comes out. We are always reminded that a wheat farmer has to lose his
crop at least nine times; in other words, he's very pessimistic until
it's in the bin. They're still not prepared to say it's going to be
double what it was last year. The outlook for farm income for 1990 is
very good not only because of the wheat but also other crops, so the
last two-year drought will not affect the 1990 crops yet to be planted
and harvested. On top of that, crop prices have firmed up recently
and there's a good deal of excitement about red meat prices. For
example, prices of cattle, including replacement cattle for the feed
lots, are essentially at an all-time high. Inventories of the latter
have not been rebuilt; they were run down over the last three or four
years. So, if you combine not only a good crop year together with
livestock prices, then the outlook for agriculture is very bright for
our area. A somewhat damping effect is the rain that Bob talked about
in Texas, which also has occurred through much of the Tenth District.
That has restored the moisture level, but now farmers can't get the
crops in [the ground], so it's uncertain. With respect to energy,
despite the weaker oil prices, the District rig count did increase in
April and remains above the year-ago level. We do have a good deal of
auto assembly [capacity] in the District and that [activity] has been
very sluggish, as has been detailed around the table. In the
manufacturing sector that's laid against a very brisk business in
aircraft manufacturing. In residential construction, contracts fell
slightly in March, but nonresidential contracts increased, which
doesn't tell the same story that apparently is told elsewhere in the
nation. We do still have a large overhang of commercial properties in
cities such as Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa. But District-wide,
the nonresidential commercial contracts have increased recently.
With regard to the national economy, I have little or no
quarrel with the Greenbook forecast. We go through an exercise in
which we hold monetary policy steady as it has been going into a
meeting such as this. Then, after we receive the information with
respect to how the staff has treated monetary policy in the Greenbook,
we do another exercise and lay them side-to-side. This time they come
out fairly close, with the exception that we have a little less growth
in 1990. That may reflect your pattern of increased interest rates;
that isn't clear to us, I guess, when we get your information. But on
that we don't quarrel. We think there will be a little less growth in
1990. The growth and the inflation aspects of 1991 look to be about
the same, given the staff's pattern of the interest rate levels.
We have found little evidence of a credit crunch,
particularly in the agricultural sector. The agricultural banks are
very liquid; they say they can't find the loans to absorb their liquid
assets into loans. Where we do hear some evidence that credit is not
available is in areas such as Denver that have just come off the
bottom and where the larger banks have been hit and now have a rating
that makes them very cautious about credit. I don't think it has

-19-

5/15/90

anything to do with examiners coming in and knocking them. It's
simply a fallout of what they've been through in the last year or two.
They are on the way up but they're very cautious in their credit
terms.
It is not price as far as we can tell.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, the impression I
get from business people, particularly on the manufacturing side, is
more in line with Mike's forecast than it is with the last three weeks
of data.
I just don't have any sense that things suddenly fell out of
bed on us here. Exports are holding up quite well. More generally,
people are saying that business at least has stopped getting worse.
The computer business appears to be showing a renewed spark, and I
Some of the commentary I hear even
don't know what to make of that.
from
suggests that maybe there's a little more to
that than even they thought.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
so weak for so long.

It's probably stock adjustment; it was

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's probably part of it; they
So, as I said, the impressionistic information is
sure feel better.
much more in line with Mike's forecast than these very recent data.
Our own forecast is quite similar as well, although the policy
assumptions are different. We don't have a rise in short-term
interest rates anything like what is in Mike's forecast and the
results are about the same.
On this credit crunch question, I've read all the surveys and
listened to all the comments around the table, and I still can't quite
shake a sense of uneasiness that there may be something there that we
Of course, I have absolutely no evidence of
just haven't seen yet.
that. But possibly, just possibly, the money supply, especially M3,
I'd like to
But who knows?
may be saying something about that.
dismiss it completely, but I can't quite bring myself to that.
As for inflation, I blow a little hot and cold on the
question of whether the underlying inflation rate has changed. Where
I am at the moment is that if it has changed, it has changed only a
tad and maybe it is basically unchanged in core terms. But whatever
conclusion you draw about what's happened to the core inflation rate
in recent quarters, I think what you have to be impressed with,
notwithstanding all this talk about credibility and all the rest of
it, is that the only way that the core inflation rate is going to come
down is if there's a lot more slack in the economy. With the
structure of the economy today, there just doesn't seem to be much to
suggest that that's going to change in a downward direction in any
appreciable way, given the kinds of resource utilization patterns we
have right now. But that, I think, is going to create an acute
dilemma for this Committee very soon, and I'm thinking in terms of
I don't know whether they will get one or not.
this budget package.
I suspect that there's probably a better chance of that today than at
any time in the recent past. And then all of a sudden we will have
what we have all said we needed--what we have all been pleading for,
begging for, and cajoling for. And it seems to me that the policy
dilemma that the Committee is going to face in those circumstances is
going to be rather awesome even if long-term interest rates come down

5/15/90

-20-

by themselves, which I'm sure they will. But I think that is
something that we're going to have to reflect upon a good deal. I
don't think that's an urgent matter because I don't think they can cut
a deal that fast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I wouldn't hold my breath.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I still think it has to be thought
about a bit. If there is a deal of some substance, it's going to make
things very difficult for us in an ironic kind of fashion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'd like to have that type of problem.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You may. But, as I say, in the
context in which that core inflation rate is either a tad higher or
stuck, that's going to be a pretty difficult environment for us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, on the local economy: Potomac,
Maryland is generally doing quite well. However, the residential
market is way overbuilt, overdesigned, and overpriced. But consumer
confidence remains high and the public is generally blase about
inflation as evidenced by the continued good business done by the
Sutton Place Gourmet!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is your wife the source of this?

MR. LAWARE. I continue to be concerned, though, about the
ability of policy to deal with inflation. At the same time, I don't
believe we have a lot of maneuvering room because we are in a
precarious position. I believe on the one hand that we have the risk
of higher inflation and on the other hand that we're very close to the
possibility of tipping over into recession. I think the risk, if we
go into recession, is greater than the risk of more inflation because
I suspect that the underlying structure of inflation is not as firm or
as high as may have been indicated by some of the recent statistics.
I think that the credit crunch is real, and I don't think
it's necessarily confined to real estate. I'm convinced that it's
going to get worse and that it is not necessarily the result of the
regulators; I think it's a general concern on the part of lenders
about lending, about capital ratios, as well as about tougher
examination standards. So, I just don't see that going away, with all
due respect for the regulators recently urging the lenders to lend
more money. I think the real estate market is under identified
pressure and also some that hasn't shown up yet. Included in the
latter, I would say, is the RTC situation; if this accelerates, short
term we're going to get an even further depression of real estate
values. And I think there's some real buyer resistance out there with
regard to the price structure, particularly with that RTC overhang. I
don't think that has adjusted itself. And I'm concerned that in a
recession situation, the change in revenue flows would really tank
some of these [firms involved heavily in] junk [financing] situations
and that the ripple effect of that kind of a credit problem would be
very severe. On the whole, I think the downside risks are quite
severe, and I'm frustrated about inflation on the other side. On
balance, I just don't think this is the time to make a change.

-21-

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. There is not much change in the Fourth District
since the last time we met.
There are high levels of economic
activity. We had a meeting with 25 economists representing businesses
located in the District.
To make a short story out of it, they see no
credit crunch within the District, continued export growth, no cutback
in capital spending plans, and real growth in the neighborhood of 2 to
2-1/4 percent for next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In the District or in the United States?

They are District economists forecasting for
MR. HOSKINS.
the national economy. The only surprising or perhaps worrisome trend
as reported by these forecasters is that out of the 25 none of them
had a recession in the forecast horizon, which means they are probably
wrong. My infamous stainless steel strip new order measure reached a
5-year high in April; that's seasonally adjusted. It indicated a very
It's muddied up a little by
strong export side as well as domestic.
some inventory building by automobile companies in anticipation of a
strike in the third quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[indicator] doesn't work.

I thought we agreed that that

It gets the direction right usually; the
MR. HOSKINS.
magnitudes are terrible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I thought you were giving us a bearish

forecast.
No; the other anecdotal information surrounding
MR. HOSKINS.
this particular firm is that in two lines they are already sold out
through the end of year and most of these sales are export oriented.
So the steel side, at least the stainless steel side, seems to be
They tend to argue that it's a proxy for the
doing quite well.
economy. We've tested it, as the Chairman has indicated, and it does
less well than the [leading indicators] over time. They did post
price increases a month ago of 4 to 7 percent, and they had no problem
making that stick.
In terms of the national outlook, I want to thank Mike again
for making, I think, a real attempt to show us what we need to do if
we want to tackle the inflation issue. Most of the risks in the
forecast, it seems to me, are weighted toward having a little more
I understand that there
inflation or perhaps having it stay the same.
are always going to be risks of fragility in financial markets; we've
talked about that now for six months. And there is always a potential
But I think we have to gear our monetary policy
budget deficit deal.
to the objective that we can achieve. I agree with Dick Syron that
I'm
credibility is important, and I'm not sure we're maintaining it.
not unduly pessimistic about inflation, but we do have an objective of
I might quibble
bringing it down and not much seems to be happening.
on the cost of bringing it down, though.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

-22-

5/15/90

MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, when Mike finished his
presentation a little while ago he made the remark that there are a
lot of jokers still in the deck to be turned over.
I certainly agree
with that. But when you're playing a hand of cards there are those
things that you know and those things that remain to be seen.
If we
look at the things that we know, they don't look that bad. Obviously,
as the cards turn over, things could change a lot.
But we know,
looking at interest rates, that we lowered the federal funds rate in
December and interest rates have been up ever since then. We have had
some tightening done for us by the market. Along with that, the
I don't want to prejudge or
aggregates have now slowed down a lot.
put words in Don's mouth--he hasn't made his presentation yet--but I
suspect he thinks they're likely to speed back up.
But if they keep
doing what they're doing now, then we're going to have a pretty slow
rate of growth in the aggregates in 1990.
Looking at the gross
national product, the best guess is that its growth is now running
around 2 percent and the two preceding quarters before that were 1.1
percent and 2.1 percent. That's clearly slow; it could reaccelerate.
There has been talk around this table that at a 2 percent growth rate
we could make slow progress, but nevertheless progress, on inflation.
If you look at inflation as measured by the CPI, we had an appalling
first quarter but the two quarters before that were both under 4
percent; and I think the increase is probably slowing down
substantially from that bad first quarter now.
John talked about the credit crunch.
I think everybody would
agree that there's something going on out there and we don't know what
effect it's liable to have. Nevertheless, there is some constraint
and it could be substantial. So, the things that we know, taken allin-all, suggest that the state of the world is not terribly
unsatisfactory. I think our policy pretty much has done what we
desired it to do; it's too early to say that it has been ineffective
in making some progress on the core rate of inflation. Core inflation
could certainly change on the up side and, if it does, we undoubtedly
will have to react.
But I think that's far from sure.
As a
consequence, for now "steady-as-you-go" makes sense to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do have some good news out
there that I think we ought to talk about. We only did $50 million in
foreign exchange intervention during the intermeeting period and I'm
most grateful for that.
In fact, I'm so grateful that I didn't even
talk about the ESF after having an antagonizing document in front of
me. But there's more good news than that.
I counted out about 15
segments of industries in which expansion seems to be the order of the
day. Quite often, I think we become somewhat impacted by those that
are having the pain; those industries having a slowdown are more vocal
than those in which things are looking up.
I was used to that with
farmers always describing things as mediocre or middling during times
when we had boom conditions and most of the rest of time describing
conditions as poor. In terms of the small business outlook, I think
we had a diffusion index this morning that demonstrated the same sort
of thing: that is, if you have as many people saying the outlook is
positive as you have saying that it's negative, then it's really boom
conditions.
So, I think we have to steel ourselves to the fact that
there is going to be some pain out there. And, of course, when that
pain involves people getting used to house prices not rising as in the

-23-

5/15/90

past, and in some cases coming down, we're going to feel that and see
that.
But that may be better news in regard to attitudes about money
than we realize.
When people see house prices going up 15 percent per
year, I'm not sure whether that in some ways undermines their sense of
value for money. And when all of a sudden the peak on selling their
house passed, a lot of people said: "My goodness! Why didn't I sell
it earlier?"
It's sort of an attitude of: I want money; I'd like to
have dollar balances.
So, I think this kind of pain may be a precursor for some
The fact of the matter is, however, that
better inflation numbers.
there are some troublesome things on the inflation front. Basically,
commodity prices are still rather troublesome, as far as I can see.
I
don't care what index you look at, unless you get into some very
specialized ones, there does not seem to be the kind of improvement
that you'd expect to see. Look at corn prices, soybean prices. Wheat
prices went up because there was an announcement of a large increase.
But it really is a troublesome indication to see commodity prices move
up as much as they did and then not move back down.
I would agree
that at a time when the pain seems to be pervasive in many households,
and when M2 and M3 seem to be growing very, very slowly, that
I'd like to close by suggesting,
information ought not be ignored.
when we are talking about a soft landing, that in any way the landing
occurs it certainly has been soft but there is an element in which an
airplane wing as it approaches the ground gets what we call "ground
effect."
Ground effect means that you have an opportunity to have
more lift than you otherwise would have because of the proximity of
the ground. As we're approaching the 90th month of this expansion, we
haven't had any abrupt pullups that might result in stalled spins
because after a stalled spin the wind does not produce much ground
effect as the plane comes crashing in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It gets too much ground effect!

MR. ANGELL.
But the implication is that I think we have to
be prepared to understand that our economy may have more ability to
operate below 2 percent for longer periods of time without getting
into negative numbers.
To me that's an encouraging bit of news.
I,
for one, do not believe that there are factors out there that are
producing a recession in the immediate horizon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
on his.

MS. SEGER.
Thank you.

Governor Seger.

John LaWare gave my talk, so I'll just piggyback

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. Actually, I feel a little better today about
the inflationary risks than I did maybe a couple of weeks ago, with
some of these more recent data. But once again, you can't tell much
from one or two months of numbers.
I still am generally concerned
about the outlook, but these recent numbers cloud it up a bit.
Consumption has been fairly modest, but the first-quarter real GNP
number looked stronger than I would have expected. We see investment
plans running at 7-1/2 percent, which is pretty strong; I don't know
if that will actually materialize, but the plans are running fairly
strong. My concern is that with inventories fairly low--and I realize

5/15/90

-24-

that there are incentives to keep them that way--demand seems to be
sufficient both on the investment side and the consumption side that
the economy is poised to pick up if demand pressures develop. And my
concern is that they might develop from external sources. I didn't
hear too many people that concerned about export demand, but having
just been overseas and having talked to people there I still have some
concern about that. I feel more comfortable that the Bundesbank is
going to deal with the inflation risk in Germany. Still, we see rates
coming down in France and other European countries; and in fact, even
though I think East Germany and other east European countries are
going to be facing recessionary-type conditions, I think all their
consumption is going to turn to the West. Even if it's lower than in
the past, they're going to be buying goods. The outlook for the
Soviet Union is grim because I don't think they're going to be able to
sell anything. They may be able to barter a few things and they will
be able to sell energy and some of their raw materials, but nobody is
going to buy any consumer goods from the Soviet Union. All industrial
countries are strained in terms of their productive capacity. Japan
is still growing strongly in spite of their financial shake-out. And
Europe continues to show signs of strength. So, I'm fairly optimistic
about our export prospects and the improvement in our external
position. But I do worry about what kind of pressure that's going to
put on the inflationary situation going forward. So, I do think there
are some risks. Some of the financial indicators suggest it. Even
though long-term interest rates have come down more recently--almost a
half percentage point from where they were--they are still up over the
intermeeting period. And as Governor Angell pointed out, commodity
prices have been under some upward pressure. They look a little
milder now, depending on which index you look at, but still they are
up. What worries me the most is that the trade-weighted dollar is
turning down. Even though the dollar had shown strength against the
yen, a lot of that has changed recently. As someone reported, the
trade-weighted dollar is down 14 percent from its peak last year. If
that kind of trend continues, we may be faced with some pretty
significant external strength, and I don't know how much room we have
for that. So, that's a worry.
I'm not as concerned about the credit crunch issue; I have
heard a lot of anecdotes and I think it is a potential risk, but just
listening to what people have said around here it seems like some of
that is [unintelligible].
The aggregates have turned weaker, but I
would argue that that has to do with some portfolio shifts that have
occurred with the change in interest rates more recently, and I think
that will subside and we will see a return to more significant growth.
So, I think we have to be very watchful and cautious. I think the
risks are on the inflation side, but given the more recent data I
don't know if it's worth pressing immediately.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
for coffee and come back?

Okay.

Why don't we break at this stage

[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Kohn?

5/15/90

-25-

MR. HOSKINS.
Don, if we have credibility in the marketplace
with respect to our [commitment to] price stability, why would the
markets have any problem with alternative C?
MR. KOHN. I'm not sure I understand. Alternative C would-MR. HOSKINS. Would be a tightening in policy.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. HOSKINS. All I'm suggesting is that, if we were
credible, that would mean we would see a drop in longer-term rates.
MR. KOHN. If alternative C increased our credibility and
reduced expected future inflation, that's correct. My guess, as noted
in the Bluebook, would be that the initial response to such a policy
probably would be a rise in bond yields. But, as I think the Bluebook
also noted, to the extent that this was seen as the Federal Reserve
giving extra emphasis to its inflation objective over time, those bond
yields would move lower in nominal terms. Now, it's also fair to say
that the real bond yield might be higher in that case because I think
there would be a higher path of expected future real short-term rates
than perhaps is built in now. But nominal rates could be lower after
a bit, especially if the dollar firmed up after our tightening.
MR. HOSKINS. Let me follow with just one question on the
If we didn't do any tightening through the rest of the
aggregates.
year, what would be your estimate for fourth quarter-over-fourth
quarter [money growth]?
MR. KOHN. We have a 5-1/2 percent estimate now for M2;
that's down from around 6-1/2 percent at the last meeting. The reason
for the decrease is two-fold. One is the incoming data, which were
weaker than we expected, and we scaled down for that; the other is the
change in the interest rate path, which is worth probably about half a
point.
So, if you told me to change only interest rates, and I
suppose there really wouldn't be much feedback on the economy in 1990
from assuming a different level of interest rates, I'd probably tell
you M2 growth will be around 6 percent. But it also probably would be
strengthening a bit as the year went on, or toward the end of the
year, if the economy were picking up a little more speed than we have
projected.
MR. HOSKINS.
interest rate path?

That 5-1/2 percent was with the Greenbook

MR. KOHN. Yes, with the assumption of rising interest rates.
So, it would be 6 percent with steady interest rates and nominal GNP
as in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Don, if you go back to the period before the
latest period, there was a sharp increase in long-term rates.
I know
you can't answer this specifically, but in your view what explains
that rise mostly? Was a change in inflationary expectations mainly
Or was it some development worldwide or here that
what caused that?
caused the real rate to go [up]?

5/15/90

-26-

MR. KOHN.

Well, I guess I'd have to say it was a combination

of both. Certainly, the inflation data were far worse than people
expected. When the March CPI came in, I think that caused an upward

revision in expected inflation. On the other hand, the incoming
economic data continued to suggest that the economy was chugging along
at least at a moderate pace and wasn't weakening. I think it was a
combination of those two things.

Because the dollar was firm through

that period, although a lot was going on in Germany and Japan at the
same time, I'd be hard pressed to argue that inflation expectations
had picked up to such an extent as to overwhelmingly explain the
increase in nominal rates.
I think real rates at least held steady or
probably were a bit on the firm side through that.
MR. PARRY. But through this period, then, if most of it was
due to expectations of higher inflation, there has not been a
tightening in monetary and financial conditions.
There was a

discussion here that implied that this was a tightening and that
hasn't occurred to the extent that it's-MR. KOHN. Well, if instead of just focusing on the last
couple of weeks or month or so you go from the end of the year, I
think it's true that some of that increase is definitely an increase
in real rates. But the equilibrium real rate--where real rates need
to be to keep the economy in check--is higher. So, that increase in
real rates would be restraining, but only relative to a lower level of
real rates. It was an endogenous response, I think, to what has been
going on. And the previous increase in rates did embody an
expectation of Federal Reserve tightening. That was very clear in the
structure of rates until the most recent employment report.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?
If not,
why don't I get started on the round table? Reflecting what I'm
hearing among the Committee, I think what we're observing is something
that I suspect has not been evident in recent decades. I never recall
a set of economic forces precisely that goes with what is developing
here, and I've been trying to forecast the economy for well over 30
years. On the expansion side, I think the evidence is very clearly
mounting; we are past the maximum durable goods squeeze and I think
we're beginning to see some flattening of profit margins at this
particular stage [after earlier declines].
As a consequence, capital
investment is clearly showing some quickening pattern, and I think
that shows up in the orders and the appropriations and in various
qualitative measures. On top of that is this extraordinary inventory
situation, which continues to squeeze down--the issue Dick Syron
raised. Of course, what that implies is that if we ever get to the
bottom when we're getting a squeeze and there is any evidence of
tightening worldwide--so that there are shortages not only in the
United States but elsewhere--then the lead times will begin to move
and we really will begin to get the type of classic acceleration that
we've seen many times in the past. At this stage the evidence on the
orders side is that they continue to improve gradually although they
are by no means accelerating; the orders levels are just creeping up.
The backlogs in real terms probably are flat to down, but that is a
major improvement from a year or so ago when the economy was
deteriorating in the total durables and manufacturing areas.
If

5/15/90

-27-

anything, I would say the evidence of all of this is [that economic
growth is] probably mildly accelerating.
The trouble, however, on the other side is that we have
something more than a merely minor financial disturbance. I think

there may well be more to this credit crunch than we're looking at; or
The
to put it more exactly, I don't think we're through it yet.
concurrent data that we pick up all over the place suggest that there
has been, as has been stated, a mild pulling back. But there is no
evidence that it has stopped. For example, all of the evidence about

forward commitments, specifically on real estate projects and loans,
is that this phenomenon is nowhere near over on the real estate side.
And we don't know at this stage to what extent it has spilled over in
any other direction. I find the money supply data--specifically M3,
as Jerry has pointed out--mildly disturbing because they say in

effect, even if you take out the thrift part of M3, that there really
is something that is constraining financial capacity even though the
underlying orders patterns suggest that there's something of a
[unintelligible] considerably more forward momentum here. The data we
have on the credit crunch are, except for anecdotal evidence, not
forward-looking. They are all historical--all basically something in
the past. The trouble with the past is that as we continue to pick it
up [in these data] it gets worse. And before we're out of this, this
has to stabilize and turn around--or at worst just stabilize, even if
it stabilizes at pretty low levels--because it has to be having a
fairly significant contractionary effect out in the distance through
the late spring and into the summer on a lot of construction projects,
which are a very substantial part of the goods markets.
So, where this all leads me is to the same type of dilemma
that I found myself in at the last meeting, where clearly there are
dangers on both sides. When we look ahead, the probability is that
our next move will be on the up side because I do think one has to
presume that this credit crunch is limited. The trouble, however, is
that at this point it is still growing; and to move to tighten at this
stage while the evidence is that the credit crunch is still occurring
I think would be a mistake. Also, despite the fact that I think we
probably will be required to move up before we move down, I wouldn't
be inclined at this stage to be asymmetric on the up side. This might
seem an odd way to put it, but although the odds suggest that that's
the direction we will be going in, I'm not sure that we should
position ourselves in that manner until the credit crunch matter has
stabilized. Nonetheless, I do think that the inflation problem is
very troublesome. And while I would feel comfortable with "B" either
symmetric or asymmetric, I must say I would prefer symmetric and would
have the policy record relate the concerns that have been expressed
around this table on the issues of inflation and the instabilities
that they create. But, like the last time, I think it's a tough call;
and I suspect it may be no less easy as we get further on into the
year. So, my bottom line at this moment is "B" symmetric, but with
extensive language in the policy record on the issue of inflation.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I could support your position but
for somewhat different reasons. It seems to me that the uncertainties
about the direction of the economy are perhaps the greatest reason to
support alternative B at this point. I must admit that looking at the
data and hearing the discussion today, I would never use the term
"credit crunch" in the classic ways that I've heard that term used.

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm using it as a forecast.

MR. PARRY. Okay. Then I would hope that we can in our
separate Districts and here at the Board find a way to monitor that
very closely. A credit crunch has real implications.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It does, and I would say that the money
supply will tell us perhaps as much as anything.
If you look at the
way the numbers have flattened out--I don't care what you say--that
has come as a big surprise to me. There's something wrong about those
numbers. And that's what bothers me.
MR. PARRY. Well, we have
If you recall at this time--

[unintelligible]

than last year.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I wish that they could be explained by
the April phenomenon. I'm uncomfortable with that explanation.
MR. PARRY. Well, it seems to me it is something that we
ought to monitor very closely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to reiterate my view that
the progress we make toward achieving our long-run objective and the
transition cost of moving to that are going to be affected a great
deal by the credibility of our policy.
--the
large regional real estate developer who told me that only one out of
eleven developers in a given city could get credit--said that he
thought our credibility as an inflation fighter had all but
disappeared. He could find nobody who thought inflation was going to
come down, and he was obviously disappointed that we didn't
And that made me think about it
somewhat differently than I otherwise would have because I think this
fellow is unusually perceptive.
MS. SEGER.

He's also about ready to retire.

MR. BLACK. No he isn't; he's even younger than I am, Martha,
if you can conceive of such a thing! So, I think we ought to pay a
little more attention to the long-run issues in the position we take
today than we typically do, instead of our perceptions of what is
going on in the short-run part of the economy. And we [ought] to
focus on what this is going to do to our credibility.
So, I would
favor "B" for now, but I would go asymmetrical. You've taken care of
a good part of my concerns by suggesting that you really favor
asymmetry but that you're not quite ready to put that language in the
directive.
I think we need a signal out there that we really haven't
abandoned our quest for price stability.
I'd like to see us put that
asymmetry in the directive. But the behavior of the aggregates is a
concern to me to some extent.
I would be alarmed if they don't pick
up before long, especially M2 and not so much M3, because I think we
might have squeezed too much. But overall some kind of signal--not a
discount rate increase
but something from this
Committee--really would be very helpful right now, because I agree
with you that our next move will be to tighten. Of course, like
everybody else, I'm guessing on that.

-29-

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

I think the risks are
I favor "B" symmetrical.
MR. BOEHNE.
I'm not willing to concede at this point that the next
about even.
It may very well be, but I think we're in an uncertain
move is up.
enough situation that I'd like to stay symmetrical and make a judgment
as the information comes in and as we learn more about the kind of
situation that we're in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think there are enough
uncertainties in the economy that we should not move at this time; we
So, I would support alternative B. But I
ought to stay where we are.
tend to agree with you that our next move is going to be on the up
side and, therefore, I would have a slight preference for asymmetric
language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons you stated, I'd
also be in favor of alternative B and would have a preference for
symmetrical language. The only other thing I would add is a question
of timing. Now, [unintelligible] I would not expect a lot to come out
But it does seem to me that this could be
of the budget negotiations.
an awkward time to be adjusting policy if in fact there is at least a
possibility that something could come out of the budget discussions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. My preference would be alternative B,
asymmetric, given that I believe we're going to have to have some
greater restraint in the period ahead if indeed we're going to make
any progress toward lower inflation rates. However, I don't see
anything on the horizon that would urge us to move in the intermeeting
I can't imagine that
period--between now and early July, for example.
these numbers are going to reverse so quickly that they would trigger
a further increase in the intermeeting period. There are ways,
however, to get the message to the market for the credibility
One is, as you've suggested, that it be stressed in the
argument.
policy record which is read by the market; on the other hand, we could
have an asymmetric directive. Either would give the view that we're
still interested and concerned about our credibility and will move
against inflation. As I say, I would prefer "B" with an asymmetric
tilt simply because of the communication. But I could, and would,
accept your proposal that it be stressed in the policy record.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Some people expressed the view prior to the
coffee break that "steady-as-you-go" has served us tolerably well--at
For the time being, I favor a
least so far--and I think that's true.
continuation of that policy. That would be "B" symmetric, in my
I don't
judgment.
I do think, though, that it's a matter of timing.
pretend to have any special insight about this, but it does seem to me
that at best we can argue that the core rate of inflation remains
stuck in the 4 to 5 percent neighborhood in which it has been for some
time.
And at the same time, as I think Manley was describing, the

-30-

5/15/90

world more generally has become a somewhat more inflationary place.
Some of the European countries in particular have taken advantage of
what's going on in Germany to stimulate their economies and so forth.
And I think that does raise the odds, as you expressed, that we are
going to have to tighten at some point in the future if we're going to
unstick inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I would support your position of "B" symmetrical.
I don't think the condition of the economy is that clear. Also, I'm
very concerned about the fragility of the financial system. I'm not
just talking about the credit crunch angle, although that's part of
it. But there are many, many financial institutions out there--S&Ls
and banks alike--that are pretty shaky, and there are more on the list
of those that will be getting shaky. I would like to support Si
Keehn's point about the timing. If we tighten today, the day of the
budget summit, I think we'd look like we had no sense at all. So, all
that means that I would support your position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a matter of timing
and I don't think [unintelligible] from one meeting to another is
going to make a lot of difference. We are always going to work and
live in a world that has a great deal of uncertainty. As the meetings
go by the calls get tougher and tougher, and I'm not sure we can make
it any easier. I understand what people are saying about perceptions
being important at this time; the budget issue is one that I think is
very important. But that can almost play both ways. I would favor
alternative B. When we come to the matter of symmetry or asymmetry, I
think the credibility issue is very important. For that reason I
would tend to favor asymmetric language--though that's almost
splitting hairs, depending upon what the policy record says. If the
policy record is strongly worded enough and if it indicates the same
thing--essentially that if economic data start to come in and lean
more strongly than this most recent information and we don't see any
improvement on the inflation front and the credit crunch really
doesn't develop into something that's equivalent to the market
tightening for us, then we understand that we are going to have to
tighten in the future. With that kind of language, I could more than
live with symmetry, though I prefer the asymmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Our goal is to achieve long-run price
stability. We have to make those decisions in the context of shortterm policymaking and there is always lots of noise in the data when
we do that. M2 is slowing; the yield curve may be flatter than it
was; maybe commodity prices always give us conflicting signals in the
short run because of the noise there. I asked Don Kohn questions
about where M2 was likely to be at year-end if we do nothing; his
answer was 6 percent or higher. We have done a good job.
I'm not
pessimistic about the long-term inflation outlook in the sense of it
rising. We have had three years of 4-1/2 percent or so growth in M2.
To give that away by producing a 6 percent growth in M2 this year is
not an acceptable policy to me if our goal is long-run price
stability. In terms of where I'd like to come out at year-end--and

-31-

5/15/90

that will condition the way I would vote today--I would like to see M2
come in at 4-1/2 percent or below, fourth quarter over fourth quarter.
It seems to me that then we would be making progress toward price
stability. In terms of what M2 means right now, it's positive from my
point of view in that it's slowing. But I'm not sure that it's going
to stay there. Somebody already has used the expression that
insurance may be appropriate at this point in time. It's a lot easier
to lower rates if we make a mistake in this environment than it is
going to be to raise them down the road. In terms of the short-term
outlook, one can just simply look at the Greenbook, which also
supports the notion that if we do nothing at best we'll stabilize the
inflation rate and at worst we will have a rising inflation rate. So,
I prefer alternative C.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I am obviously more uncertain
today than I have been in the past couple of meetings. I could
I would have a fairly strong preference for
support alternative "B."
asymmetric language. Your prescription of a narrative in the policy
record reflecting inflation concerns and that sort of thing is okay,
but if we're talking about credibility and sending some signals, that
brings in a lot of nuances and subtleties it seems to me. I think an
asymmetric directive would give credibility to the verbiage that would
be in the policy record and for that reason I think we would have some
opportunity to strengthen at least the credibility [of our inflation
effort].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. My preference is for "B" asymmetric. But I
certainly wouldn't make a big deal over that, given your preference
for statements in the policy record showing our concerns. It's
splitting hairs to make that point. However, like Dick Syron, I'm a
little worried that if over the intermeeting period we get a few
stronger numbers, our credibility could slip rapidly. I was very
concerned for a few weeks before this meeting that we were right on
the edge of totally losing our credibility when we got the CPI and
purchasing managers' survey results; all the data were coming in
strong. Of course, the more recent numbers have to some extent bailed
us out. Maybe that's an indication that there was an illusion in the
data. Still, even if we go for symmetric with a slightly stronger
record of our concerns, we should be prepared--if these numbers slip
in the intermeeting period--to be able to swing all the way to an
intermeeting move. I think we're in a situation where if, say, the
credit crunch concerns start to dissipate and all of a sudden we get
one or two strong numbers, we may not make it to the next meeting with
our credibility intact. We ought to be flexible enough to be able to
react to that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know, what we react to and act
on is not [just] what we write down.
MR. JOHNSON.

I understand, and I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

What we act on is basically what--

The facts.

-32-

5/15/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, not on facts, but the attitudes of
everyone. Essentially, what we put down on a piece of paper is what
the Committee obviously wants to do, but I think the reality is a lot
more subtle than that. And it depends on how events unfold.
MR. JOHNSON.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
with symmetrical language.

There's nothing that says we can't move

MR. JOHNSON. Sure, I understand.
agree with what you're proposing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

That's why I'm saying I

Governor LaWare.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
I'm somewhat tempted, Mr. Chairman, to
counterbalance by having a governor vote for tightness to offset Mr.
Hoskins' dissent so that we don't continue this issue about presidents
versus governors on the tightening side. But I guess that really
wouldn't be a logical basis for me to cast my vote.
I would note that
of the presidents who are voting only two out of five of them could
muster a tightness in their [policy stance].
But of the ones who are
not voting, four out of five can muster tightness, which I think
probably is what gives the presidents the reputation for being hawks.
You presidents really are hawks when you don't have a vote!
MR. SYRON. We want you to tighten now so we won't have to
tighten later when we do vote!
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that you are
correct that there is some uncertainty right now. And that
uncertainty is such that, even though I'm in the mood to tighten and I
was hoping we would be tightening, I do believe that it would be much
better for us to wait a couple of weeks and see what happens in that
time. We could act at that point in time rather than run the risk of
tightening and then have conditions go in such a direction that our
credibility is lost on the other side and that we would not be able to
do what we need to do when we have to do it.
So, in that sense, I'm
very sympathetic with your position, Mr. Chairman.
I certainly
understand why prudence is in that direction. I would prefer that the
directive would read tighten now, but I can vote in the affirmative
with the understanding that we're very close together with some
consensus here which says: that we deem this attack against inflation
to be a very high priority; that we think following that priority
gives the economic expansion more of an opportunity to develop and to
strengthen and to lengthen than not to do it; that we are steeled to
be ready to do what has to be done some time in the future; and that
that is not to be deterred because there's a little bit of pain
[involved].
I had been hoping we could get there in a painless way
but, frankly, what I have learned in 4-1/4 years tells me it's tougher
than I thought.
I know from the experience in 1986 that once we've
eased it sometimes takes a lot longer for us to change direction to
tighten than it does to stop tightening and ease, because everybody
likes to ease.
I just have a very strong compulsion at this point to

5/15/90

-33-

be looking for an opportunity to get the fed funds rate up to where I
I'd be much more satisfied with an 8-3/4
think it ought to be.
I just don't
percent fed funds rate than with an 8-1/4 percent rate.
think today is the time to do it.
I certainly hope we'll be ready to
do it when we need to.

MR. HOSKINS.
MR. ANGELL.
asymmetric.

That sounds like alternative "C" to me, Wayne.
Well, I don't get credit for it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Alternative B,

Governor Kelley.

"B" symmetric, please sir.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to come full circle, I find
myself quite sympathetic with Governor Angell and Governor Johnson.
But I can associate myself with the prescription that you put on the
table, Mr. Chairman. I also think, though, that this "beefed up"
language--if I can put it that way--in the policy record is very
important. And even though I have an uneasiness about this credit
crunch issue, I would agree with Bob Parry that it would be a mistake
in this key part of the policy record to frame this position on those
grounds, partly because I'm afraid that that is susceptible to the
I would be inclined
interpretation that we intend [unintelligible].
to take that beefed up language and couch it more in terms of the
economy, as you did a few moments ago, and the concern about the
inflationary process.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I also think that Wayne Angell said
something which is important: that the surest way to get a recession
is to allow inflation to take over.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

No question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's an important issue. The
presumption that we are caught between inflation and recession is a
misunderstanding of the way the system works. We are always against
recession. The question is: How do we avoid it best--by tightening
[or] easing? Sometimes it can be either.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, if that language can have
some of that flavor and stay away for that purpose from this credit
crunch matter, I'd be a lot happier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I wanted to go last so I didn't feel the
pressure of others wanting to speak after me: "B."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't feel the pressure. Let's try a
vote on the recommendation that I made, which is "B" symmetric with
appropriate policy record language indicating the concerns about
inflation.

-34-

5/15/90

MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress toward
price stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior
of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March
through June at annual rates of about 4 and 3 percent respectively.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The next meeting is scheduled for July

2-3.
END OF MEETING

