Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
December 7, 1990

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Keehn, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Hendricks, Oltman, and Powell, First
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Cleveland, New York, and San Francisco,
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
December 7, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone. The purpose
of this meeting is to fill ourselves in on the views of the Committee,
given that a number of events have occurred or will be occurring in
the interim between the last meeting and the next scheduled one. So,
I think it would be useful for us to be brought up to date. As you
know, we eased policy a notch under the asymmetric directive this
morning. It was clear that at some point some action would be
warranted as the economy eased. The fed funds rate opening up this
morning at 7-1/4 percent put us in the position today of either
protesting the rate for the second day in a row or essentially
acquiescing to it. We decided that it was more sensible to do the
latter, especially in view of the fact that recently we have been
getting a significant number of requests from the [Reserve] Banks for
a discount rate cut. That issue will be on the agenda sometime next
week for basic review.
I'd just like to run through quickly what I think is
happening in the economy and then I'll call on Mike Prell to fill us
in on today's employment report which, as I'm sure you all well know,
I think it's
came out a bit on the [down side] of expectations.
fairly apparent that we are seeing a weakened retail market. And
while I suspect that the sharp fall-off in automotive retail sales in
the last 10 days of November is partly an aberration in the same sense
that the normal strength earlier on was of dubious merit, nonetheless,
I think the trend is clearly down. And there has been some fairly
significant weakening in industrial activity in the month of November.
However, it's difficult to make the case, at least as I see it, that
this acceleration on the down side is continuing in the sense that the
industrial production data that we have on a weekly basis, which
comprise at least a moderate part of the total index, suggest that the
last week in November is not significantly different from the average
for the month. And initial claims for unemployment insurance, while
in a higher plateau, are not accelerating much beyond the 450,000
range. One must remember that back in 1982 they were up to 650,000 to
700,000 weekly. Part of that, I suspect, is that there was greater
participation in the unemployment insurance system back then. But
even making whatever adjustments one would like, the degree of
weakness in this economy, at least at the moment, is nowhere near the
order of magnitude that one perceived in 1982. Obviously, the orders
picture is somewhat weak, but the October orders figures were scarcely
a set of numbers that one picks up in the middle or even the beginning
of a recession. From what we can judge from the structure of the
orders and other information, the predominant element of strength in
the data was on the export side; domestic orders are really quite
soft.

Now I would like to call on Mike Prell to give us a quick
update on how he reads the employment situation. Then I would ask
that Messrs. Cross and Sternlight bring us up to date. Then, finally,
I would like to call on Don Kohn to report on the issue of the money

supply, which continues to be on the soft side, and which is one of
the more disturbing elements that I find in the financial picture.
Mike.

12/7/90

MR. PRELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the Committee members
undoubtedly have the major figures, and you have covered the crux of
the picture. We were surprised by the dimensions of the decline in
private employment in November--270,000.
There was a noticeable
downward revision in the figures for September and October as well.

The workweek, which we had noted last time had dropped more than we
could possibly understand, did rebound, but only partially. So
overall the hours of production workers for the current quarter are

likely to be down very sharply.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

[Unintelligible]

in the fourth quarter?

In the fourth quarter [hours worked]

are likely

to be down very sharply, on the order of perhaps 5 percent at an
annual rate. That combined with the other information we have on the
labor market--the unemployment rate and so on--suggests to us that the
decline in GNP this quarter is likely to be at least as large as the 2
percent that we had in the last Greenbook. We're trying to sort
through the data and come up with a reasonable estimate as we work
toward next Wednesday's Greenbook publication. My guess is that it
will be closer to [a decline of] 3 percent when we're done with this.
Industrial production, as the Chairman noted, appears to be down very
sharply in November. It's a larger decline than the 3/4 of a percent
that we saw in October, based on both the physical product indicators
that we have and the hours in manufacturing for last month. So, those
are the major inferences we have from the labor market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess the only good news is that the
average hourly earnings figures were extended.
MR. PRELL. Right. It was the second straight month of
essentially no change, and over the last three months they were up at
a modest rate--something between 1 and 2 percent annualized. So in
retrospect, looking at the employment cost indexes for the third
quarter, it appears that we have seen some moderation in wage
inflation recently as the labor market has weakened. We're continuing
to have this puzzle about labor force participation. It continues to
be weaker than we would expect, even with the decline in labor demand,
and of course, that raises some analytical problems. Basically, the
overall picture is one that we're not surprised by, i.e., declines in
employment in manufacturing, construction, and retail trade. But the
declines were sharper [than we expected] and we're trying to assess
why and what the carry-through is going to be into the future months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Mike?
not, Sam Cross, would you bring us up to date?

If

MR. CROSS. Mr. Chairman, for several weeks, up until the
past couple of days, the dollar was finding pretty good support in the
market, seemingly based on the continued Middle East tensions, the
expressions of concern about a weak dollar from the Treasury and the
Federal Reserve, talk of a G-7 meeting, some year-end activity, some
of the uncertainties in Japan, some feeling that the dollar has fallen
to a level where it is at a minimum very competitive, and also a view
that the Fed's monetary moves have been quite measured. Yesterday and
today the dollar eased off about 3 yen and 3 [pfennigs], reflecting
unwinding of some of the [unintelligible]--not entirely, but a
considerable amount--and a more negative view of the economy following

12/7/90

the release of this morning's statistics and the implications of that
for interest rates. Today, the dollar has not eased all that much; it
may be that the dollar's decline has been kept in check partly by a
spate of rumors this morning that the United States was intervening in
the foreign exchange markets to support the dollar or perhaps a
reluctance to take on new positions on a Friday afternoon. But we
hear comments--including comments from our [unintelligible] committee,
which happened to meet today--that a significant reassessment is now
going on in the market and that many [market participants] feel that
the downside potential for the dollar has increased. That's my
report, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Sternlight.

Questions for Sam?

If not, Peter

MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you know, right
after the mid-November FOMC meeting we moved to lower the funds rate
1/4 percentage point from 7-3/4 to 7-1/2 percent. It took a few days
to achieve that because of some other temporary pressures in the
market, but the market got the point in a few days. Today, as was
mentioned, another 1/4 point move was made, and that was rapidly
[digested] by the market. Funds were trading at [7-1/4] percent at
the time and we passed through some customer RPs. In fact, over the
course of the day funds have drifted off a little further to 7-1/8
percent and there was even some trading at 7-1/16 percent just before
I walked in for this call. Since mid-November Treasury bill rates
have come down by 15 to 25 basis points, with maybe about half of that
occurring today. Coupons are down even more [unintelligible], by 25
to 35 basis points; there too about half of it occurred today.
Private sector rates have not come down as much; typically they lag.
And a few short-term rates, such as those on 1-month CDs, actually
have moved up a little because the time has come to bridge the yearend period and we are at the same time facing some concerns about
year-end pressures. But those pressures themselves have come all in
the last week. They seem to have reached a crescendo about the end of
November and have abated noticeably since then. It's not that they
couldn't swell up again, but at the moment they have abated.
Policy [has been seen] right along as having been in an
easing mode, given the backdrop of weak news on the economy and soft
aggregate numbers punctuated with what the market [digested] of the
mid-November fed funds move and the reserve requirement reduction and
then today's federal funds move. It seems to me that the easing has
been seen in the market as well justified, and in that setting the
longer-term rate has come down as I mentioned. The discount rate is
getting some increased attention in the market; I'd say more and more
people are looking for [a cut in] it. I wouldn't say a move has been
entirely priced into market thinking, but to some extent a move in
coming days has been priced into the thinking as of this point. As
some of you may know, a few smaller banks--the Southwest Bank in St.
Louis, another St. Louis bank, and then First Fidelity in New Jersey-have moved on the prime rate by 1/4 percentage point today. That's
all I have, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Peter?

If not, Don Kohn.

MR. KOHN. As you noted, Mr. Chairman, the money stock is a
little weaker than expected. Some past data have been revised upward

12/7/90

but the November and very early December data look on the weak side.
We are now projecting M2, partly estimated, at -3/4 percent for
November. We had +1/2 percent in the Bluebook. For M3 for November
we have -1 percent and we had +1/2 percent in the Bluebook. So, both
of those are a bit weaker, at least in growth rate terms, in November.
Some of that weakness and some of the outlook for further shortfalls
rest on some very preliminary data for the week of December 3rd which
show a sharp drop in M2 and also in M3. And because of that drop,
even if we assume further growth for the month, we're looking at a
weaker December at this point than we thought before and, therefore,
shortfalls from the 3-month growth rates that the Committee was
expecting. Right now we are projecting about 1/2 percent M2 growth
for September-to-December, compared to 1-1/2 percent projected in the
Bluebook, and about -3/4 percent M3 growth for September-to-December,
compared to 0 in the Bluebook. So, it looks as if the aggregates
aren't really responding to the easing of money market rates that has
occurred over the last month.
We do have some very preliminary data on bank credit as well,
and that shows for November another month of very sluggish growth--on
the order of 1-1/2 to 2 percent--in bank credit. Loan growth picked
up to an estimated 3 percent, but it is still very slow. Business
loans did pick up--we're estimating 5 percent growth in business
loans--but some of that appears to be replacing commercial paper that
has run off or is being paid down by businesses that are finding the
commercial paper market less hospitable or at least more expensive.
If we add together commercial paper and business loans, we have no
growth in the combined total of the two.
So, the short-term credit
picture for businesses remains very flat and very weak.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. MELZER. Don, what has Ml been doing and what do you
expect it to do?
And, are there possibly any distortions in those
broader aggregates?
MR. KOHN. Actually, if there's a distortion in the broader
We got slightly
aggregates, I think it's partly arising from Ml.
greater growth in Ml in November than we expected but the weakness in
this first week of December is in large measure a shortfall in demand
deposits. Whereas we had projected a small increase, it looks as if
there was about a $4 billion decline in the first week of December.
I
have to emphasize that this is a very preliminary number, but at this
point we are looking at essentially no growth in M1 over the month of
December, or maybe a small increase. The other factor here is that
currency growth has slowed down in November. Unfortunately, we don't
have data on foreign shipments of currency beyond October, so it's
hard to know whether this is domestic or foreign caused. But we're
looking at 4 percent currency growth in November after months of 10,
15, and 12 percent--double-digit growth rates, really, for all the
[earlier months] of the year. But unfortunately we don't know the
source of that.
So, M1 seems to be slowing down a bit and a lot of
that shortfall is in demand deposits.
MR. MELZER.

Thank you.

MR. BOYKIN. Don, do you expect the change in reserve
requirements to affect the money situation in any way?

12/7/90

MR. KOHN. Well, we're trying to sort that out, Bob. In one
respect, we thought it might augment M3 a bit because there are some
M3 components that will have lower taxes on them. But that's working
against the higher deposit insurance premiums coming into effect,
which I think will induce banks to move as much of their business as
possible offshore, to the extent they can do that. And they can move
their deposits to the Eurodollar market now and bring them back in an
untaxed way from that market or they can make loans to U.S. customers
over there without incurring reserve requirements. Because deposit
insurance taxes are going up at the same time that the reserve
requirement tax is going down, it's hard to say. It's something we're
still trying to sort through.
MR. BOYKIN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.
Prell a question?

Any other questions?

Dick Syron here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

May I go back and ask Mike

Sure.

MR. SYRON. Mike, can I ask you to speculate--I guess that's
the word--a little about the time lags on the impact or a range of
impacts if, say, the Middle East situation were to be widely resolved
or at least if there were a substantial diminution in warfare. If
that were to happen by mid-January, what kind of impact would that
have and what might one speculate about the time lags?
MR. PRELL. Well, President Syron, that is very speculative,
obviously. There are two facets of this, one of which is even more
difficult to assess than the other. One is the implication for oil
prices. To the extent that the war premium comes out of oil prices,
we would see a significant drop there and very quick translations--if
we see the reversal of the earlier runup--through gasoline prices into
overall consumer purchasing power. And we would expect that to have a
fairly prompt influence on consumer spending. On the other hand,
there is the war scare and what influence that has had on sentiment
and what influence that in turn has had on actual spending, about
which we know very little really. We have very shaky data on spending
for October and only anecdotal evidence--apart from the chain store
sales, which haven't proved very reliable in the past as a guide to
overall spending--for November, My sense is that to understand why
retail activity seems to have weakened as much as it has, one has to
put some weight on the argument that sentiment has been adversely
affected by the concerns about possible hostilities. And if people
get to feeling a whole lot better about that, particularly around the
Christmas season, perhaps one might see some catch-up on consumer
spending. There are great uncertainties here, but my feeling is that
if these things were to move in a positive direction, there could be
some fairly prompt firming on the consumer side. But, as I said,
that's very speculative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for anybody?
It
would be helpful at this point for any of the presidents or the
governors whose view on the outlook, either within the District or the
economy as a whole, has changed in any material way to put it on the
table for discussion. I don't want to burden all of you by going

12/7/90

around the whole [group], but if anyone has some new significant
thoughts it would be useful to the rest of us to be exposed to them.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alan, this is Jerry.
I agree with
how you and Mike characterized the economy itself, but I do feel that
even if that's right--and it probably is--the risks are asymmetric on
[the down side].
I must say that the money supply and credit numbers
and the lack of growth thereof now are an increasing concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
shaking their heads.

A number of your colleagues here are

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Yes, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to contribute something?
MR. MELZER.
mention that we had

In which direction?

Affirmatively.

Would anyone else like

This is Tom Melzer.

I might just quickly
earlier this week.
a national home building
operation, said that they were surprised by their November sales
results, which were much better than they expected and about in line
with those of a year ago and maybe a little better.
So, he had the
sense that things weren't continuing to deteriorate, which confirms
something you said earlier. And
who is involved
with the trucking business felt the same way. His firm actually
noticed a pickup in activity in the latter part of November.
In terms
of [the outlook], my view hasn't really changed.
I have some concerns
about the behavior of the aggregates too, but I'm not inclined to
overreact to one month's figures.
If you look at the thrust of
monetary policy over a much longer time span, going back really to the
first half of last year, I think the course of policy has been one
that is generally consistent with expansion. I guess I'm saying that
it wouldn't lead me to the conclusion that monetary policy is
strangling the economy right now, and I don't think we can lose sight
of the several [easing] steps that have been taken just recently.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's right, Tom. I think that
the really disturbing issue is not what the economy is doing, which is
almost forecastable, but that the monetary aggregates are giving us
wrong signals. I must say I'd feel a lot better personally with a
slightly stronger M2. Does anyone have any sense of Christmas buying
in the first week in December?
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, this is Dick Syron.
I talked to
the managers of two of the main private stores in the area. I think
their views are influenced largely by the extraordinarily pessimistic
climate here but they went into the period expecting weak sales and
[sales turned out] to be even softer than they had feared. And I
think there is almost an edge of panic on their parts and the sense of
other retailers-MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn in Chicago.
I
would echo what Dick is saying, though not in magnitude.
I've talked
to several retailers and they said that the Christmas season is
starting off far weaker than even they expected. They do point out,

12/7/90

though, that this is unusually long in their [unintelligible], and
they are hopeful that as they get along toward Christmas it will pick
up.
The initial returns are quite bad.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I might just put a technical note
to that. The feeling here is that some of the sales [results] are due
to the very warm weather we have had this season; that has had really
a significant effect. And now we need [unintelligible] merchandise
advertised in the beginning. Today some have spring merchandise,
believe it or not, when it should be time just about for the
coincidence of the first major snow.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

As usual.

MR. BLACK.

How's that going Dick?

MR. SYRON.

Well, our oil spending is down!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else have any insights,
questions, thoughts, or notions?
I do think we have to
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black.
I really [unintelligible] favor the
address this discount rate issue.
penalty [rate] that Governor Angell has stated recently. But I do
think this differential is now down so low that it is something that
Some of my
we need to look at and make a conscious decision about.
colleagues may be surprised [unintelligible] because I've been very
hawkish throughout my entire career, but it is out of line with past
practices.
It's very difficult to explain [to the directors] why this
is so and we don't want to tell them it really doesn't play much of a
role anymore unless we're going to give the changed expectation. So,
we sent in a recommendation suggesting that the discount rate be
lowered by 1/2 point, with an announcement that this was to bring it
I think a decision is needed on what sort of role we
into alignment.
I think we have the
want the discount rate to play in the days ahead.
right amount of [ease] now and I wouldn't favor any further moves now,
but I do think we need to look at that issue.
I think the
MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. I agree with Bob.
structure of rates and the circumstances are such that it would be
appropriate to change the discount rate. We have not changed it for
some 22 months, which is an extraordinarily long period, despite all
the changes that have taken place. And I think we should do that if
for no other reason--and this is in itself [unintelligible]--than at
least that the directors feel left out of the problem.
I essentially agree
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.
I would
with the last two speakers, with a bit of a twist, however.
like to see an action taken today coupled with a discount rate move;
if [the Board cut the discount rate] 1/2 point, I'd offset half of it
That option is still open for the
through open market operations.
period ahead, it seems to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Roger, we discussed precisely that
this morning. The problem that we had today was one that the market
But I
confronted us with; it partially blocked our freedom of action.
think we do have to consider--even though it's something we haven't

12/7/90

done for quite a while--if we decide to move on the discount rate,
whether we allow all of it to flow through to the funds rate.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, it would be my feeling that we shouldn't
unless things deteriorate much further than they have at this point.
I guess I still take some comfort from the fact that we are about on
track in terms of where we want to be.
And to start easing very
aggressively as we did in 1976 I think would be inappropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think that--

MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. As long as we're having a
round robin on the discount rate, I think we have a discount rate cut
in our future that's not too far down the road. However, I don't
think we ought to do it in the next few days. While the economy is
weak and while we do have concerns about the money supply, I think we
have to be careful that we don't convey the notion that the Fed is
really alarmed about the economy.
If we lower reserve requirements on
a Monday and then reduce the funds rate on a Friday and then on the
following Monday or Tuesday cut the discount rate, it seems to me that
that does convey a notion that maybe we think things are a lot worse
than we want to indicate. While the underlying economy is soft, it's
probably not as soft as the attitudes out there. So, I think we want
to make certain that we ease into this announcement in a constructive
way. Also, if and when we do cut the discount rate, I think we ought
to let at least some of it flow through to the funds rate. Just to
cut the discount rate for some kind of alignment reason or to make the
record [unintelligible], I think would be even more confusing. And I
would think we wouldn't want to cut the funds rate today and then cut
it again two or three days from now. So, I just think we need a
reasonable interval here before we hit the accelerator with something
that will clearly have a major announcement effect.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, since we're in this general
discussion, I guess one would take it that Sam thinks that the
discount rate move would not have a major effect in the exchange
markets at this point, that one quite [unintelligible].
The other
issue, which I hate to raise again since it seems [heretical], is that
I do think at some point that we are going to need to raise again this
issue or at least the perception out there of the change. Be it real
or not, it has been an [unintelligible].
Maybe I'm speaking too much
from being close to some of the fire here, but until there is some
change in perceptions I think we are going to have difficulty with the
money supply.
MR. CROSS. Mr. Chairman, Sam Cross. May I just make clear
what I was saying about this whole question? As I said earlier, I
think one of the factors that has given the dollar some strength over
recent weeks has been a perception that the monetary moves have been
measured and understandable in light of the way the markets have moved
and in light of the way the economy has moved.
I think the [exchange]
market is now going through a very searching kind of reassessment and
they find themselves in new circumstances because of the Middle East
situation and because of the worse-than-expected economic situation.
Anything that conveyed any sense of panic on the part of the Fed would
have the possibility of a very serious impact on the exchange market.
Certainly, some of the people in that market are expecting a possible
discount rate move at some point. But I wouldn't say that this is a

12/7/90

move that could be made without any expectation of an impact on the
exchange market.
MR. GUFFEY. Sam, do you have any sense of what the Japanese
and Germans might do with their rate structures?
MR. CROSS. Well, not anything very formal or official or
anything other than what the market is expecting. The situation with
respect to the Japanese seems to have changed recently. Whereas
earlier the general market view was that the Japanese would be
tightening, that perception has turned around. With respect to the
Germans, there is still an expectation of a possible--or some are even
saying a probable--tightening perhaps as soon as next week when they
have their meeting on Thursday the 13th, which is just prior to some
Some people are saying that the Germans would want to
EC meetings.
So,
move before then in order to position themselves for the EC.
there's still a very substantial expectation that the Bundesbank may
tighten further soon.
I'm off to Basle tomorrow and I'll get a
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
much clearer picture from the group there as to what the latest
I have been getting calls here
feeling is and whether it is shifting.
and there, but I think Sam has outlined as much as we know at the
If there are no further comments, I thank you very much.
moment.
END OF SESSION

