Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 2-3, 1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Monday, July 2, 1990, at 3:10 p.m., and was continued
on Tuesday, July 3, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,
Promisel, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Siegman,
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1.
2.

Mr. Boehne entered this meeting after the action to approve the
minutes for the May meeting.
Attended Tuesday session only.

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Chief, Banking and Money Market Analysis
Section, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Feinman and Krane, Economists, Divisions of
Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics,
respectively, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice.Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Cook, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. McNees, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, and
Boston, respectively
Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

3.

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary
and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of July 2-3, 1990
July 2, 1990--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we get started, please?
would like to move approval of the minutes-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

If somebody

So move.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Cross, would you
carry us through your operations since the last meeting?
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. CROSS. I'm sorry, it was Honduras rather than Costa Rica
in the ESF arrangement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?
to move to ratify the transactions?
MS. SEGER.

Move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

If not, would somebody like

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Ms. Lovett, would
you take us through domestic open market operations?
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Ms. Lovett?

MR. HOSKINS. I noticed in the New York Fed's [report on its]
financial panel that there was a comment by Scott Pardee indicating
that he felt the pegging of the funds rate was not allowing market
forces to show through and was creating a situation whereby even
moving the funds rate a little would be viewed as a very strong
signal. Can you evaluate that? Do you sense the same thing?
MS. LOVETT. Well, in the six weeks since you met last, it
has been the case that market forces have shown through by the time
the maintenance period has come to an end. So, we ended up with
federal funds either being quite comfortable on the settlement day or
quite tight on the settlement day. Some of that has been reflected in
banks' behavior, based on their expectations of what the funds rate
was going to be. In the first couple of periods they were quite
convinced it was going to be a soft settlement day, and so it was. As
we got into the June 13th period they were so sure it was going to be
comfortable that they waited until the very end even though there was
a real need for reserves. Some market [participants] chance this;
they put off [action] until there is no more room.

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
If not, would
somebody like to move the ratification of the actions of the Desk
since the last meeting?
MS. SEGER.

I'll move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
the "Chart Show" by Messrs. Prell and Truman.

We'll now move on to

MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll be referring to
the charts in the package with the bright red lettering, which you
should be able to distinguish from the other materials before you.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. TRUMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. FORRESTAL. Ted, that 3.9 percent inflation rate for
Germany [for 1991] looks awfully high by historical standards. Why do
you think the Bundesbank won't resist that?
MR. TRUMAN.

Politics.

MR. FORRESTAL.

Politics still?

MR. TRUMAN. Our sense is that they would resist something
above 4 percent but that for a period of time they will tolerate
That's part of the forecast. And, as I
something in the high 3s.
said, they may [unintelligible] more, in which case the forecast
[unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY.
I'd like to ask a question of Mike on the basic
assumption that a shift in credit supply conditions has occurred.
Throughout the Greenbook and the Bluebook there was certainly
discussion of these events.
Could you give me some idea as to how
important those conditions are in terms of the forecast?
Did they
represent some percentage of GNP that did not occur as a result?
MR. PRELL. Well, we don't have a quantification. It is
woven into the forecast and, as I suggested, is not a big effect.
I had to quantify it, I'd say it's a fraction of a percent.
MR. PARRY.

If

A quarter of a percent, then?

MR. PRELL. It's just very hard to trace this through. My
Part of the problem is
guess would be maybe a little more than that.
the semantic difficulty of identifying what is the credit crunch. If
you build in the recognition of all the declining investment
opportunities in real estate and so on and call that a part of the
credit crunch you have a bigger effect than if you are thinking simply

-3-

7/2-3/90

of the shift in credit terms offered to people of a given level.
Congress is-MR. PARRY. Well, I was thinking of risks of changes in
supply, which could originate from both of those factors.
MR. PRELL. Right. Well, I think it's a fraction of a
percent.
Implicitly, given the changes we've made over time as we
thought we recognized this, I'd say it's considerably less than a
percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's one way of coming at that
in a slightly different manner. The data that have just come in from
the survey on lending terms suggest that the combination of increased
collateral requirements and increased spreads on loans over open
market rates has a [unintelligible] of something like 25 basis points.
So another way to look at this is to think of it in terms of how we
would view the real rates if we had tightened the funds rate by, say,
25 basis points.
MR. PRELL.
I think the difficulty with that, Mr. Chairman,
is that those effects seem to have been greatest for relatively small
businesses.
And as best we can assess it, the role of smaller
businesses in total investment, for example, is not overwhelming. But
then there are these secondary effects. Looking at corporate bonds,
if you took the-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Mike, I think Bob was raising an
I can see
interesting question about something we're all aware of.
the [unintelligible] and the point at issue is that it's crucial for
It's clearly not
us to get a feel for what the order of magnitude is.
a percentage point, but how do we know [how much it is]?
If the real
interpretation of what I said is correct, it's less than 25 basis
points. But there are a lot of other forces going on and this really
What in
gets down to a very tricky issue of what the definition is.
the world does a term mean?
We are looking at such complex forces
here. How does one get a feel for how to separate them?
MR. PARRY. Well, did you make any adjustments in the model
to reflect the kinds of things that typically would not be captured by
a model?
MR. PRELL.

[Unintelligible.]

MR. PARRY. So, what you had in there are the typical types
of changes in the supply of credit due to diminished prospects with
regard to growth of income, employment, etc.
MR. PRELL. Well, if this forecast were spit out by a model,
then yes, I'd have a better basis. But, of course, we always are
adjusting for various surprises, and to isolate this one would be very
difficult. But I think one needs to lay on top of those direct
interest rate effects whatever allowance one makes for collateral
requirements.
I suggested that perhaps the decline in consumer
sentiment might have been affected to some degree by all of the press
discussion of shortages of credit and the possibly bad effects on
business.
That might be why consumers are less confident than they
were before. So I think it gets to be very, very difficult.

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think Bob is saying that in a
very structural sense consumer confidence is an element in the model
and interest rates are an element in the model but the credit crunch
is not.
And the issue here is how you embody that [in your forecast],
other than, say, through consumer confidence or some other variable-or in this particular case, I would assume, add-factor adjustments.
How do you capture that?
That's the issue he is raising.
I'd like to, but it's
MR. PRELL.
I don't have an answer.
very hard because there are too many things going on at once. We
would have to settle on exactly what categories these things would
fall in.
The land price story, if it is significant, is another thing
that affects people's thinking on a number of decisions, and that
isn't obviously related to the credit crunch. So, though I'd like to,
I just don't have a good answer.
MR. PARRY. Don't get me wrong; I don't think you're
understating these events.
I just wondered how you did it, that's
all.
I think the effects are probably on the low side of what you're
saying.
It is difficult to know how to deal with it.
MR. MELZER. Mike, on Chart 9, the alternative fiscal
scenarios, I wanted to ask you just what happens in your model for the
longer-term growth rates of money where interest rates are adjusted to
Is there a change in the
keep output close to the baseline path?
model in the longer-term growth rates of money yet?
MR. PRELL. We have to have substantially higher money growth
Let me see, I must have those numbers
in order to accomplish this.
here. Let me check and give you some idea.
MR. KOHN. The rule of thumb we have been using is that [a
decrease of] about 2 percentage points on the funds rate for the year
will give you about 2 more percentage points in M2 growth on the
Now, whether that still pertains is
standard M2 demand [function].
another question.
MR. PRELL.
I don't have the corresponding money numbers but,
clearly, having a little higher nominal GNP level here and
substantially lower interest rates implies through the money demand
function much more rapid money growth over the period.
MR. MELZER. My point in asking and my general concern about
this is that, basically, I would view a dramatic shift in fiscal
policy as some sort of a short-run shock, and we can use monetary
But we're going to be giving up something
policy to try to offset it.
in the long run to do it and I guess the model would incorporate that
in a sense with higher longer-term growth rates in money.
MR. PRELL. Well, longer term, perhaps one begins to look at
things differently.
But it's a matter of many years before these
We need to make some
fiscal effects presumably would die out.
assumptions about what would happen to fiscal policy beyond this
period. But in this period, obviously, we have to have that
accommodation. And in this period, because of the balancing fiscal
contraction, aggregate demand isn't growing much more rapidly and we
If you maintain consistently higher
don't have that inflation effect.

7/2-3/90

money growth throughout the future--sort of along the lines of the
Bluebook simulations--then you do begin to see these effects mount.
MR. KOHN. I would view this more as a shift in the level of
the money supply as interest rates fell or rose--fell, in this case--

and then growth would be along whatever you thought the old
equilibrium was relative to whatever inflation rate you want it to be.
I don't see why this would result in a permanent increase in the
growth rate of money; rather, I think it's a level adjustment.
MR. MELZER. One other question I had with respect to rates:
What occasioned the dramatic change in your assumption on the path of

interest rates between this meeting and the prior meeting?
MR. PRELL. Several things were involved. One was the fact
that in the near term the economy seems to be weaker in an underlying
sense than we had anticipated previously. A second factor was our
decision to make fiscal policy a bit more restrictive in 1991. On top
of that, we already had brought our interest rate bulge down; we had
thought rates would be going up and spiking in the first part of 1991
and then coming off. Those first two things moderated that
considerably. Then we decided that it would be sensible, as a
baseline for the discussion here, not to assume any significant change
in rates because it still appears that we would have some mild
disinflationary trajectory going into 1992. We felt this kind of
scenario was in line with what we perceived to be the general policy
objectives of the Committee, consistent with the symmetric directives
recently and so on. This seemed a sensible baseline for the
discussion.
MR. MELZER.

Thank you.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mike, again in the area of the
budget, but leaving aside RTC-type things, could you give me some
sense as to the sensitivity of the [1991] budget deficit estimate to
economic assumptions? What is [the effect of a difference of] 1
percentage point of GNP or 1 percent on the unemployment [rate] or
something like that on the actual budget deficit excluding-MR. PRELL.
I can give you, for example, the CBO's rule of
thumb. A one percent change in real growth starting at the beginning
of a year yields--if you take the lower growth scenario--$7 billion in
the first year.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PRELL.
in the second year.

How much?

It's $7 billion in the first year and $26 billion
Was it real output that was your primary focus?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. What I was trying to ask was this:
Looking at your earlier charts on page 3 for the differences in 1991
between the staff numbers and the Administration numbers for GNP,
unemployment, etc., if you had to make a very rough ballpark guess,
what does all that translate to in terms of the budget deficit?
MR. PRELL. For 1991, I would take it to be a fairly sizable
difference once one builds in the difference in interest rate
assumptions. For example, their Treasury bill rate in 1991--these are

7/2-3/90

not published numbers yet--is an average of 6.8 percent.
So that's a
little lower than our forecast entails.
Looking across the board
that's probably worth somewhere between $5 and $10 billion; I don't
know the particular phasing. If you add on the output path
difference, I would think we're running a difference of something in
the $10 to $20 billion area in terms of the economic assumptions.
Inflation differences are very small; the projections aren't very
sensitive to inflation differences. Clearly, this is small potatoes
relative to all the other aspects of [unintelligible] deliberations.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, that was what I thought.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Somewhat related to Jerry's question: How likely
is it, if Congress goes for expenditure cuts on the budget and higher
taxes, that that actually would produce a larger deficit because the
impact of that fiscal restraint would be to slow growth even further?
MR. PRELL. Well, our simulation suggests that it's within
the powers of monetary policy to offset any [expected] drag.
It might
take aggressive action, if you believe these models, but it's doable.
I guess that's the most-MS.

SEGER.

And you think the timing would work out and all

that?
MR. PRELL. Mechanically, the models say you can do this.
I
guess I should say, to follow up on the earlier question about 1991
budget deficits, that I wasn't really building in the differences in
the 1990 forecast, which would start things off a little worse and
widen that gap.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The growth in output I think [depends
on] a judgment as to when, for example, any tax increases that occur
are effective.
MR. PRELL.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will know what that date is well in
advance. We won't know the expenditure numbers that easily.
I think
we'll have some judgment as to the fiscal tax results.
Now, if you
want to think in terms of appropriations and forward orders, current
contract awards and that sort of thing, we can track those things
fairly well and they're not going to fall on their face overnight.
In
other words, it's going to be a very extensive lag so that a lot of
the initial effect would be anticipatory. You can get a good deal of
anticipatory effect from monetary policy because people expect
interest rates to change and reduce some of this. But unless a change
in orders arrives at somebody's desk, he is not going to change
[inventory policy].
I have been reading in the newspapers that there
has been a contraction in the budget and there's nothing we can do
[unintelligible] change inventory policy or any policy. But when you
get something it sure will. And I think it's that sort of timing that
we have to be sensitive to.
My impression is that it's very difficult
to write the budget deal without some significant [unintelligible] in
their fiscal impact. And it should be of a nature that we have more

7/2-3/90

than adequate lead time to respond, if in fact our decision is to do
so.

MS. SEGER. My second question relates to what I thought I
heard you say when you were talking about housing starts. I believe
you said that you thought the credit availability problems for
builders were a one-shot phenomenon. I hope that's true, but I'm not
sure.
MR. PRELL. Well, I tried to say two conceptually separate
things. One is that to the extent that it lowers activity, that's a
one-time effect.
MS. SEGER.

Right.

MR. PRELL. That's a one-time effect, and then a growth path
can be pursued as determined by subsequent interest rate and income
movements as well. The other thing is that to the extent that some
builders have been displaced--for example, by their friendly S&L
having been shut down or the loan-to-one-borrower restrictions having
made their S&L less able to provide credit--we think that in time they
will find alternative funding if they have viable projects. There
will be people who want to make those loans. On a technical side, we
think that institutions will find ways, such as participating loans
and so on, to deal with the loan-to-one-borrower limitations. So in
that sense we think that the level problem will diminish over time.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We were too focused on bidding Manley
Johnson farewell and we forgot that we have a new member who now has
the floor.
MR. MULLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My [question relates
to] either the prospect or reality of higher state and local taxes in
a number of populous regions. How is that included in the model?
MR. PRELL.

Clearly, that has happened already.

I heard a

news story that something like 10 or 11 states had tax increases going
into effect yesterday. And in our forecast we expect, among the
actions taken to close the budget gaps in a number of states, more tax
increases. We have in the forecast a significant increase in the
average indirect business tax rate of state and local governments.
That tends to give a little boost to inflation as we go out through
1991 in this forecast.
MR. MULLINS.

Okay.

MR. PARRY. I have a question about timing in terms of
monetary policy reactions to a change in fiscal policy.
If greater

fiscal tightness were imposed and one wanted, say, to keep output
close to the baseline path, what do the different lag structures
associated with monetary and fiscal policy tell you in terms of the
timing requirements for monetary policy?
MR. PRELL.
timing requirement.
force.

Well, unless we go to extreme cases, there is no
If you act later, you have to act with greater

7/2-3/90

MR. PARRY.

Do more.

MR. PRELL.
Just to give you some sense, though, of the
sensitivity of these numbers: We did another simulation where instead
of waiting until the fourth quarter, as we've assumed in this, we
adjusted the federal funds rate by 150 basis points in the third
quarter of this year and then let the rate drift up very gradually,
pretty much back to the path seen here.
And that has essentially the
same output effect.
So, it took 50 basis points less if you moved one
quarter earlier.
That gives you some sense that there is considerable
[room] to maneuver, if you're willing to move in rather gross ways in
your policy adjustments--and if you believe the model.
SPEAKER(?).

That's one big "if."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm trying to remember a comparable
fiscal action that has taken place, and the only thing that comes to
mind is the Johnson Administration's surtax and subsequent, or
concurrent, monetary ease.
What actually happened then in this
context?
Do you remember offhand?
MR. PRELL.
Well, that was before my time.
However, when I
arrived at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank in 1970 it was legend.
There were a lot of economists in the System who were still feeling
that that was one of the biggest mistakes they had ever made.
They
had neglected to take a sort of permanent income view of a one-time
tax surcharge.
I think it was expected to have significant effects on
expenditures and in retrospect it didn't seem to have that.
Now, in
this case, the presumption would be that we're talking about something
more permanent and one wouldn't have that kind of surprise.
But I
think that was the analysis.
There may be people around the table who
have a direct recollection of what went on within the System.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

That was a temporary surcharge?

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So, basically, the model would take some
marginal propensity to [consume]--0.7 or whatever the number would
be--out of GNP when in effect it was probably 0.1.
MR. PARRY. Well, it warmed Milton Friedman's heart because
the permanent income hypothesis explained it pretty well.
MR. PRELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The real issue is that there is a
difference here, and we have to be careful that there's not another
problem we haven't captured.
The complexity of this issue is rather
mind-boggling.
MR. PRELL.
We recognize that this [presentation] makes it
all look more pat than it is.
I hope I threw in enough cautionary
words on that part.
But as I said, I think it gives one some sense of
the orders of magnitude that conceivably could be involved.

good this

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I don't know if my memory is very
evening but I think there was another element in that

7/2-3/90

surcharge in 1968. And that is that for a long time prior to the
point when the surcharge was supposed to come into play, there were a
number of senior Federal Reserve officials, including Chairman Martin,
who were pushing publicly and privately very, very hard to get some
I certainly wasn't around or close
kind of a tax to finance the war.
enough to the situation to know whether or not all of their pushing
put them in a position where there might have been some understanding
Certainly, the visible case was the one that
of a [quid pro quo].
Mike cited: that it was treated--whether because it was misunderstood
or for other reasons--as if it were a permanent large tax increase
But I suspect there was a little more to it than
[unintelligible].
that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

To be sure.

Any more questions?

David.

I have one question on the bottom panel of
MR. MULLINS.
Chart 4. Since we talked about Friedman some, we can talk about
Your model, I guess, is meant to suggest a rebound
Modigliani some.
in consumer spending because household wealth is relatively high. How
For example, one
has that notion worked as a predictor in the past?
can't help but notice the little dip in October of 1987 in total
Can you trace out the consumption impact of that?
wealth.
MR. PRELL. Yes, in a rough way. The fact is that after that
period the personal saving rate did rise. There was not a recession,
as some people expected, because there were some strong interestincome generating sectors--stronger than most people had realized at
the time. The net export increase was sizable; the investment gains
were sizable. That seemed to generate the income. And even if
consumers wanted to spend less of it, they still increased their
expenditures, and thus we glided through that period. But the index
of the wealth effect would be the personal saving rate. So there's
nothing in the data superficially, given everything else that was
going on, to suggest that there wasn't the predicted effect.
It really is not a
Just one question for Mike.
MR. HOSKINS.
But, if the average
fair one because he probably hasn't looked at it.
error in the forecast one quarter out is plus or minus 2 percentage
points when we have normal times--that is, no fiscal policy change-what would you [estimate] the error is going to be with a fiscal
policy change?
MR. PRELL. Well, I don't know. If I knew what the fiscal
I'm not sure the
policy change was, we'd be able to [unintelligible].
error would be any larger, but given that I don't know the [fiscal
policy change] or the underlying strength of the economy, I'd say
there is a very wide range of possibilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, can
Who would like to
we proceed to our usual roundtable discussion?
start off?
In the Philadelphia District, my sense is that
MR. BOEHNE.
both business sentiment and economic activity have deteriorated since
the last meeting and that the outlook is more bearish now than even a
Real estate is the weakest spot, with increasing reports
month ago.
The number of bankrupt properties is rising.
of builders in trouble.
One of our major firms that is closely tied to capital spending

-10-

7/2-3/90

reports that new capital spending authorizations have moderated
appreciably during the second quarter. The only major exception is
for environmentally related projects.
Spending commitments are off
for steel, chemicals especially, pharmaceuticals, electric power
generation, and oil and gas.
And the prospect for continued weakness
in capital spending authorizations is there. Retailers report
essentially flat sales, and I would say that merchants are more
cautious about the outlook than a couple of months ago. Manufacturing
generally appears to have flattened out but at fairly low levels. And
except for autos, I think most of the manufacturers in the District do
not expect further slippage from these low levels.
In general,
bankers are increasingly gloomy; they are worried about loan quality,
profit margins, and the next examination. Lending for real estate
projects has been curtailed sharply and lending to small business-often collateralized with real estate assets--is under much more
scrutiny. My sense is that against the background of a generally
slowing economy and a general tightening of credit standards, most
companies are falling short in terms of their targets and plans for
sales and profits.
I think all of those are ingredients for a period
when business confidence is quite vulnerable and is susceptible to
some significant deterioration in the months ahead.
Now, translating that into the national economic outlook, I
continue to think that the modest growth forecast, as outlined in the
Greenbook, is most likely. But in my judgment, there has been a
significant increase in the amount of downside risk to the economy in
the last few weeks. So, while I would say that modest growth is the
most likely outcome, I'm much more concerned now about it coming to
pass than I was in May.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, I guess this is a Northeast economic story.
In New England our situation continues to worsen, and I'd have to say
with some signs of cumulation. But I don't think this is largely
because of national factors. Our own expectation for the region,
given an economic performance nationally something like that in the
Greenbook, is that the region will continue to decline well into 1992
and then level off but be slow coming back. Retail sales are now
quite weak with aggressive pricing; there are some bankruptcies, and
inventories are becoming a problem. There are some questions about
weather influences because we have had a cool, rainy spring and
purchases of things like gas grills and that sort of thing--once it
gets past the fourth of July--may tend to be put off for another year
unless they are priced very aggressively. Contributing to all this is
the banking situation, which I think we'd have to say continues to
deteriorate. We now have people actually becoming somewhat blase,
about banking, which I guess could be either good or bad. We have had
a bank failure about every two weeks for the last two months.
MS. SEGER.

The people are blase or the outside--

MR. SYRON. As these things happen successively, I suppose it
is human nature that they draw less attention in the press.
It's
really noticeable that they draw much less attention in the electronic
media and on the radio than one might have thought.
Now, these are
[mostly] small institutions. With the exception of one $2-1/2 billion
thrift institution, these are institutions of less than $1/2 billion

-11-

7/2-3/90

in size, so the impact is not enormously great. But to cite one
example: A story that a $1/2 billion institution was going to be
closing was in a gossip column in one of the newspapers two days
before and it ended up having some problems but no severe runs or
anything like that. Interestingly, consumer confidence--and the
decline we have had is pointed out in Mike's chart 4--is remaining
about the same. It's no longer falling in the region, which is a
little hard to figure out, but it is at a quite low level. Looking at
sectors, construction is obviously at dead center, particularly in
southern New Hampshire where it was very big. And that is going to be
a drag on the New England economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Seasonally adjusted, it will soon turn

negative!
MR. SYRON. It's almost conceivable! Interestingly,
employment in services has been falling as well, particularly in
finance, insurance and real estate, and also in wholesale and retail
trade. You just notice the availability of labor where there really
had been a problem with availability in the services sector. It is
now much less of an issue at the wholesale and retail stores; the
stores are actually tightening up and have not put as many salespeople
on the floor as they had before because of the concern that they have.
Interestingly, the credit crunch question, although I'm not sure
quantitatively or qualitatively that it has gotten any less pressing
one way or the other, is becoming much less newsworthy and is drawing
much less attention. We took some loan data and adjusted for sales of
loans and items that were changed to writeoffs and things like that,
and we found that loan data pretty flat except for real estate, and
there was some decline in consumer loans. Manufacturing was really
one bright spot, believe it or not. Sales were mixed for our
manufacturers--from 0 to 15 percent. The two [unintelligible] see an
increase [unintelligible] holding up relatively decently but a lot of
these things are special factors. For manufacturers, exports are more
and more becoming an important source of sales. Also, a lot of these
things are in areas you might expect--in aerospace, as it has gone
nationally, some types of electronics and defense-related products.
Our computer sector is still quite weak. For the longer term there is
quite a lot of concern about what defense means, and regionally I
think we will see a substantial drag from state and local fiscal
changes. The Massachusetts budget deficit is about $1.4 billion for
the current fiscal year and the next fiscal year is forecast to be
about another $1.4 billion. They are trying to arrange for some sort
of [financing], part of that out 30-40 years. Connecticut has a
substantial problem, so there is going to have to be very significant
[unintelligible].
As far as the national economy goes, given the policy
assumptions last time, our view is that the Greenbook seemed a little
optimistic; and given the policy assumptions this time, it seems to us
slightly pessimistic. I'd emphasize the "slightly," particularly on
the unemployment rate. As has been noted, it does seem to put a lot
of weight on this credit crunch issue. I think that is so; at least
it's discussed frequently--let me put it that way. And it's very,
very hard to know what that means. There are lots and lots of
unknowns out there; things are definitely softening but it's hard to
see whether this is a pause or a trend. In terms of policy, we need
to see something on whether this will continue or not. There are a

7/2-3/90

-12-

lot of weather-related issues in the retail sales data, particularly
in fuels and personal consumption expenditures and in some of the GNP
accounts.
I'm also skeptical of the month-to-month retail sales
numbers.
So, I don't know that we can think at this point that the
consumer sector is really going to weaken. The export sector looks
relatively healthy; residential construction look weak. On the other
hand, the purchasing managers survey this morning looked reasonably
good.
The indicators of a recession don't suggest a [high]
probability of that.
Unemployment hasn't risen; claims aren't rising,
even though we've seen poor employment performance. We just have an
awful lot of unknowns out there, not the least of which is what is
going to happen with fiscal policy. We'll get into a discussion about

this later today or tomorrow, but I think it's a very difficult period
to make a decision to change [policy].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is new in this whole process is
that I don't think any of us has sat through this type of unraveling
of an accelerated financial expansion. If you look at the
flow-of-funds table, we go from double-digit [rates] to squeezing
down, and that effect, I think, is really what we're hearing about.
The question is: How does one read that? I think it explains the type
of phenomenon that we see in New England at the extreme. But the rest
of country is definitely [unintelligible].
MR. SYRON. Well, on this business of a credit crunch--and I
think we have had some severe problems along that line--in looking at
these figures it's interesting that, once you've adjusted them, a lot
of the fall-off is in areas you wouldn't expect to be price-driven-i.e, in consumer lending. There is just no avoiding it; that's what's
going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economy
continues to grow, but the pace of growth has slowed recently.
Employment grew at a 2.8 percent annual rate from January through May.
That compares favorably to the U.S. rate of growth of employment of
1.8 percent, but it does represent a slowdown. From May of 1989 until
January of 1990 employment in the District was growing at rate of
about 3-1/2 percent. Conditions remain good in the trade and services
sectors. Retailers report healthy sales, confirming moderate
employment growth in recent months. In most parts of the West, home
sales are still strong and median prices are rising but at a much
slower rate. Reports of particularly robust activity come from
Seattle, Sacramento, Oregon, and parts of Utah and Idaho. However, in
the coastal areas of California, which are primarily Los Angeles, San
Diego, and San Francisco, sales volumes and median prices have fallen
from the high levels of a year ago. Although sales of more affordable
homes continue to be robust, construction activity has fallen from the
high levels of a few months ago. Nevertheless, the level of activity
remains high with construction employment still registering solid
gains over year-earlier levels. Manufacturing activity continues
mixed. Production of commercial aircraft, aluminum, and some
construction-related products is reported to be strong. However,
employment gains in commercial aircraft are limited by both capacity
constraints and also by improvements in labor productivity. It's
interesting to note that Boeing has actually laid off some people and
apparently has done that, as they explain it, as a result of increased

-13-

7/2-3/90

labor productivity. High-technology-related industries are relatively
flat overall with wide variations among firms and product lines. And
layoffs and plant closures associated with defense cutbacks continue.
If I may turn to the national economy, we're in general
agreement with the outlook in the Greenbook for this year, but we do
have a few differences. Adopting the Greenbook assumption of no
change in the current level of short-term interest rates, our forecast
would be about a quarter of a percentage point stronger, at least in
I'm not sure exactly
1990 and continuing into the first part of 1991.
what the causes of these differences are, but I have a feeling that
they might be accounted for to some extent by differences in the
impacts of credit availability effects. Even in the absence of credit
availability effects, we expect real GNP growth to be less than that
of the growth of potential, putting some modest upward pressures on
the unemployment rate and containing inflationary pressures, at least
Therefore, we anticipate inflation
underlying inflationary pressures.
in the GNP fixed-weight price index to average about 4-1/4 to 4-1/2
percent over the next 18 months, which I believe is slightly higher
than that in the Greenbook. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the economy has not changed
appreciably in the Southeast since the last meeting. Growth is
continuing along the slow path that we've been experiencing for some
time now. We are seeing a fairly healthy expansion, I think, in
Offshore energy exploration is
services and in our export industries.
also moving up higher and we continue to receive reports of severe
labor shortages in the energy sector in Louisiana. Other
manufacturing areas are quite weak, mainly due to the conditions at
the national level for the automobile and construction-related
industries.
I don't have to go out and ask people any more what they
think about the economic situation; I'm inundated with advice about
what we should do. But I must say that people are expressing
increasingly their concerns about current conditions and the outlook.
Now, that certainly has been true for some time in the real estate and
housing areas, but increasingly we're hearing it from others as well
In recent weeks they seem to be a lot
and particularly from bankers.
less concerned about regulatory pressures than they were and much more
concerned about loan demand that has weakened across the board. That
is one very notable change from the views a few weeks ago. And I
would echo what Dick said: that the publicity about regulatory
pressures seems to have waned quite a bit.
Looking at the national economy, our staff has somewhat
faster real growth, especially in the early part of the forecast
period, in comparison to the Greenbook forecast. The differences are
basically because we have a small reduction in Federal spending and we
have in fact [unintelligible] as much of an impact from the tighter
We are also a bit more optimistic about the price
credit conditions.
outlook even though the forecast shows a somewhat tighter labor
market. But as we go into 1991, our forecast does converge a little
As I try to look at the outlook, like
more on the inflation side.
I must
everybody else, I'm beset by a number of these uncertainties.
say that one thing weighing heavily on my mind is that our bank

-14-

7/2-3/90

directors, who have been very steadfast in supporting our antiinflationary policies, are now leaning to the view that some reduction
in restraint is needed right now. What is significant about that, I
think, is that it is not only the business directors who are saying
this but also the bank directors who have typically favored a
relatively tight policy in comparison to the other directors. The
business and financial contacts that I have spoken to in recent weeks
are much more blunt in this regard--virtually without exception urging
a reduction in rates. My take on this is that the negative sentiments
really reflect the pressures, the temporary pressures I hope, to slow
inflation after a period of pretty comfortable business conditions.
Businesses seem to be having trouble, at least in the Southeast,
raising final prices as much as they had expected to, and now they
have to find ways to cut costs to preserve their margins.
It seems to
me that this is the pressure and the ultimate adjustment that we've
been trying to achieve for a long time. But having said that, I still
find myself now feeling--and even more so--that the risk is on the
down side and that there is a greater chance of growth falling short
of rather than exceeding our expectations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, on balance the economy in the
District is largely unchanged from the last meeting: mixed to just
stable, at least at a moderate level. Clearly, there are some sectors
that are weaker. Retail sales are down and I must say anecdotally I
am hearing that June sales really have been very soft as compared to
last June.
Construction activity is down, both residential and
nonresidential; yet our numbers I think are still running ahead of the
national numbers. The Chicago purchasing managers report came out the
other day; for June it was down a bit from May. Production, new
The manufacturing sector is
orders, and order backlogs were lower.
In the
generally unchanged, but there are some areas that are better.
steel business, for example, as the year is moving along, the
shipments level is being increased. They started the year off
thinking it would be an 80 million ton year. Now, the numbers are up
to as high as 84 million tons--a little lower than last year, but
still a comparatively good year. Operating levels, at least at the
company I talked to, are at about 89 percent. The electronic
communications business is strong; the order rate is moving up and is
The paper industry is flat
now back up into the double-digit area.
But having said
but at a high level, operating at about 98 percent.
that, an awful lot of capacity has come on in the paper business and,
therefore, pricing is very, very intense. Liner board, for example,
In the manufacturing
has gone down from $410 a ton to $370 a ton.
sector, not surprisingly, agricultural equipment is very strong;
production levels are about 5 percent higher this year than last year.
Sales of agricultural equipment at retailers are moving at a very good
pace.
Construction machinery, though, is weak; and in response to the
decrease in construction activity, that category is down.
The auto sector continues to be very, very uncertain; the
sales level in May and early June certainly was weak and as a
consequence the forecast for the year is beginning to be pulled down a
bit.
One company's forecast is down to a little under 14-1/2 million
units for the year and that's depending on 14-1/2 million for the
second half. Even those levels, of course, are dependent on
tremendous incentives.
The incentives continue to be over $1,000 per

7/2-3/90

-15-

Auto
car in order to maintain these even weaker numbers of sales.
inventories at retail continue to be at reasonable levels; dealers
just aren't buying and, as a consequence, many of them are losing
money. GM is quoted as saying that 35 to 40 percent of its dealers
The auto production levels in the third
are currently losing money.
quarter will be significantly higher than last year but there is a
comparative issue involved because the third quarter of last year was
pretty weak.
In the agricultural sector, what started off a couple of
months ago as being a near perfect growing season looks not quite as
positive as a consequence of the heavy amount of rain we've had in the
Midwest. We are having, to quote a new term, "ponding" in some areas
and severe erosion. And as a consequence, the corn planting has been
delayed and some of it has been shifted into soybeans, which can be
planted a bit later. Depending on how things work from this point
forward, I think we're still going to have a good production year, but
it just isn't going to be quite as strong as it might otherwise have
been.
On the pricing side, our outlook is more positive than the
The
staff forecast. I am continuing to hear awfully good reports.
raw materials prices are stable to down. One large manufacturer I
talked to says that his firm's raw materials costs for all of this
In other respects I
year will be 1/2 percent lower than last year.
Finally, with regard
hear very good news on the raw materials side.
to the credit crunch, the banks that I talk to are saying that they
certainly are being more careful in their approach to credit lending.
They are lending very, very carefully, but everybody says that there
is more than enough credit for good credits. And, of course, they
would emphasize the word "good."
Just briefly, in a national context--and I think our view is
reflective of our District outlook--we have been a little more
positive than has the Board staff in the past and we continue to be
so.
Our outlook for this year particularly is stronger than the
staff's and for next year we are a bit stronger. The difference
really is in personal consumption, to some extent in nondurables but
to a greater extent in the durables category and [more specifically]
Our outlook for home starts is a little higher
in household durables.
than 1.3 million, whereas the Board staff's is a little under 1.3
million, and that works its way through in the household durables
category. With regard to inflation, our outlook is a bit different
from the Board staff's also. We think as we get into next year that
the numbers will begin to show some improvement. And our outlook for
inflation by the end of next year is certainly lower than the Board
staff's. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In terms of our long-run outlook, we're right
near the central tendencies in both years; we tend to be at the lower
end in terms of nominal GNP, real GNP, and the CPI, and a bit at the
higher end on unemployment. The one comment I would make is that in
1991 we're looking for somewhat lower inflation, just a quarter of a
percentage point from the lower end of the central tendency. I would
say that's based on the progress in the trend growth in money and the
decline from double-digit rates in the 1986-to-1987 period to less

7/2-3/90

-16-

than 4 percent now. Essentially, I think that kept us from
overreacting earlier this year to the temporary runup in prices. And
it also influences us now in the sense that we have built such a good
base here that I think there's some reluctance to trade away a lot of
that.
Now, there's concern about the recent slowdown in money, but in
general where I come out--and not everybody would agree with this--is
that I'd need to see more before I reacted to that, particularly in
the context of trading away some of this longer-term progress.

As far as the District goes, the situation still looks pretty
good right now. We have had growth in nonagricultural employment in
the most recent three-month period that's right in line with the
national numbers and over the last year almost right on top of them.
Our manufacturing component is actually a bit stronger; it's growing
sluggishly but that compares to declines nationally in the most recent
three months and over the last year. On the horizon, however, there
are clearly some problems. We have a lot of auto industry exposure in
Missouri--in St. Louis and Kansas City. Chrysler has a shift that is
scheduled to go out this fall and as I recall it involves about 1,900
workers. And recently McDonnell Douglas has talked about layoffs;
they have not made any specific announcements but the rumors are that
4,000 jobs in St. Louis will be eliminated, and that would be 0.3 to
0.4 of a percentage point in terms of our metropolitan area
unemployment rate. The interesting thing about that is that I would
attribute those layoffs solely to current inefficiencies. That is, it
may put them in a better position as contract cuts come a couple of
years down the road, but basically this is dealing with current
problems. And I think it caught people a bit by surprise in that they
weren't really looking for any winding down until 1992 or some time
around then. On the banking side, asset quality continues to improve
in our District. Nonperforming loans are going down; real estate
problems have gone up a little but they are still well below national
averages. In St. Louis, for example, nonperforming real estate loans
are less than 2 percent, compared to much higher numbers in some other
metropolitan areas. On the agricultural side, the weather has
affected the wheat crop. We have had, of course, very wet weather.
It also has affected planting but I think corn is the only crop that
would possibly be affected by that; soybeans and cotton are in pretty
good shape.
I wanted to comment on one other thing quickly. We had a
series of meetings a week ago with our pension fund managers.
I think
it's dangerous to draw conclusions from a relatively small sample of
managers, even though they're very professional, but what struck me
was that I did not pick up from any of them a great deal of anxiety
about the outlook. Basically they are assuming a soft-landing type of
scenario. In other words--or I guess to put words in their
mouths--they are assuming continued sluggish growth, a continued
unwinding of inflationary pressures, and a gradual decline in interest
rates. I would say that, in effect, what most of them were doing was
looking through current [profit] margin pressures, which are very
evident, and the effect that will have on earnings. They feel that a
gradual decline in interest rates will offset that and that from a
valuation point of view they will be okay. The flip side of that--and
we didn't ask this across the board but we talked to one group--is to
ask what they would worry more about. And I think in general they
would be much more worried in a longer-term context about a resumption
of inflationary pressures as opposed to some shallow recession. Of

-17-

7/2-3/90

course, they were quick to add that once a recession started who knows
whether it would be shallow. So, that was kind of a soft question.
Generally, in the bond part of the portfolio there is usually not much
of an interest rate bet; in fact some of them won't make any at all.
They just stick right around the Shearson-Lehman index in terms of
their duration. But there were two standouts, one on either side.
One manager is betting on declining rates and another on rising rates.
So, overall, there's a pretty neutral view there.
MR. PARRY.
that, are we?
MR. MELZER.

We're not supposed to adjust policy based on

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard first to the District economy, for
some time I have reported that it was doing better than the nation as
a whole. We just had some data revisions; the series we follow most
closely are nonfarm employment and income, and the data revisions
confirm those reports.
Both for 1989 and early in 1990 at least, the
District has outperformed the nation. I think essentially what is
going on is that the natural resource industries in the District,
which sometimes act as a drag, have actually been pulling things up.
In that regard, I'm referring to mining and forest products and paper
In fact, the farmers in
and, of course more recently, agriculture.
our District have just about run out of things to complain about and
that almost never happens. We too have had a lot of rain but it was
much needed. So, people's spirits are up and that has positive
implications not only for morale and farm output but for implement
spending and so forth. On top of what has happened to natural
resources, as I have reported before, the diversified economies in the
Twin Cities and some of the other mid-size metropolitan areas have
done pretty well throughout most of this expansion. We recently had
meetings not just with our directors but also with our advisory
council on small business, agriculture, and labor. And, based on
those meetings, I would say the general tenor is positive.
It is not
ebullient; there certainly is not a great deal of confidence going
forward, but in general they are relatively satisfied with what is
happening at the moment.
There are a couple of exceptions, both of
which are obvious: anybody whose business is related to defense is
concerned as are those in construction--although they are not
concerned about new home sales, I must add, which continue to run
above year-ago levels in many places in the District. Generally, I
don't think the District is going to continue to outperform the
national economy much longer.
It is likely to perform much like the
national economy; that is, I think things are going to become a bit
more sluggish as we go ahead.
Commenting very briefly on the national situation, I have a
[unintelligible] sense that, as Tom Melzer and a couple of others
suggested, we may be poised for some progress on inflation in terms of
disinflation here.
I say that in part because of the slow growth in
money that we've had over an extended series of years now, but also
because in terms of anecdotes from people in the District I really
haven't had any reports of growing inflation pressures in at least a
year. Of course, the latest aggregate price statistics look a bit
better. Now, the obvious kickers are the services sector and some of

7/2-3/90

-18-

the things that Mike pointed out in his report about the
[unintelligible] and so forth. Nevertheless, I think we may be close
to a point where we finally start to see some progress there. As far
as real growth is concerned, I'm pretty comfortable with the Greenbook
forecast or maybe even something a bit better.
I think most of the
fundamentals are in place for some acceleration of growth. But having
said that, I must say that the statistics for the last few months on
employment and consumer spending, and my impression of what is
happening with home prices, raise the yellow flag.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our projections for GNP are pretty
close to the staff's; they are almost right on the button for this
year, but they are a little lower next year than the staff is
projecting. As we see it, this seems to be pretty compatible with the
kind of growth we've had in the aggregates recently and the
Greenbook's assumption that we'll have the same degree of restraint
over the forecast period. We would guess that the risk of error would
be on the down side and perhaps very much on the down side for the
next six months or so.
I say that partly because there doesn't seem
to be a real thrust in the economy anywhere right now, with the
exception perhaps of exports, and also because of the sharp
deceleration in the aggregates.
The staff memo did a good job of
eliminating a lot of the worries I had about the slowing in the
aggregates, but as the staff admits--and, of course, we all know--this
could be reflecting to some degree a slower growth in the economy than
would be healthy. And we, like Bob Forrestal, Si Keehn, Tom Melzer,
Gary Stern, and maybe some others, are more optimistic than the staff
about the degree of inflation that we will have, and we have felt that
way for some time. We think the staff is about right for this year
because of what is already in place for the first quarter, and that
puts us at 4-3/4 percent on the CPI for the year. But we're expecting
a deceleration in 1991, down to the neighborhood of 3-3/4 percent
maybe, because of the drop in M2 growth in the second quarter and also
the projection on the part of the staff that we will have a constant
federal funds rate over the forecast period. And, finally, we think
the credibility we will get on our anti-inflation policy, if in fact
we do hold the federal funds rate steady over the next 18 months in
the face of rather sluggish real growth, really ought to have at least
a moderate [salutary] effect on the rate of inflation that we actually
achieve.
I was intrigued by Si Keehn's comments about "ponding" in
his District; we've had a little dry spell, Si, and I think we would
be happy with a little "puddling."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national picture our view
is not very different from the staff's forecast. We see slightly more
strength for the rest of the year and about the same for 1991.
I
don't quite share my friend Bob Black's and others' optimism on
inflation.
I continue to remain a little pessimistic there.
With respect to the District, the economic recovery continues
but its strength seems to have diminished in the last two months. At
the May meeting I spoke about how, for the first time in three years,
the recovery in the Eleventh District had time finally to spread
across all sectors and all geographic regions in the District. A

7/2-3/90

-19-

definite slowdown has occurred recently, probably in response to the
slower growth nationally. Our manufacturing industries are still outperforming the nation. We actually have slow-to-modest employment
growth, but the gains have been concentrated in chemicals and energyrelated manufacturing. Electronic equipment, apparel, paper and
several other sectors that had held up manufacturing strength have
slipped recently. Defense contractors, of course, have been cutting
back heavily.
In spite of lower energy prices, drilling activity has
continued to increase significantly and all the leading indicators
suggest that this should continue for several months to come.
Retail
sales have softened and construction contracts have declined. Most
disturbing, however, is the noticeable slowdown in the service-related
sectors.
This has been an area of persistently strong growth, but the
most recent three-month period marks the weakest growth this group of
industries has exhibited since a recovery began three years ago.
In
spite of what I've been saying, for some strange reason business
sentiment seems to have improved a little lately, perhaps because
steady slow growth in a stable, predictable environment has finally
come to be viewed as preferable to an uncertain stop-and-go

environment.

Nonetheless, the talk of credit shortages--and I'm not

just talking here about real estate nor just for the smallest firms-is becoming more widespread down our way.
To keep [my report]
balanced, I guess I should say that our directors are probably not
quite as optimistic as I am.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, the good news is that the drought
is over as far as our District is concerned. We had "ponding" and
"puddling" but the fact of the matter is that the farm sector still
remains the primary source of the strength in this rather slow-growing
District economy. With respect to the agricultural sector, the wheat
crop, which has been mentioned here already today, is in a sense
Mother Nature plays tricks on the farmers as she
[unintelligible].
does annually, I guess. But overall the wheat crop is projected to be
at or near a record level. As a matter of fact, earlier today I
received a report that wheat in western Kansas had yielded 10 percent
more than it ever had before.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Better subtract the fraction of a bushel
that Wayne brought back and we lost!
MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that some of the wheat
crop, which 30 days ago looked outstanding throughout most of our
District, has been lost because of high winds and wet weather. But
overall it apparently will come out very well.
In addition, there has
been a delay in planting corn and the corn acreage will be down this
year, but that is [offset] by the soybean crop because of the later
planting date for that crop. Red meat prices for the farmers still
are very good and as a result the agricultural economy looks very
strong.
With respect to the credit crunch that has been mentioned,
with some diligence [in our search] we simply don't see it in our area
of the country. As a matter of fact, the complaint is that there is
very little loan demand and liquidity is very high in most of the
small agricultural banks particularly, as well as in some of the
bigger banks. Employment continues to grow throughout the District;

7/2-3/90

-20-

in fact, in each of the metropolitan areas the unemployment rate is
lower than the national rate, and there is some strain on skilled
labor in the District.
The District automobile manufacturing sector
remains in the doldrums. There is some continued modest improvement
in the general aviation manufacturing area. As for construction, home
building is at a low level and there is very little commercial
construction taking place because of the overhang that still exists in
the energy areas such as Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa. Although
there is some [construction] in Kansas City and a little in Omaha, by
and large it does not measure up to year-ago levels.
In the energy
sector, the OPEC overproduction has driven down prices, as noted
earlier today. However, the rig count in the District still remains
fairly stable and in fact is higher than a year ago.
Overall, I would
characterize the District as being in fairly good shape in most areas.
I hear very few comments from people that I or my staff have been in
contact with concerning the economy itself. People are pretty well
satisfied, but one has to lay that against the fact that some of them
suffered rather dramatically in the 1980s, so they think current
conditions are pretty good.
On the national level, we have no real divergence from what
was presented in the Greenbook with the exception that in 1990 we're
about 1/4 percentage point stronger [on GNP] than the Greenbook and
inflation is roughly 1/4 percentage point more. We're back together
in 1991, however.
So, over the total horizon our forecast is not
greatly different than the one the Greenbook portrays.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, to start with, our own
forecast continues to be very, very similar to Mike's forecast both in
terms of GNP and inflation. There are some minor differences around
the edges but they are really quite small. But insofar as the kind of
bias [unintelligible] around the forecast is concerned, I associate
myself with the comments that Mr. Boehne made at the opening of this
discussion. And that is, if somebody put a gun to my head and said
"You have to put a forecast down," that's the forecast I would put
down. But I don't think I'd have quite the same confidence in that
forecast that I would have had three or four months ago--again, for
some of the reasons that Ed Boehne mentioned. Anecdotally, there are
some aspects of the consensus forecast that look pretty good.
Certainly, the impression I get is that the export sector still is
quite strong, quite similar to Ted's forecast if not even a bit
stronger in volume terms. Again from what people say, the capital
goods sector seems to be hanging in there but it is not robust by any
stretch of the imagination. One interesting thing that someone
mentioned to me just the other day--I don't know, Bob Parry, if you
picked this up--was that this was the first instance that this
individual could remember of a domestic airline failing to exercise
options on Boeing 737s that they had had for three years.
I get the
sense that the capital goods sector is okay, but certainly not robust.
The real estate sector is a tough call.
Two or three things
strike me there: one is that I do get the sense that the second- and
third-level effects of the contraction of real estate are beginning to
show up a little more directly for derivative products.
That's not by
any means confined to the Northeast. On the other hand, having spent
a lot of time over the past several weeks with both bankers and with

7/2-3/90

-21-

my own examiners, some of whom I think are pretty darn good at this
real estate stuff, the feeling I get is that while there is more bad
news in the pipeline there isn't a sense of any kind of rout yet to
There may be pockets geographically or otherwise in which that
come.
is true. But even in terms of what my own examiners tell me, drawing
from the credit files and so forth, they see some things out there
that still worry them, but they do not see a collapse in real estate
markets generally.
On the other hand, for what it's worth, those same examiners
are more concerned today than they were 6 or 12 months ago about
This is stuff that they don't
another round of LBO-related problems.
feel they know enough or are sure enough about to be able to
significantly downgrade some of these [unintelligible] credits, but
based on their experience their comfort zone is lower. [They cannot]
justify substantial changes in classifications but they do tell me
that they are more concerned about some of the LBO-related loans that
are in there right now. So, there are some good aspects in that they
don't see, nor do I sense from the major banks, a further black hole
with regard to the real estate situation, although in the case of some
of the small banks and some of the regional banks in the Northeast I
don't think they would be quite as confident because those
institutions have a much higher concentration in real estate loans
In the minds of everybody I talk to who has a broadthan big banks.
based business concern or lending concern, the big question is the
I come
consumer and what the consumer is thinking and going to do.
away with an impression, not unlike what Gary Stern was saying, of so
But I have this nagging feeling that any kind of a shock
far so good.
could knock consumer spending off in the wrong direction.
Now, on the credit crunch issue more generally, I think we
all have problems trying to rationalize [or to] quantify what we seem
I think that's partly because it is a financial shrinkage
to see.
Much of it is demand-side
that has many different aspects to it.
oriented; some of it is supply-side oriented. But a lot of it is a
When you
reaction of both supply and demand to excesses of the past.
try to put that all together, it's very hard to quantify; but I
continue to think that there is something of consequence going on.
Take the example that Joan Lovett referred to in her remarks about the
Chrysler matter a couple of weeks ago, where it was announced that
Chrysler was being put on a credit watch list for its commercial paper
ratings and, just on the basis of the announcement alone, within three
or four business days Chrysler had drawn down its bank lines by almost
$3-1/2 billion to replace commercial paper that it couldn't roll over.
That was just on the basis of an announcement! Now, one of the
interesting things about that is that Chrysler had fully paid backup
lines throughout the banking system. The bankers are saying to me
point blank that if somebody comes in looking to draw on their lines
and they don't have fully paid lines, forget it--the loans simply
aren't going to be made. I think that is symptomatic of this very,
very cautious, and ultimately healthy, process of shrinkage and
But any way you cut it, I think there
consolidation that's going on.
is clearly something there. Again, I go back to Mr. Boehne's comment.
On the inflation front, my sense of the situation at the
moment is that the so-called core inflation rate hasn't changed.
Maybe it is poised to go down, but when I read articles like I read in

-22-

7/2-3/90

this morning's paper about automobile price increases I have to
wonder.
In that sector everything is-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
psychiatric--

[Unintelligible]

your core inflation is

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. --identified with responding to
problems [by raising] prices.
I don't think that quite tells me we're
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
out of the woods yet on the inflation side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Well, the Fourth District is a little more like
Si Keehn's District than it is Ed Boehne's.
There is not much of a
In terms of the manufacturing
change from the last time I reported.
side, I would say we're more upbeat than the national counterpart,
perhaps because we focused on capital spending and it turns out that
in real terms capital spending plans for most firms are running
increases of between 5 and 10 percent, whereas the Commerce
Department's [number] is running at 3-1/2 percent. Again, like Si's
District, steel is relatively strong.
I don't have a really good
explanation for that.
In carbon, they are looking for a pretty good
second half. And in stainless, a major firm in our area has very
close to a record year in terms of its order book in the next two
months. Also, a good portion of this is driven by a very strong
export sector in the District. The weakness, as you might suspect, is
in retail sales and construction.
In terms of the credit crunch issue, we have talked to our
small bank advisory council and, of course, to all of the major banks.
Small bankers report no change in their standards; they are worried
about the regulators coming in. And these small banks are seeing more
deals come across now from S&Ls that have been closed; developers are
So, there are plenty of deals in
moving over and searching the banks.
front of them, but most of them aren't very good.
In terms of larger
banks, we see rather flat to modest growth in loan demand--nothing
spectacular. The one thing that I do sense in talking to my
directors, who have been and remain very concerned about inflation-and it's very apparent more recently--is that there is some concern
about the economy. When I press them on their own firms, all of them
are doing all right--some robust and some flat, but nobody's going
over the cliff. Their perception is that somebody else is going over
the cliff, but they don't know who at this point in time.
So, there
is a greater degree of caution in the minds of the business community
in the District, it seems to me, than there was just last month.
As far as the national outlook goes, we're a little stronger
in terms of real growth than the Greenbook and a little less
optimistic about reductions in inflation. I think the difficult
times, looking at what has happened to money, are making some sort of
sense out of that.
Staff [unintelligible] but the confidence level
around the forecast of velocity leaves me a little cold as well. The
problem with retail sales is also a bit of a concern. I don't like to
be much of a fine tuner; it has been going on for a time so I'm
comfortable watching things for a while.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

-23-

7/2-3/90

MR. ANGELL. I was a little struck, Jerry, when you said that
we could knock consumer spending off in the wrong direction; I was
rather startled by that. That's a new worry, because I presume you
meant it might be knocked down. And, of course, if it is knocked down
that means the saving rate is higher, and it means we would be getting
this long-awaited adjustment in household behavior. I think it's an
adjustment that comes quite naturally, given what has been showing up
in the housing sector. It's quite clear that during most of the
post-World War II economy, American households one-by-one went from
better to worse [unintelligible].
The last old word was that the more
money you borrowed to buy a house, the more money you made; and the
only sad thing was that you didn't buy a bigger house. Of course,
farmers learned that if you borrowed money to buy land or machinery,
you made more money; and the oil people learned that if you borrowed
more money to drill holes in the ground, you made more money.
One-by-one all of these notions have bit the dust; housing in a sense
is the last one. So, I'm somewhat optimistic that the U.S. saving
rate will stay at the 6 percent level, whereas the staff is
forecasting that it will fall back to 5-1/4 percent. So in this new
environment of opportunity, we get just what we've been asking for for
a long time. It does appear that what everybody said--that real
interest rates do not determine savings rates--was wrong, like most
everything else we were taught. And it does appear that we're making
some real progress.
Now, my forecast is somewhat weaker on nominal and real GNP
than the staff's, but not as much as you would think, given my 6
percent saving rate, because I do anticipate that the export sector is
I have a great deal
going to continue [to support domestic output].
[unintelligible] and if we have more capacity opportunities and we
have rather low profit margins in the domestic sector I think our
economy is responding in rather an amazing way. I just note that
hardly anyone talks about the fact that the trade deficit and the
current account deficit now are projected to be less than half of what
they were at the highest point. And it does seem quite likely now,
from my perspective of course, that we're going to move into a
balance-of-trade surplus position before my term is over. So it just
looks to me as if-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

When is your term over?

MR. ANGELL. It's a secret!
I know this sounds too
optimistic for most of you but I'll add to it by joining in with Si
Keehn, Tom Melzer, Gary Stern, and Bob Black. I also believe that
1991 is the year that we will get the rather dramatic move on
inflation numbers. The way the numbers are set I think the year-overyear CPI is not going to change much from the present 4.2 to 4.4
percent level until about next January. And then all of a sudden I
think we're going to be seeing 3 percent numbers. But you better
discount that, because I've been saying that the last two years!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, I'm also in general agreement with the
Greenbook except that for 1991 I'm not quite as optimistic about the
rate of growth, given the interest rate assumptions. I don't think we
have much room to maneuver. I think we're walking along a path that's
rather close to the edge--if not the edge of the cliff, at least the

-24-

7/2-3/90

edge of the ditch. And I believe that the downside risk is greater
than the upside risk, maybe significantly greater. I sense that this
real estate malaise is spreading. It's not contained; it's creeping
down the East Coast; we have it right here on the Potomac. And I
think that's a matter of serious concern. The loan demand that has
been cited as being relatively soft is a reflection of attitudes and
confidence--not only individual confidence but business confidence as
well. I think the publicity about taxes and the savings and loan
[bail-out] costs and the debt problems of Trump and RJR and the whole
junk bond story and all the other stories that are out there in the
press can further depress the markets. Personal consumption
expenditures are not exuberant by any means, and in a consumer-driven
economy that doesn't spell much of an increase in growth to me. The
saving rate is more likely to stay at 6 percent or even go higher
because I think consumers are far more cautious than the Greenbook
forecast would indicate. So, I think these psychological factors, if
we did happen to slip into a recession for a couple of months, would
accelerate the downhill slide. The watch words ought to be "be alert
and be cautious."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, in the brief time that I've been
on this Committee I can't remember an intermeeting period where it
seems to me that less has changed. I almost have the sense that since
May 15th we've been in a kind of suspended animation, with no
startling new strengths or weaknesses showing up. Maybe the most
important news is what didn't happen. Inflation was scary in the
first quarter; we all expected and hoped that it would slow, and
fortunately it has done that. So far the credit crunch hasn't eaten
us alive. It still could, I suppose, but usually these things have a
way of either gaining momentum or losing momentum. My sense is--and I
hope it's correct--that it is not gaining momentum. Short term, I
have some of the same concerns that Governor LaWare noted in the sense
that a couple of things that are going on are unavoidable. One is in
the area of construction. Commercial construction, housing--real
estate generally--has probably not seen the bottom yet; and I worry
about whether it could drag other things along with it excessively.
The automobile industry has been borrowing from the future for some
time and that's going to catch up with them sooner or later. And I
must say that the notion of answering slow demand with rising prices
strikes me as bizarre, and that's what they have just done. It's
clear that things are going to change if we have been in a period of
suspended animation; maybe no one will agree that we have. But
shortly we will know much more than we know so far about the fiscal
outlook. For better or worse, that's going to become clear quite
soon. And perhaps as the next year develops, we're going to know much
more about the impact of foreign events on our economy. They promise
to be profound, perhaps more so than they have been in the past. But
it seems to me that, for now at least, we can feel pretty good about
the fact that our strategy continues to look like it's working and
that we are on track: that we largely have the conditions that we had
hoped to get, and that there is a reasonable prospect that the results
flowing from that will be the ones that we had hoped for. So for the
moment, I feel that the thing to do is to sit tight and watch closely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

-25-

7/2-3/90

MR. MULLINS.
I really don't have much to add to the
extensive review given by the presidents and my fellow governors.
When I look at the data, it's clear to me that the economy is weaker
than was projected earlier, but there are no compelling signs that we
are headed for a recession. There are some positive signs, perhaps,
on the inflation front but mostly in terms of breathing a sigh of
I think
relief that the early numbers for the year were transitory.
one would have to look really hard to see strong evidence of any
I would argue that there is greater risk
breakout on the down side.
It is
on the down side. The consumer risk has been talked about.
true that the retail sales numbers were only for one month, but they
were accompanied by downward revisions for March and April, and the
breadth of that retail sales report was not too encouraging since all
Pretty soon we will know whether we will
categories fell except one.
I tend to agree with
get the bounceback we are hoping for or not.
Governor LaWare, though, that there are a lot of bad vibes coming
across to consumers through the tube and through their home prices.
And the confidence survey shows confidence to be a little low,
although there doesn't seem to be any hard evidence that there's any
kind of dive.
I also worry a little about the services sector. We have had
no real growth in employment in that sector, at least recently. And
it seems to me that sooner or later they're going to have to deal with
Inventories, the way I look at the data, show
their cost structure.
no real evidence of impending recession; the same is true for capital
goods.
Construction is obviously not in great shape. Exports have
I wonder about the buoyancy of western Europe.
been really helpful.
The industrial production numbers of Germany have not seemed to me to
be all that encouraging. On the inflation side, again, I don't see
I just went back and looked at a whole series of
any major changes.
commodity prices a year ago versus now and it looks like there's
nothing to be upset about there on the up side, and there may be some
Lumber is way up due to the spotted
encouragement on the down side.
Scrap steel was higher than I expected, perhaps
owl [unintelligible].
having to do with the auto companies thinking about strikes coming up
and so forth. The one factor, which has been discussed here a little,
that I find puzzling and concerning is the slow growth in monetary
aggregates--not only M2 and M3, but also demand deposits, which
presumably are mostly corporate demand deposits. When you look at a
period in which all the aggregates have been growing more slowly than
projected and add to that the notion of some sort of credit crunch
going on, it's conceivable that monetary conditions are implicitly
tighter than intended or projected. Over time that's going to be
helpful on inflation but perhaps [adds] some risk to growth in the
And while I
economy. So, I wonder about the implications of that.
generally would not disagree with the Greenbook, I guess that's what
makes me believe that if there is a risk, it tends to be more on the
down side than the up side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

First of all,
MS. SEGER. I have a couple of comments.
agree with Mike and the Greenbook that the economy is sluggish.
fact, I would even use the word "weak" to describe some sectors.
pleased to see some of the estimates getting down more in my
neighborhood, which is a very low number for economic growth this

I do
In
I'm
year

7/2-3/90

and no growth next year.
as well.

-26-

Maybe I'll have some company for next year

I will note just a couple of concerns that I have. Autos
have been mentioned quite a bit, and I too was surprised by the
I
announcement in today's Wall Street Journal about price hikes.
checked with two friends of mine, including one who is
and his explanation was that they
I'm not a
added on to the sticker so they can give bigger incentives.
marketing person, so you can explain to me later whether that makes
It still has a negative impact as far as the public is
sense.
concerned. And I don't think it's too bright, especially when some of
these same people have been telling me for some time that there has
been a problem with sticker shock, particularly in parts of the
country where income levels are a lot lower than they are around
Washington.
So, that's a problem. Also, the consumer debt load is a
growing problem and the auto companies have been having trouble
getting some of the would-be buyers qualified to get loans even by
their own captive finance companies. You would think that they would
bend over backwards to get the sale made, but I think that says
something. On the credit availability side, I picked up some comments
that some of the dealers themselves have been kicked out of commercial
So, credit availability is entering
banks for their floor planning.
into autos in that way rather than on the individual consumer side.
I
has been
talked with people at
expected to fill this void by providing funds for floor planning; but
because of their own problems, they're not always able to do that.
And a growing number of car dealers are having financial difficulties,
to the point of going bankrupt. The number of dealers going bankrupt
in the first 6 months of this year is equal to the number that went
into bankruptcy in 1987 and 1988 combined and is 50 percent above the
So, I think this is getting
number that went bankrupt in all of 1989.
to be a serious problem and it [unintelligible] in a couple of ways.
One is that they are not going to be around to make sales; the second
is that they're unwilling to come up with a good order stream because
they're just so stretched themselves that they cannot afford to carry
decent-sized inventories. Everything I heard I don't view as a
temporary phenomenon--something that's going to go away in the next
couple of months, unfortunately. Then, of course, the auto makers
have the UAW to negotiate with. I can't get anybody to admit, by the
way, that they're adding to production in order to stockpile; that
In fact, what I hear more is that
just does not seem to come through.
they're having a hard time getting enough orders from dealers to do
their build out just so they can handle the production for which they
already had ordered parts and supplies.
Another area I want to say a few words about is housing. I
probably deal with less-than-spectacular builders, but I don't think
the problems are all going to be resolved in a hurry--particularly in
smaller towns.
I don't believe that it is easy just to walk out and
find alternative sources of funds. Even though it would be nice to
assume that, that doesn't seem to be the case. A person
just called me this morning from California with another whole raft
of stories about small and medium-size builders who are having
problems getting financing.
In some cases they are builders of
single-family homes; others are builders of small apartments--10 to 12
unit apartments, not the big ones by developers who have been engaging
I would like to think that housing
in all sorts of wild extremes.

7/2-3/90

-27-

starts have bottomed out, Mike, but I'm not necessarily convinced that
that's the case.
Finally, on inventories, even though the aggregate numbers
may look pretty good, there are growing examples of firms in the
retailing industry, and to some extent in manufacturing, whose
inventories are creeping up above where they would like to have them.
So, these are the areas that I'm most concerned about at the moment.
In looking ahead for 1991, my problem is that I can't see what's going
to give this rather sad-sack situation a boost and turn it around,
particularly with the talk about the tax hike. I had the TV on
yesterday and it seemed to me that every program--every one of these
"Face the Nation" kinds of shows--was going into this subject of the
tax hike and President Bush breaking his pledge of no new taxes. You
would have to be deaf and a low-grade moron to have missed this. And
I think that is going to have a real impact going forward.
On inflation psychology, I talked to the head of a big paper
company and I'll just tell you what he said because I remember a year
or year and a half ago paper was one of the industries that we worried
about having shortages of capacity and that were passing out price
hikes with abandon. Anyway, he said that they have ample to excess
capacity at the moment and that there's nothing in the way of price
increases either in the works now or on the horizon. Many prices of
this particular producer are actually well below where they were a
year ago and at the moment some prices are still declining. He thinks
the rest of 1990 and 1991 should be [a period] of price stability for
their whole industry, not just for his company. There has been new
capacity added in the last year, year and a half, and there is going
to be more coming on all the way through 1991 which, of course, will
make it still tougher just to pass through any higher costs. From his
point of view inflation is not a big problem, and he doesn't hear
other business people that he speaks with mentioning inflation as a
big problem either. He thinks the so-called inflation psychology is
much more evident in the financial community than in the manufacturing
arena. And I think he's probably right. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that concludes the go-around, but
I think we have time, as the last item on this evening's agenda, for
Don Kohn to at least discuss the longer-term ranges for monetary
policy. Then we will call it an evening. Remember, we're invited to
the British Embassy for cocktails, I believe at 7:30 p.m., and dinner
thereafter. Don.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to
[Statement--see Appendix.]
tables in the Bluebook as I go along.
[Meeting recessed]

7/2-3/90

-28-

July 3, 1990--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We left off yesterday with the
completion of Don Kohn's presentation on the long-term ranges and we
are now open to questions.
MR. PARRY. The growth rates for M2 and M3 in 1990 and 1991,
particularly 1991, assume that the special factors that impacted 1990
will persist in 1991.
Is that correct, particularly with regard to
M3?
MR. KOHN. Yes, especially with regard to M3.
We are
assuming that the thrifts continue to shrink in 1991 and shrink at
The
close to the rate that they did in 1990, or a little less.
marginally solvent ones will remain under pressure and there are
enough assets and liabilities out there in the conservator thrifts to
keep the RTC going at a pretty good clip for the next six quarters at
least.
So, we built in a continuing shrinkage of the thrift industry
and [continuing] activity of the RTC.
We built in moderate growth in
bank credit--about 6-1/2 to 7 percent--which would be a slight pickup
from now. So, we have diminishing effects relative to the second
We don't have that built
quarter when we had no growth in M2 and M3.
in; we have that moving down or decreasing over time.
But there are
still some effects, yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no other questions, I would
like the members now to address the issue of the 1990 ranges--whether
they should be the current ones or perhaps the alternate ranges--and I
also would appreciate having the members' views on the 1991 ranges
We will have to vote separately on
with respect to M2, M3, and debt.
the two sets of ranges, but I think it would be useful in this
discussion around the table for the members to combine both years.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to
It's always good, of
compliment the staff on the excellent Bluebook.
course, but the provision of the extensive longer-term alternatives
was very helpful. Before I turn to the longer-term ranges, let me say
a few words about the alternative [strategies] that were set out in
the Bluebook. As I look at those, the first two scenarios are the
only ones that seem consistent with our policy of trying to push down
inflation; the third does not really accomplish our objective. The
first scenario seems to me to be representative of the policy of
gradualism that we have been following. I certainly endorse that
It is a policy that
policy; it is a policy that we ought to continue.
is very frustrating in the sense that it does not produce very quick
results, but I think we need to accept that anyway.
It seems to me
that a more aggressive policy at this time really would jeopardize the
achievement of our long-term goal of price stability. One could argue
about the credibility associated with a more aggressive stance, but
I'm not convinced that that's a practical solution.
I think we ought
to be very pleased essentially with where we are with respect to
policy. We obviously would like to have had [better] results in terms
of the inflation numbers, but that will come if we exercise patience.
I think we've done very well considering the posture of fiscal policy
over this time.
With that as a preamble on where I'm coming from, let me turn
I would favor keeping the range for M2 at its present
to the ranges.

-29-

7/2-3/90

Tampering with it six months into
level of 3 to 7 percent for 1990.
the year would reflect a degree of precision that we don't really
There's a lot of uncertainty surrounding M2, and I think that
have.
any potential shortfall for 1990 can be explained when you testify.
Now, with respect to M2 for 1991, I realize that as a signal effect
we've had a tradition of generally lowering the range to indicate our
continued attention to inflation. But with all of the uncertainty
surrounding velocity and the state of M2, I would leave that range
alone. Also, we have projections from the staff that it may grow more
quickly anyway. So, I don't think it would be good to change the M2
range either for this year or for 1991; I would keep it at 3 to 7
I would keep the M3 range the same in 1990 as well. An
percent.
argument can be made to reduce that range for 1991; but again, given
all of the uncertainty surrounding the S&L situation and velocity and
all the things that Don indicated, I think the argument is stronger
So, I would not change the
for keeping the range for M3 the same.
ranges either in 1990 or 1991 for either M2 or M3; nor would I change
debt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. I concur, Mr. Chairman, with Bob Forrestal's
statement about how useful these longer-run [Bluebook] simulations are
because I like to look at monetary policy from a particularly long-run
viewpoint. As I studied these, I found myself thinking about the Neal
Resolution. If we can assume hypothetically--I'm sure it's purely
hypothetical--that the Neal Resolution would pass Congress this year,
we would be mandated to bring inflation down to zero by the year 1995,
Since we supported this
the last year shown in the simulations.
resolution publicly in part of the testimony [presented by] many of
us, the deceleration shown in the simulations in strategy II would
seem to be the very least that we ought to be aiming for over the long
run.
Two percent is certainly not zero, but it's considerably closer
than the 3-1/4 percent that we would have in the baseline simulation.
And the simulations for strategy II do suggest that GNP growth would
be very modest over this extended period of time in order to get
inflation down to the 2 percent level over the five-year period. But
as we are well aware, there are various kinds of models and the
I think
Board's model is not a particularly forward-looking model.
one that took more consideration of the rational expectations [theory]
might show that there would be a [higher] rate of real growth
consistent with the progress against inflation that is shown in
strategy II.
In any case, the inflation rate in strategy II seems to
me to be the minimum progress that would be consistent with our stated
objectives.
To help achieve this minimum progress--and I would hope
we could do even better although I'm doubtful about that--I think we
ought to reduce the ranges for M2 steadily over this entire period of
time, with the goal of eventually bringing them down to 2-1/2 or 3
percent no later than 1995.
I had this sort of thinking in mind when
I argued--I felt very persuasively but later found out very
unconvincingly--in February that we ought to go to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
percent for 1990.
So, I would like to see us do that, and we can
explain it on the basis of its behavior. There is some risk, I
suppose, that some might think that was a tightening move, which I
In any event, I do feel very strongly,
would not consider it to be.
whatever we do with the 1990 ranges, that we ought to cut them for
I think the adoption of
1991--in the case of M2, to 2 to 6 percent.
such a range would send the public a pretty clear signal that we have

7/2-3/90

-30-

a continued firm commitment to our anti-inflationary strategy. And it
may be especially helpful to send this signal right now because of the
recent fiscal developments and the likelihood that we're going to get
added political pressure to ease policy aggressively if anything
significant comes out of this. Now, if we did reduce the M2 ranges,
it obviously makes sense to lower the M3 ranges too, although I really
don't think that does a lot for us operationally. I'm pretty
sympathetic to Governor Angell's suggestion that we eliminate M3. But
I do think the staff produced a good memo that suggests that there is
some marginal value in maintaining it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Yes. Even though I proposed eliminating M3, and
I hold that position as the proper policy, I do not believe this is
the right time to make that move. I think it would signal something
we don't want to signal or to deal with at this time. In regard to
the 1990 ranges, I wish to reaffirm the ranges adopted previously. I
believe it's better for us to look at the target ranges as targets
that we're planning to hit, based upon the assumptions we had at the
beginning of the year, and then explain why we didn't hit them than it
is for us to move the targets to hit the growth path. So, I am not-and never have been before--very open to changing at mid-year. On the
1991 ranges, I agree with Bob Black that strategy II is the only
alternative that's consistent with our stated objectives. Frankly, I
wonder why I wasn't able to see a year ago that M2 growth might not be
larger. But I really anticipated a somewhat weaker economy this year
than we really ended up with, and my guess was that we might need the
3 to 7 percent for this year. But it seems to me that the behavior of
households has changed and that many households, for example, find
that they probably want to hold smaller balances and hold less nontax-exempt interest-rate debt. And as the consumer saving rate has
risen, that in a way brings with it a desire to hold a lower balance
largely because of consumers' intolerance for debt, which I think
finally has caught up. It does seem to me also that there may be
other behavioral changes in people's willingness to hold M2. So I
believe it's quite consistent to choose alternative I and alternative
II and to choose for 1991 2 to 6 percent for M2. Now, I would also
choose 2 to 6 percent for M3 on the basis that I have a commitment to
only lower these ranges and never to raise them. And even though we
may think that 0 to 4 percent makes sense for M3 for alternative II
for 1991, I would hate to see us chase it down to that aberration and
then end up moving it back. So, I prefer to leave the consistency of
2 to 6 percent for both M2 and M3.
I recognize that there could be a
scenario developed in which M2's growth path in 1991 might push the
upper boundary of that 2 to 6 percent; that kind of risk is there.
I'm very, very pleased, Mr. Chairman, that we've been able to get M2
growth down from those 9-1/2 percent [rates] that we had in 1985 and
1986 and to squeeze that M2 growth down without ever having the
monetary shock that all of our critics thought we were producing.
We're looking at four-year average growth of M2 of 5 percent, threeyear average growth of M2 of 4-1/2 percent, two-year growth of M2 of
about 4.2 percent, and one-year growth, I suppose, of less than 5
percent right now. So, we have the one-year, two-year, three-year,
and four-year all there together and we're going to be able to get it
to the 2 to 6 percent range without a monetary shock. It's just
almost an ideal situation. On the debt, I'd use 5 to 9 percent.

-31-

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, I agree with everything that President
Forrestal, President Black, and Governor Angell have said. I think
that we are just about where we want to be, perhaps in the aggregates
as well as in the real economy. There is just an awful large number
of unknowns out there with respect to the real economy, the behavior
of velocity, and what is going on in financial markets. From a policy
perspective, I come out with a somewhat different result, but it's
largely a matter of how one presents these things. I agree that
strategies I and II are the only relevant choices, given what we need
to accomplish. This really is a matter of velocity. In terms of how
one presents this in testimony to the [Congressional] Committees and
how it's read in the broader financial public community, there is some
value to indicating that we're willing to change targets as velocity

changes and to indicating that these [ranges] do not have [the
certainty] of a physical science by a long shot. It makes it easier
when we do have a problem to have indicated beforehand that we made
these adjustments because of changes in velocity. Generally I also
think that we should try to have targets that are somewhere in the
middle of the range that we adopt rather than going up [to Congress]
and extensively explaining that we're not going to be in the range but
I can see arguments on both
that's because of all of these [reasons].
sides of that, but that would be my preference. Given that and given
the slight change in or flat velocity between 1990 and 1991, I would
be in favor of the staff's alternative shown on page 17 [of the
Bluebook] for both 1990 and 1991. Because we would be making a
substantial change this year, I think that would require a change next
year given that we expect a more normal pattern of economic growth in
relation to velocity. Having said that, I would not be uncomfortable
with--but I'm very worried about how to fine tune this image for
1990--changing, say, to an M2 range of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and
whatever corresponding M3 range would be involved and then going to
these ranges for 1991. But just as a matter of presentation, I'd
prefer that we go up [to Congress] now and explain that there have
been these changes and explain what our longer-term expectations are
and how the monetary targets have to be adjusted for changes in
velocity. So, that's the direction I would take.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

President Syron, what about debt?

On debt, I'm comfortable with 5 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, according to our projections, the
present 3 to 7 percent range seems likely to accommodate the
uncertainty about M2 over the remainder of this year, although it's
likely to end up toward the bottom part of that range. Therefore, I
recommend that we reaffirm our M2 target for 1990. For 1991, at least
based upon our projections, I would recommend a 1/2 point reduction in
the M2 target, but I certainly wouldn't have any problem if we reduced
it a full point to 2 to 6 percent. On the basis of our projections a
[reduction of] 1/2 point would accommodate the growth of M2 that we
would see and put M2 exactly in the middle [of that lower range].
With regard to M3, the special factors that we've seen probably will
continue to depress M3 in the second half of the year. And, of
course, that's going to place the aggregate well below the current

7/2-3/90

-32-

range in December.

But I prefer to retain the present M3 range for

1990 and just explain to the [Congressional] Committee that there are
some very special factors--and uncertainty as to how long they're
going to last as well--that may cause it to end up below the lower

end. For 1991, I would suggest a reduction of 1 percentage point in
the M3 range. Again, that would be consistent with the forecast of M3
that we have for 1991.
I must admit, though, that the uncertainties
associated with M3 are so great that my confidence in that range or
the range that is in the alternative in the Bluebook is not very high.
With regard to debt, 5 to 9 percent in 1990 and 4 to 8 percent in 1991
would be appropriate in my view.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Where I start on all this, Mr. Chairman, is with
the M2 growth rates that Governor Angell enumerated. We are well into
our fourth year of moderate growth in that aggregate and I think it's
important that we sustain that kind of performance. It's important
principally because that's what is going to get us to our long-run
objectives and to the kind of overall economic performance that we
want to achieve in the long run. So having said that, I think we
should lower the ranges for 1991, consistent with the alternatives
specified here. I would apply that to all the variables although, as
I said before, M2 is the one that I at least focus on principally. I
think it's important that we consolidate what we have accomplished
over the past several years, and in my judgment that's the kind of
range that will help us do that. With regard to 1990, the current
year, I feel a little less strongly about what we ought to do with the
ranges. Despite some of the mysteries surrounding what has happened
to M2 [and M3] recently, it seems to me that we have enough
information with regard to the thrift contraction and so forth that it
probably does make sense to lower the ranges for 1990 as well. That's
where I would come out with regard to that issue. As I think Don
mentioned yesterday, and certainly we're all aware of it, if we were
to get some meaningful budget package and a meaningful shift in fiscal
policy--and that's a big "if"--we might want to reexamine all this. I
certainly wouldn't prejudge where we would come out were that to
happen; that's going to depend on an awful lot of things, including
progress toward our objective and what's happening to market rates and
bank offering rates, and the list goes on and on. So, at this point I
think we just have to put that issue aside and be prepared to deal
with it if and when it becomes appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So you would reaffirm the 1990 ranges?

MR. STERN. No, I would lower those because I think we have
enough information to make the case that that's the sensible thing to
do.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

So you'd have 2 to 6 percent in both

years, then?

MR. STERN.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

MR. STERN.

What about M3?

I'd lower that as well.

-33-

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

To the 0 to 4 percent?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to backtrack just a minute and
re-ask the question that [Don Kohn] raised relative to this issue.
Whether or not we can forecast quarter-by-quarter what the level of
RTC resolutions will be, I feel uncomfortable arguing that the
If in
[anticipated trends of] the thrift changes alter our ranges.
fact we knew about it and were able to make that judgment at the
beginning of the year, then it can't be the thrift [developments] per
se that create the [deviations from] our target.
MR. STERN. Well, I have two reactions. One is that I don't
think we felt that we knew the magnitude of the thrift [effects] with
any precision. But I don't think it's just the question of the
thrifts. The year is half over, so in some sense we have the 3-1/2
percent or so growth of M2 behind us for six months. We're looking at
relatively modest projections for M2 growth for the third quarter as
well.
Those may turn out to be wrong, admittedly; but if they are in
the ballpark, we have pretty modest growth for about 3/4 of the year
and that's a fair amount of information it seems to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me tell you the argument we
would get up on the Hill. We're supposed to run monetary policy, at
least in theory, on the basis of the targets that we set.
If we set
targets on the basis of the monetary policy that we run, they will
argue that we have it backwards. Adjusting [the ranges] because of
the fact that the money supply is veering off our targets is not an
acceptable view up there. That's the reason I feel uncomfortable with
this form of explanation. If there's a proved [or] partly anticipated
But I don't know
structural change, then that's a valid statement.
how we can argue that because, in fact, the degree of [thrift]
resolutions going on is not all that different from what we were
telling the Congress they were going to be.
It's just that the RTC
didn't even do it for a while and finally they are trying to catch up
at this particular stage.
MR. STERN. Well, I guess I can't judge the degree of
precision with which Congress views this [target-setting].
I've
always viewed it as clearly having a wide range of uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we can also raise some serious
questions about the targets themselves; but I'm just talking about the
issue of what's in the law and how we handle it.
I hate to interrupt
at this stage, but I need to ask the question of Don: How do we handle
this?
MR. KOHN. Well, I can't tell you exactly what we were
assuming for thrift resolutions in the face of the decline in thrift
assets last February. I'm sure that the staff was not assuming as
much as we got in the second quarter. But I think maybe the more
fundamental point here is that, whatever our assumptions were, we have
never tried to set monetary targets in a period in which the
depository institutions system was shrinking the way it is now. This
is unprecedented.
I agree with your point and Governor Mullins' point
that we knew something was going on; we knew things were going to
happen.
I hope I'm not being too defensive if I say that in this

7/2-3/90

-34-

situation it's very difficult to judge how the whole thing is going to
play out. One can easily get surprised and have it then seen as more
of a velocity shift or a structural shift rather than a violation of
the underlying policy. But there is some of the other too because
we've had very weak bank credit growth; some of that may be a
restraint on the economy, and one can't excuse that altogether. So,
there is a mixture, I think, and it's not easy to sort out.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, if I can follow-up: In thinking
back to where we were when putting together the flow-of-funds
projection at the beginning of the year, our focus was very much on
our view that the thrift industry was going to contract and that that
would result in some disruption of the mortgage market. We were very
much concerned about who would pick up the mortgages. We anticipated
that banks would pick up many of the liabilities the thrifts were
giving up. I think we were sort of right in our analysis of the
mortgage market effects of the thrift institution change, but we
didn't anticipate the weakening in bank credit. And at that time we
didn't anticipate all of the hits on bank capital that would arise as
real estate loans were recognized to be less valuable and as these
other events occurred, especially in New England, that affected bank
capital and the growth of bank assets. That was another surprise. So
we've had some significant surprises relative to what we were thinking
on the supply side of the credit market and at depository institutions
in particular.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

Let me play Senator Foghorn or whomever.

Is he in the Senate?

MR. ANGELL. I doubt you'd be very successful.
too much a part of you!

"Fedspeak" is

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're right. The argument will be made
that that is precisely what the targets are for. In the event that
the economy is weakening and money supply slows, the expectation up on
the Hill is that the Fed would then ease to push them back [on track].
MR. PRELL. But the economy is roughly on the track that we
charted at the beginning of the year. The central tendency of the
forecasts at this point looks very similar to what we had, except that
the inflation rate is a little higher. Debt is on target, around the
middle of its range, and I think that's what we indicated. In a sense
it's this depository element, which is so important for the monetary
aggregates, that has been disturbed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What you're saying is that it was misestimated with respect to things on which we had no historical
experience?
MR. PRELL.

Right, so I think there's a rationale--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh! Now, that's more like it.
It's got
to be something on which there was a judgment about how markets would
behave under certain structural changes--not economic changes, not the
business cycle. We took a shot at it; we didn't quite hit it; and we
are readjusting. That's a credible argument.

-35-

7/2-3/90

MR. PRELL. Also, the Committee should have to decide what it
is trying to communicate [via] the monetary aggregates. Are they
closer to ultimate objectives for your purpose in policymaking or are
they just instruments? In a sense it's as if you were shooting at the
moon; you set your direction initially and then found you were off
target. It seems to me completely reasonable to say you adjusted your
instruments rather than shoot past the moon and then explain later why
you missed. That may be an exaggeration of the differences here in
the way one can view it, but I think you have to decide just how
important the monetary aggregates are per se as a representation of
your policy.
MR. HOSKINS. Don, I think you mentioned the other day that
we did mid-year adjustments twice before. Do you remember in what
kinds of circumstances and for what rationales?
MR. KOHN. Well, I think they were both M1 adjustments; the
M1 ranges were increased [because] we had velocity surprises. They
happened to be in the direction of increases rather than decreases.
MR. BLACK.

Which were easy to explain to Congress at the

time--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. For 1990, I would keep M2 and debt the same, but
I would make a technical adjustment on M3. The rationale for keeping
M2 and debt the same is that we are fundamentally on target, that
there are uncertainties, but the ranges that we have, with a 4-point
spread, are wide enough to accommodate that. I think that conveys a
message that we are fundamentally happy with the basic thrust of
policy. M3 I would adjust technically, largely for the argument that
was just given. We have a target for M3 that we almost surely cannot
hit because we mis-estimated what it ought to be at the beginning of
the year. We mis-estimated these deposit flows and I think we ought
simply to face up to it and make that adjustment. So, I would go with
a 0 to 4 percent range for M3 in 1990.
For 1991, I think it is important to continue on this longerrun track of lowering the aggregates, conveying the notion that we are
serious about working inflation down. I would lower the ranges for M2
and debt by 1/2 percentage point so that we would end up with 2-1/2 to
6-1/2 percent for M2 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for debt. I would
keep M3 the same, 0 to 4 percent, on grounds that we made a technical
adjustment now and we ought to wait and see whether that's accurate.
If we have to adjust it again, we have to adjust it again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to join those
who start from the premise that strategy II on the long run--the one
labeled "tighter" [in the Bluebook]--is consistent with our objective.
I also would join those who have indicated that where we are today is
about where we want to be and about where we had projected in the
past.
I think it's rather remarkable. With that background, I would
prefer to take the opportunity that I think is now available to
ratchet down M2, simply because over the long term 6 percent growth in
M2 is the maximum growth that we can sustain and still achieve the

7/2-3/90

objectives that we're looking for. As a result, I would ratchet down
M2 by 1 percentage point on both the top and the bottom for both 1990
and 1991, simply taking advantage of the window that seems to me to be
available. With regard to M3, there's some debate as to whether or
not we should keep M3.
There are those who have spoken on that in the
past--particularly Governor Angell, who says that he would not pursue
his feeling about doing away with M3.
I would want to keep M3.
But
as has been indicated in the discussions before by the staff and
others, it seems that M3 needs to be adjusted because of the
uncertainties that have occurred.
I don't like the proposal by the
staff of a 0 to 4 percent range; I don't like the 0. As a result, I
would like to see an adjustment to a 1 to 5 percent range for M3 and I
would maintain debt at 5 to 9 percent.
I would do both of those
adjustments, to M2 and M3, now rather than later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Debt?

MR. GUFFEY.

Debt at 5 to 9 percent.

MR. ANGELL.

Both years?

MR. GUFFEY.

Both years.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm persuaded that to go to
strategy II may accelerate us a little toward that ditch I was talking
about yesterday. So, I would rather stay with strategy I. Consistent
with that, I would like to keep the range of 3 to 7 percent for M2 for
1990 but reduce it to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for 1991.
I agree with
President Boehne that we can make a rational and credible argument for
a reduction in the M3 range and we should do it now. I don't get so
disturbed by 0 because I don't consider it nothing; I just consider it
[another] point on a range. So far as debt is concerned, the 5 to 9
percent for 1990 is acceptable, but I would move it down to 4-1/2 to
8-1/2 percent for 1991.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

For M3 in 1991, 0 to 4 percent?

Yes, sorry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

I
MR. MELZER. I have a couple of general thoughts on this.
would say first of all, in terms of long-run strategies, that I would
Generally, I think there is a lot more
be in favor of strategy II.
informational value in the ranges if we gear them to what we believe
long-term trends are.
In other words, I get very concerned about
[moving around] these ranges over time. Given where we are and where
we're headed, there is very much the prospect of ratcheting these
ranges down at some point to accommodate some short-term velocity
development and then having to bump them back up.
And I think that
becomes very confusing. Personally, I like to think of these ranges
much as Bob Black does--in terms of where we want them to be in a
long-term sense--and I'd move them gradually toward that.
I guess
that view leads to two points: (1) with respect to problems in the
current year, I would [allow actual growth outside] the ranges and
explain that and not reset them; and (2) as to the future year,

7/2-3/90

-37-

particularly with something like M3 which I think has limited value
anyway, I would set a range that's reasonable in the context of what
we think the long-term trends are, knowing full well that actual
growth probably will miss it.
I'd telegraph that right up front and
indicate that we are going to be putting less weight on it for that
reason.
The other point I would make is that while I'm in favor of
strategy II, I don't think we have all that far to go.
If you take
the number Bob Black threw out--around 3 percent--as what we might
want to get in terms of M2 growth, that would assume roughly 3 percent
potential growth in the economy, with roughly 0 percent velocity.
Taking that as the center point of the range, that means we have the
potential of eventually getting down to 1 to 5 percent on the range.
Therefore, we'd be taking a pretty big bite out of what we have left
if we ratchet the ranges down a full percentage point right now.
So,
all of that put together would lead me simply to reaffirm the 1990
ranges. And in 1991, I would ratchet M2 down by 1/2 percentage point
and, if it is in a longer-term sense consistent with that, do the same
with M3 and debt.
I look to the staff for guidance on that, but
that's essentially where I am.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, Bob Forrestal summed it up well
for me when he started us off this morning. I think our strategy is
on track. There are good prospects that it will work acceptably and I
think we have reason to be fairly pleased so far.
And I would like to
give that strategy every chance to work. I think that strategy
definitely calls for an inflation result on the strategy II matrix,
but I'm not quite sure what necessarily is going to be required in the
way of aggregates growth to achieve that. As far as 1990 goes, I am
definitely of the school of targeting and budgeting that would say we
shouldn't shift in the middle of the game.
If we are missing the
targets, then we should explain why we are missing them but not shift
the target at that point in time.
So for that reason, I would
reaffirm all the ranges for 1990 and, if we miss on M3, explain the
technical reasons why that happened. For 1991 I would stay with 3 to
7 percent for M2 because, given where it is now and where it looks
like it is going to be in the rest of 1990, I would not be comfortable
with the prospect of having an even lower number, 2 percent, be in the
range of acceptability.
So, I would leave the target for M2 in 1991
at the 3 to 7 percent we presently have.
I have been convinced by Don
and others that the M3 realities have changed. As a consequence, for
1991 I would go to the 0 to 4 percent range because of those technical
realities.
On the debt side, I could be comfortable with either 4 to
8 or 5 to 9 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, for reasons that I think are clear
from the discussion, we are going through a period where the
uncertainties are particularly high with regard to the aggregates.
While it's clear we will be low in the range for M2 and below the
range for M3, I think changing at this point implies a [degree of
certainty] that we just don't have. Therefore, I'd be inclined to
maintain the 1990 ranges as they are.
In your testimony you can
explain it.
It does seem to me that the exchange that you had with

7/2-3/90

Mike and Don a moment ago begins to provide a good basis for reducing
the ranges. First, Don's model and our models are not perfect; they
certainly give as good an educated guess as we can come up with as to
how things are going to work out.
So, I do think there's a basis for

lowering [the ranges].
Secondly, Don used the word "symbolism" in his
text and I think that is important. In effect, it's why we should
continue the program of lowering the ranges. So, I would lower the
1991 ranges. Specifically, for M2 I'd be a bit more comfortable with
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. I don't feel strongly about it, but I have a
minor preference there. I think we definitely should continue
targeting M3. In a period of uncertainty, the more alternatives we
have the better off we are; therefore, I'd continue M3. Somehow
reducing it to 0 to 4 percent seems like a big drop; I have a minor
preference for 1 to 5 percent. I don't feel very strongly about debt,
but it does seem to me that the economy may begin to pick up next year
as the forecast suggests that it might; therefore, I'd prefer to keep
the debt range at 5 to 9 percent for next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I will have to confess that
the arguments are very persuasive for leaving the ranges the way they
are for 1990 or for changing them!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's almost as good as your colleague
across the way quoting that famous philosopher who said that 95
percent of the putts don't go in the hole!
MR. BOYKIN. Being forced to have to take some [position]
here, I would lean a little toward the alternative of reducing [the
ranges for] 1990, although I don't know how to sort through how to
explain that and how it would be read. So, that's a slight but not a
strong preference; I could certainly accept leaving the 1990 ranges
the way they are. Now, I do have a little more definite feeling on
1991. Of course, I agree with continuing to indicate our long-term
commitment toward reducing inflation. And I would favor 1991 ranges
of 2 to 6 percent for M2, 0 to 4 percent for M3; and 4 to 8 percent
for debt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. I favor strategy II for the long term. I think
that [presentation of alternative strategies] was nicely done. I
think we ought to be comfortable, as many people around this table
have already indicated, that we have made good progress toward that
[objective], probably more than I thought we would early on. I agree
with Tom Melzer's point that it is important not to bounce the ranges
around. I would not want to see them have to be moved up because of
suspected shifts in velocity. But that doesn't pose a particular
problem for me since I wanted a 2 to 6 percent range [for M2] anyway.
I have some concerns about the aggregates and about the point that
Dave Mullins made--that they all are sending us the same signal and
they are slowing rather dramatically. But since I was comfortable in
February with 2 to 6 percent, I think we ought to go to 2 to 6
percent. There is a rationale to explain that: It is our best
estimate of where we are at this point in time and I think Congress
ought to have that information. I would accept all the other ranges-for M3 and debt--under the alternative for 1990.

-39-

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN, That is, 2 to 6 percent on M2, 0 to 4
percent on M3, and 5 to 9 percent on debt?
MR. HOSKINS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. HOSKINS.
the Bluebook].

Yes.
You want 4 to 8 percent for 1991?
The 1991 alternative as listed by the staff [in

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. HOSKINS.

5 to 9 percent.

Well, for 1991 it's 4 to 8 percent.
It's 4 to 8 percent for 1991.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Both 1990 and 1991?

Let me get this straight.

I want the staff's alternatives both for 1990

and 1991.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
percent for both 1990 and 1991.
MR. HOSKINS.

It's 2 to 6, 0 to 4, and 5 to 9

No, it's 4 to 8 percent [for debt] for 1991.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, something I'm looking at has a
mistake on it. Governor Seger.
MS. SEGER. Well, like everybody else here, I think it's
great to be a long-range thinker and strategist. I'm also looking
backward 6 years to the first Humphrey-Hawkins meeting I attended in
1984. Just to remind you folks, we had an M2 range of 6 to 9 percent
and we have brought it down to 3 to 7 percent, which is quite a
significant change. The actual M2 growth ran 7.7 percent for 1984 and
we are estimating it at around 3-1/2 percent this year. I think
that's very significant. Also, these ranges have been moved down very
consistently; we haven't had them popping around like popcorn, and I
think that's good also. On M3 we went from a 6 to 9 percent range
down to where we are now, 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, and the actual
growth went from 10-1/2 percent down to an estimated 1.1 percent this
year. I'm just mentioning this because there has been a very
significant amount of squeezing out of liquidity in the economy over
that period. So, having pointed that out and looking ahead with
respect to the strategies, I'm a baseline strategy supporter. With
all due respect to the forecasters, I'm just not convinced, looking
out 5 years at the additional inflation relief we would get from going
the tighter route, that it's worth taking a chance on. I realize
that's a value judgment; but it's the way I feel. I'm also not
convinced that tightening policy will generate greater growth out in
1995. So, I would go with strategy I.
In terms of the ranges for 1990, I've never supported
changing the ranges in the middle of the year; I just don't think it's

-40-

7/2-3/90

a good idea.
I believe that these ought to be set with some idea of
stability and [we should] just keep moving them downward; we can pause
[in implementing the] decline, but I just think it's very disruptive
to have too much volatility in the ranges themselves.
So, I would be
for keeping the ranges where there are, including the M3 range of
2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent.
And instead of just dismissing this
[shortfall] as a technicality because of RTC activities, I think a big
part of the credit crunch story is in here. Maybe we ought to look at
this and ask ourselves whether we should be satisfied with a 1 percent
increase in M3 for 1990.
If many people up on the Hill are continuing
to get letters from their unhappy constituents, they might be asking
that same question or a similar one.
So, I would support keeping the
same ranges for this year that we established earlier. And for 1991,
I also would keep the same ranges for the main reason that we have
another crack at these in February. There are a lot of uncertainties
about velocity and the economy in general--the RTC activities and a
whole lot of other things.
Therefore, there's something to be said
for hanging in there with the existing ranges and then, with six
months' additional information and knowledge, if we're off we can
adjust them at the next Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a general comment first,
and that is that I cannot quite shake the feeling that there may be
something going on here that's a little more real. Even all the
discussion about the RTC represents something very real; and what it
represents is that in the prior period there was a heck of a lot of
bad debt created in the financial system. So, it's not just a kind of
accounting change. What I keep toying with in my mind is that there
is perhaps a small possibility that we are going through a phase here
where this retrenchment of the financial system, as symbolized by the
RTC and the slow growth of bank credit and the slowdown of overall
debt, is something quite real and something that need not even be
transitory. If you look at the great bulk of experience over recent
years, we have had this very substantial disconnection, for example,
And
between the growth of debt in the economy and the growth of GNP.
it turns out that a lot of that disconnection reflects the fact that a
lot of that debt was bad debt.
It's now showing up as RTC and bank
write-offs and junk bond write-offs, etc.
So, there may be something
here that goes beyond the so-called transitory factors.
I tend to take a rather eclectic view of all these Ms, but I
am struck that even Mr. Kohn can't explain, no matter how hard he
tries, a sizable part of the shortfall in M2 in the second quarter.
So, again, I'm not quite sure that we fully grasp, or at least that I
fully grasp, all that's going on here in these relationships.
For
that reason I think we do have to be a bit more cautious about the
interpretations that we put on these things.
Now, with that general point in mind, Mr. Chairman, for 1990
I would keep M2 where it is at 3 to 7 percent and keep debt where it
is at 5 to 9 percent. For 1991, I'd be thinking in terms of 2-1/2 to
6-1/2 percent for M2 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for debt.
For M3, I'm
quite prepared to let you do whatever you feel most comfortable doing.
But even in the framework of letting you do whatever you feel most
comfortable doing, it's possible that a compromise--in the interest of
cohesion in the Committee--might be to put it at 1 to 5 percent for

7/2-3/90

-41-

both years. But I have no strong feeling on that at all; I'm quite
prepared to let you explain it because basically you've got to explain
it one way or another. Either you have to explain why we changed it
or you have to explain why we didn't change it.
And I would leave
that to you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. My preference would be to leave the 1990 ranges
I don't like the perception of moving the
essentially the same.
targets to fit the data; I think monetary aggregates are pretty
It also bothers me--the point
important and not just instruments.
that the Vice Chairman made--that there's an unexplained component of
this.
If we really could explain it as just a portfolio shift from
one part to another part, I'd feel a little more comfortable with it.
I think we ought to have the burden of explaining what's going on, and
I generally agree with Tom's point that we ought to set ranges based
upon long-term factors and have the discipline put on us of explaining
aberrations rather than shift the ranges to try to fit the
aberrations.
So, for 1990, I would keep the same ranges.
On 1991, again, I don't like the idea of moving the targets
around. I am concerned with lowering the tentative targets for 1991
in the current environment of fiscal uncertainty as well as the
uncertainty of what really is happening to the monetary aggregates.
The way I would view the [appropriate] stance for monetary policy, I
would hate for us to come back and tentatively have to move the ranges
in the opposite direction. Also, I agree with Governor Kelly on M2;
I'm not entirely comfortable with the notion that 2 percent would be
So, I would prefer that the M2 range for 1991 be kept at
acceptable.
3 to 7 percent, although to be honest with you--maybe because I'm new
on the Board and I have less courage than the old warriors--I wouldn't
be uncomfortable moving it down 1/2 percentage point. On M3, I still
would prefer to try to have a range that is more consistent with what
we expect it to be over the longer term. I think the RTC is going to
go in fits and starts. When the new guy gets in there, I wouldn't be
surprised to see a period of time in which there is not a lot of
So, I
action--a period in which they gear up and change strategies.
would prefer not moving that range to 0 to 4 percent, but keeping it
I wouldn't fight keeping it
at more the long-term average range.
where it is, but I would feel comfortable with 2 to 6 percent, which
would require the Chairman to explain the deviations in 1991 as well.
For debt I think 5 to 9 percent would be fine and I could [accept] a
4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent range as well. So, my general stance is that
we ought to stick with the targets, especially as long as there is
uncertainty.
If there were no unexplained component, then I would
I guess I'm a little
feel much better about shifting the targets.
If we move the
more cautious about 1991, given the current stance.
ranges down, [we might] then find ourselves in a position of having to
consider a move back.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I have here in front of me a
set of numbers [on the members' preferences], which led me to ask
whether the coffee was ready. But frankly, whether it is or not, we
will have a short recess.
[Coffee break]

-42-

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our abacuses evolved the following
results, which I will eventually put to an official vote: There is for
1990 an overwhelming balance [of preferences] for no change for the M2
range; a marginal [preference to] shift toward 0 to 4 percent for M3;
and overwhelming, if not unanimous, support for keeping debt
unchanged. For 1991, it's not that we're all over the place; we are
close.
I inferred with great insight, because that's what it
required, that the mode or mean was something resembling 2-1/2 to
6-1/2 percent for M2.
The predominance of 0 to 4 percent for M3 in
1991 was rather large, and for debt it looks to be 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent.
So, what I shall do is to call for two votes, one for 1990
and one for 1991.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, there is language in the Bluebook
suggested, if the Committee did decide to reduce the 1990 range for M3
and wanted to consider special language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, Norm, why don't you read it?

MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from page 4 starting with line 72
if you're using the draft directive; if you're using the Bluebook it's
page 27, paragraph 29.
"In furtherance of these objectives the
Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had established in
February for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1989 to the fourth quarter of 1990. The Committee also
retained the monitoring range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it
had set for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With regard
to M3, the Committee recognized that the ongoing restructuring of
thrift depository institutions had depressed its growth relative to
spending and total credit, though to an uncertain extent. Taking
account of the outlook for unusually strong M3 velocity, the Committee
decided to reduce the 1990 range to 0 to 4 percent."
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, since the other items seem to be
compromises, I wonder why there isn't room for a compromise on M3, as
the Vice Chairman of the Committee suggested. That is, the 1 to 5
percent range does accommodate what we expect to happen in 1990, I
think, and it increases the odds for those of us who do not want to
vote for an increase in the range to have a better chance of not
having to do so.
You did not have a majority vote, as I counted, on
the 0 to 4 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's correct;

it was a very close

showing.
MR. ANGELL. So, I'm just wondering why we couldn't take the
compromise between those of us who are for 2 to 6 percent and those
who are for 0 to 4 percent and come out with 1 to 5 percent.
MR. KELLEY.

If that is a substitute motion, I will second

it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was about to suggest that we do this
officially. I will read it as 0 to 4 percent; you propose an
amendment to raise it to 1 to 5 percent and we'll vote on that
particular amendment. You may well be right that there is support for
that.
I was puzzled a little about the reasons that we had discussed
earlier about the restructuring of the thrift depository institutions.

-43-

7/2-3/90

[I'd suggest adding] "more than anticipated" to the phrase "depressed
its growth relative to spending and total credit."
I
Well, getting into this is a kind of trap.
MR. ANGELL.
just think that this will pose a problem for you when you start using
I think your suggestion is a great
that language up on the Hill.
idea.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless the Committee votes for no
change, we have to use some language and this is the least-MR. ANGELL.

I'd use the least language possible.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, I don't think that this is
where our problem lies. Would the Secretary read the sentence with
the revision in question put into it?
"With regard to M3, the Committee recognized
MR. BERNARD.
that the ongoing restructuring of thrift depository institutions had
depressed its growth relative to spending and total credit more than
anticipated, though to an uncertain extent."
MR. PRELL.

Do you want to put

"though still to an uncertain

extent?"
MR. ANGELL.

No, take it out.

MR. KELLEY.

It doesn't ring right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

I'd say

I think not; take it out.
"more than anticipated" period.

MR. KOHN. And maybe then just say "taking account of the
unusually strong M3 velocity" instead of "the outlook for".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Taking account of what?

MR. KOHN. Just take out "the outlook for" there since you
already would have said it's more than anticipated; so you're saying
it's unusually strong.
MR. PRELL. You could make it "unexpectedly strong" if you
want to reinforce your earlier thought.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, use "taking account of the
unexpectedly strong."
Would somebody like to move that paragraph?
SPEAKER(?).

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

MR. ANGELL. Now, Mr. Chairman, I presume that has the 0 to 4
percent range for [M3]?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's correct.

7/2-3/90

-44-

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I move to substitute 1 to 5
percent for 0 to 4 percent in paragraph 29.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Is there a second?

Let's vote on that.

You're voting on the 1 to 5 percent?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, I assume there's no discussion.

MR. KOHN. You could take a straw vote, Mr. Chairman; that
way we wouldn't have to record it.
MR. ANGELL. Then we won't have to record it.
this is the kind of vote that we would want to record.

I don't think

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it this way: All those
in favor of 1 to 5 percent instead of 0 to 4 percent raise your hand.
Opposed?
The ayes have it; the amendment carries. We will now move
to a vote on the paragraph itself.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we'll now move to 1991.
As I
indicated to you before, we have 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M2; 0 to 4
percent for M3, which is consistent with 1 to 5 percent; and 4-1/2 to
8-1/2 percent for debt. Why don't you read the paragraph itself?
MR. BERNARD.
I'm reading from line 63 if you're using the
draft directive or from the top of page 27 [in the Bluebook], about 4
lines down, starting with "For 1991."
"For 1991 the Committee agreed
on provisional ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
percent for M2 and--" Is it 1 to 5 percent instead of 0 to 4 percent?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's still 0 to 4 percent.
somebody wants to propose an amendment, they can.

If

MR. BERNARD. --"and 0 to 4 percent for M3.
The Committee
tentatively set the associated monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991."
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I would move to amend the 0 to 4
percent on M3 to read 1 to 5 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

Is there a second?

-45-

7/2-3/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a second. All in favor raise
your hand.
One, two, three, four. five.
Opposed?
One, two, three,
four.
I'm sorry, it's five.
MR. ANGELL.

Four.

SPEAKER(?).

You have 9 voters in here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
percent and let it carry.
MR. LAWARE.
MS. SEGER.
MR. ANGELL.

I will then move my vote to 1 to 5

What was the vote?
Five to five.
Five to five.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Who's missing?

SPEAKER(?).

Governor Johnson is absent.

SPEAKER(?).

President Corrigan didn't vote.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let us now vote on the paragraph for
1991, with 1 to 5 percent for the M3 range.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, we now move to our regular shortterm monetary targets. Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

If not, why don't I
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
The same forces
get started then on the Committee's [unintelligible].
that I discussed at the last meeting are still operative but, as best
I can judge, they turned up a notch. I think we are observing the
unwinding from several years of excess credit expansion relative to
the economy. One can see that in virtually all the aggregates for the
money supply, obviously, and just as importantly in a wide variety of
As you may
other sub-elements within the flow-of-funds [accounts].
recall, they exhibited some fairly significant credit acceleration, in
part as a result of real estate appreciation, mergers and
acquisitions, LBOs, and some overall degree of exuberance in the
middle 1980s, which I think carried forward and is now gradually

7/2-3/90

-46-

unwinding.
I think what we are looking at is a credit slowing in
which in large measure we're going back to historical relationships.
And the only question that we really have to focus upon is whether in
the process the contraction is overdone, which of course is what one
normally would expect whenever one gets these types of adjustments.
In any event, I think we're seeing the credit slowing interacting with
the hard asset balance sheet items--that is, the stock adjustment
processes--which I believe I mentioned at the last meeting. Motor
vehicles--which had a long run with the number of cars on the road
[increasing] as the number of two- and three-car families [rose]--and
a variety of other elements all were above trend and then ran into a
stone wall in 1989. We're looking at that sort of adjustment. We're
obviously seeing the same problem in a more extravagant way in the
commercial real estate markets with the vacancies involved; we're also
getting some of the problems in residential real estate, though it's
obviously far less of a problem than in commercial real estate. There
is some slowing in the rate of increase in equipment stock as well.
As I indicated last time and would reiterate today, I think
the reason why that process, which I believe historically would almost
always have dumped us into a recession, failed to do so was because
the inventory management change has created a much less volatile
inventory investment pattern and essentially removed a major factor
that tends to tilt the economy over into recession. In the very near
term there's little evidence that I can see to suggest that in fact
the economy is tilting over.
The motor vehicle assemblies and the
extraordinary electric utility output because of weather clearly
suggest that there is some temporary uptick--perhaps a small one--in
the June industrial production index. But from what everyone can see
in there, one must conclude that it is probably temporary because
there's really no other evidence of an acceleration taking place.
While orders are holding up--or perhaps stated more appropriately they
have stabilized [after] their decline--and we have some positive signs
from the NAPM survey the other day, backlogs are stagnant; and some
surveys suggest they may even be softening slightly.
On top of all this, there's at least a better case to be made
at this point that inflationary pressures are cresting.
The wage data
are no longer carrying through with evidence of an acceleration. An
experimental unit cost analysis of manufacturing, which the staff has
been working on, had earlier indicated underlying cyclically adjusted
unit costs actually rising.
In effect, one way of looking at it was
that with price inflation steady while profit margins were going down
more than cyclically, the adjusted cost elements clearly were rising.
That too now seems to have stabilized; but I would not want to put too
much emphasis on those data because they do kick around a good deal.
But at least they are no longer signalling a firmer inflationary tone.
In any event, in this particular economic context I would say
that it would be inappropriate for the money markets to be tightening
either on their own or through Federal Reserve action. While the
evidence here is clearly difficult to come by, it strikes me that it
is becoming increasingly evident both from fragmentary data and
anecdotal reports, as well as history I guess, that the money markets
at the current funds rate are actually tightening. We are seeing up
through May, the last survey period, some marginal evidence of an
increase in some loan rates and an opening up of the spread of loan
rates against the funds rate. My suspicion, however, is that when the

-47-

7/2-3/90

data come out for the current period--I don't know when that will be
but it's a number of weeks away--what we are picking up anecdotally
has to show through in some evidence that there has been some pulling
back. By pulling back, I mean essentially that commercial banks are
concerned about their capital positions and are doing some form of
marginal credit rationing. I think the anecdotal evidence has reached
a point at this stage that it is extremely unlikely to be without any
basis whatever. To be sure, when one goes from excess credit
extension to normal, it feels as though it's a tightening; and that, I
would expect, is unquestionably the vast majority of what this credit
crunch is all about. But I would suspect that there is a little more
to this. The particular statistic that bothers me the most as a
consequence of all this is the unexplained part of M2, which has
clearly sneaked down into a no change range. According to what Don
was saying, it's holding--I would say has settled--several percentage
points under where all the other factors that we're looking at would
suggest is likely. So, this is obviously not a definitive case where
one would say that there's clear evidence that this credit rationing
I don't think we ever get that evidence except six years
is going on.
after the fact. But from what I can gather and from the contacts I
have I would say that at this stage the odds that we are not seeing
some actual money market tightening are very slim indeed. Put another
way, the funds market is trying to ease and we are essentially holding
it in check.
Our job is really not so much to focus on trying to fine tune
the economy; we can't do it. All that we can do is get ourselves
involved with money supply, credit, and financial systems; and as I
read the data at this particular stage I would say that we probably
have been sitting here with an inadvertent minor tightening, which I
think would be appropriate if the economy were showing some
significant signs of firming. But at the moment the evidence of that
is really quite remote. As a consequence, I would be inclined to go
with an unchanged directive, asymmetrical toward ease, but with the
expectation that unless a firmer tone in the financial aggregates--and
indirectly in the economy--began to exhibit itself fairly soon that it
would call for a small, 25 basis point, decline in the funds rate.
So, I would like to put that somewhat complex issue on the table and
would be most interested in the responses I get to it.
MR. SYRON. A technical question, Mr. Chairman. Are you
suggesting a 25 basis point cut anticipating we will have a conference
call or are we voting for that now essentially unless there's a-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say voting now. My view is that
a conference call shouldn't be necessary. In other words, we've
discussed at great length the types of things we're looking at, and
unless something unusual happens of a nature that always indicates the
need for a conference call, I don't think that I could convey very
much more. Governor LaWare.
MR. LAWARE. I'm encouraged that my economic education seems
to be going along in pretty good style because you have expressed
exactly the thoughts that I had intended to express. I strongly
endorse "B" with an asymmetric tilt toward ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

-48-

7/2-3/90

MR. KELLEY.

I will second Governor LaWare's remarks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I'm basically in the same
place.
I came to the meeting thinking that there were three choices
available to the Committee. One was an asymmetric plain vanilla kind
of directive; the second was a strongly asymmetric directive, which is
what I think your suggestion amounts to; and the third was even the
possibility of easing right now. My own strong position was the
second of those choices, the strongly asymmetric directive, so I
support completely your proposition.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.
I support your proposition, Mr. Chairman.
I
have a technical question: I'm not quite clear in my mind what data
you would be looking at to trigger the 25 basis point cut.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Basically the data that are coming out
at the end of this week--including average hourly earnings, which is
not a minor player as far as I'm concerned. Also, the money supply
data early next week and-MR. FORRESTAL.

The employment number.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --the employment figure on Friday.
MR. FORRESTAL.
adjustment?
10 days.

So, you're looking at a fairly near-term

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.

Yes,

I would say within the next week to

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative "B."
However, since I think there is a good chance that economic growth
will be faster in the second half than in the first half, I would
prefer symmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Where I stumble a bit with your suggestion is
with the automaticity of the move.
I too have a great deal of
interest not only in the upcoming data but in how the economy is
likely to perform over the next several months given the situation as
it has changed with regard to consumer spending and whatever wealth
effects we may get out of housing.
I must admit to a lot of
uncertainty as to how that's all going to play out.
I'm a little
concerned by the asymmetric directive with the automaticity of moving
on the basis of another week or two weeks' worth of data; that gives
me some pause.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Obviously, if there is evidence of
firmness in the data, that would suggest to us that the money supply
data are not as terribly [weak] as we think. I would say the money
supply data are really the crucial data as far as I'm concerned,
because we're getting to the point where what we affect essentially is
the credit system. And to the extent that the credit system is

7/2-3/90

-49-

contracting--and it is showing as far as I can see no signs of
stabilizing--it means that the process is still going on. And if it
is, what I'm arguing for is not an easing.
I'm arguing for
[unintelligible] holding. The question, therefore, is basically: Do
I would say only
we want to be tightening in this particular context?
if there is evidence that the economy is picking up, and I must tell
you that at the moment I don't see a single statistic out there
suggestive of such an acceleration. That's [unintelligible]
basically. Obviously, we could wait for three weeks, two months,
whatever.
It may-MR. STERN.
latest data at all.
around an awful lot.

I don't disagree with your interpretation of the
It's just that I've watched these data bounce

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, so have I. And this is the first
time in six months that I have nudged off the middle because I was
unconvinced by all of this evidence until now. And it's not economic
weakness; it's credit.
I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
MR. STERN. No, actually, I had concluded what I was going to
say. You've elaborated your views on how you see this. And, as I
said before, my concern was with the automaticity of the move not with
the asymmetric language on "B".
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
automatic move.
MR. STERN.

No,

Well, there's no such thing as an

I would say I'm somewhat comforted by your

comments.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's an asymmetric comfort then.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Well, I appreciate what President Stern has
It really is a very important difference for me, Mr. Chairman,
said.
because I do want to vote with you on this.
I would admit that I'm
not able to discern so accurately the need to stay symmetric versus
the possibility that incoming data will tell us that we need to ease.
I would prefer symmetric language but I can compromise away from that
if we are going to be looking at the data and, if the data coming in
say that we ought to subsequently make a decision to ease, I can go
with that.
But I cannot go with the notion here that we really are
going to ease, because if we really are going to ease, we might as
well do it now and then those of us who are going to vote "no" can
And I will just vote "no."
vote "no."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's a correct [interpretation
of the] difference.
It's [essentially] why we raise the issue of
automatic; if it's automatic, then it can't be asymmetric.
MR. ANGELL. So, I suggest that we not put into "Fedspeak"
all this new language that the Vice Chairman is about to introduce in
regard to super ease.
I really don't think we need to fine tune our
language. My understanding, based upon what you said, is that we're
going to be recommending that we have no change in policy, alternative
"B," which I can support with the "mights" tilted [toward ease].
I

-50-

7/2-3/90

can go with that. I don't want to make too much over little
differences, but I do believe strongly that we have reached a point
where we're just about to succeed in something that we've been trying
to get done. You put it so well last year when you talked about the
view that we have to err on the side of restraint. All of us know
that there is risk in doing that. I want to continue to err on the
side of restraint, but I definitely do not want to get this economy
into recession. I want us to reap the fruits of what we're about to
[achieve], and I think the sooner we move the more likely the bond
markets are to misinterpret and say that the Fed really gave up before
we were there. I think the whole [issue] is that attitudes concerning
inflation are at a very delicate point. I noted in the staff's laying
out of strategy II on the long-run model, that in 1995 that results in
the highest real GNP growth of any of the alternatives. Now, I just
think it happens faster. I think the whole monetary world works
faster than it ever worked before. And if we really stand here and
are prepared to do what needs to be done, I believe we'll get lower
long-term interest rates. Frankly, one reason that we got into slow
money growth is because we lowered the fed funds rate in December, ran
the long bond rates up 70-80 basis points, and the opportunity cost
[of] the M2 balances has [risen] so that the shortfall of our
aggregates is due entirely to our premature ease in December.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, I do.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

I don't think that's correct.

Well, that's your evaluation.

I think--

Well, you see, what has happened is that the

opportunity cost on the M2 balances has changed and then you get the
lagged effect of that change from March and you get low growth of M2
in May. My view is that we need the lowest long-term interest rates

we can get for the second half of 1990. And I happen to think that
being patient here for a [while] will get us lower rates than we will
get if we jump the gun on easing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The difference, Wayne, is that I think

we're closer to having success here than you think.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, I think we're closer in that respect too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're very close. If I believed
otherwise, I wouldn't be arguing for the type of asymmetry that we're
talking about.
MR. ANGELL.

I'm somewhat impatient for patience.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd be in favor of alternative "B"
with the current asymmetric language, and I'm entirely comfortable
with the explanation that you gave Bob Forrestal on what would trip
using the asymmetric language. Perhaps I have a slightly more
positive outlook on the economy than some, and perhaps more so than
you, but I think it's awfully important that we provide an environment
in which we can continue to have these kinds of results.
It does seem
to me that the move that you suggest will give us that.

7/2-3/90

-51-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Obviously, you know that I'm in favor of easing.
I'm just sitting here trying to decide what we gain by doing it in a
couple of weeks rather than now. I'm thinking about the lags that I
Whatever we
thought I had been taught about by Don Kohn and his pals.
do today or in two weeks or three weeks is going to impact the economy
some time in the future, not immediately. The way I read the economy,
I'm not sure we have until Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve to have
The employment numbers are not my
some stimulus actually being felt.
favorite numbers, but I do read them. As I remember, in the April and
May statistics the whole show was the hiring of temporary workers by
the Census Department. And from what I've seen previewed, those folks
are leaving; a lot of them--something like 160,000--left in June.
That number came from Barbara Bryant who heads the Census; it isn't
That's going to have an impact on the
something I just threw out.
Some more of
employment numbers again and not a very good impact.
So, I
these folks are going to be turned out on the street in July.
think we're going to get some weaker employment numbers as we go along
here.
Also, I read the retail sales numbers as weak. I don't think
we have had three months in a row [of weak data] that have been flukes
I hate to
or aberrations; I think there's something going on there.
repeat myself unnecessarily, but I believe that this so-called credit
crunch has had a big impact on construction in many parts of the
country; it's worse certainly in some parts than in others, but it's
not confined to New England or Arizona. And I don't think that is
I also believe that lower interest rates
over as an influence.
amazingly would help the strength of the financial system; it would
provide some of the marginal institutions a better chance to make it
because it would allow them to get a lower cost of funds rather
promptly and improve their margins. And I think we need to do that
I would argue that lower interest rates would help even
very swiftly.
on the liquidation of the S&Ls by the RTC. So, I certainly agree with
your notion of some ease, but if I wanted to split hairs--which I
won't do; I will support your position--I would feel more comfortable
doing it sooner rather than later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the last several years of
monetary policy have been some of our very finest; I wouldn't go back
and change any vote that I've cast during that time. It has been many
years since I went through an entire session without dissenting in
favor of tighter money. I started off thinking about the short-run
objectives with exactly what you had in mind: an asymmetrical
directive because of this apparent softness in the economy and the
Then I started looking at the economy
slow growth in the aggregates.
a little more closely and I read Don's and his associates' memo. And
when I looked at the economy, I couldn't see what it was that was
going to make us turn down; and his memo on the behavior of the
aggregates gave me a good deal of comfort. So, I became somewhat
uncomfortable with the asymmetrical part of it, since I think our
objective is price stability and we're going to have to take some
responsible risks on the side of restraint if we're going to get
there.
I came out with alternative B, but I favor symmetry.
I
certainly wouldn't dissent on this, but I do think that in general
it's better to have a symmetrical directive because that suggests we
are able to go either way.
I think that would give sufficient leeway

-52-

7/2-3/90

to do exactly what you have in mind.

I don't have any great problem

with asymmetry, but I have a slight preference, as I think Governor
Angell has also, for symmetrical language. But I think you're very
close to where we ought to be on this.
You made a good statement; I
found particularly helpful your analysis of the current conditions,

and I take some comfort in your view of inventories.

I share that

feeling. I don't know what's going to make us turn down.
So, if I
voted, I would go with symmetrical but not dissent on asymmetrical.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This may be hairsplitting a bit, but my preference would be "B" with a symmetric
directive.
I don't see that there is accumulating evidence of a

tightening of credit markets. As a result, a symmetric directive--to
the extent that it will be read six weeks from now as a sort of
"steady-as-you-go" policy--seems to me to be a reasonable outcome [of
our meeting].
On the other hand, if I have understood the discussions
around this table in the past, particularly as articulated by Don,
with a symmetric directive you have the ability to take one cut--if
you will, a quarter point [on the funds rate], which is what we are
talking about--without the necessity of a conference call or
consultation. As a result, it seems to me that "B" with a symmetric
directive gives you what you want and I wouldn't object to that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

"B" asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'll skip the subtleties.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'd favor "B" symmetric but I could certainly
accept "B" asymmetric as you specified it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. "B." I have a marginal preference for symmetric
but I can certainly accept asymmetric. I do have some of the concerns
that Gary Stern expressed on the automaticity of the approach, but I
am comforted by your explanation. I think it's important to have in
the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony an indication that we are not trying to
lead the market down, but that we are not effectively trying to ease
policy--that there has been some tightening in policy not at our
volition and that we see this as bringing policy back more to where we
get the [unintelligible] rather than the other way around. I think
that's actually quite an important distinction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. In my view, the economy has been weaker than
[the staff has] projected and I haven't felt especially comfortable
with the low growth in the aggregates. I have been concerned, given
the notion of the low growth and the credit crunch, that we might be
implicitly tighter than what the Committee had committed to earlier.
To believe differently is to put a lot of faith in adjustments and
still accept an unexplained error. I don't believe that a tighter
stance at this time is warranted. And I wonder whether a marginally
lower funds rate wouldn't be consistent with maintaining the stance of

-53-

7/2-3/90

monetary policy voted on earlier this year. The advantage of this
approach is more discretion, more time to adjust to the new data; and
it has less automaticity than the approach of easing directly. I
think Dick's point is extremely important because that's exactly the
way I view it--that we essentially are maintaining the intended
moderately restrictive monetary conditions and, when there's
unintended tightening out there, we're simply not easing but moving
back to that position. So, I would wholeheartedly support "B" with
asymmetry toward easing or returning to the [degree of] restraint that
we intended earlier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative "B."
Coming into the meeting I had felt that symmetric language would be
preferable. However, the explanation that you gave would cause me to
accept asymmetric language. But I do want to say that I agree with
I share a lot of
about 85 percent of what you said, Governor Angell.
I
sympathy for not letting go prematurely just as we're about there.
don't know what the next week or week and a half is going to show, but
I have a slight uneasiness in the sense that it's almost preordained
that there's going to be a downward move shortly. That may be
necessary and it may be what's called for; I just can't read that.
But I would accept asymmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, as someone who has worried
consistently about the growth rates in the aggregates, I find myself
in one sense pleasantly surprised that the aggregates are at about the
growth rates that I thought were appropriate for the year.
I think your
Unfortunately, I'm uncomfortable with how we got there.
explanation may well have some merit for pegging the funds rate [when]
the economy is weak. We're not running monetary policy by supplying
reserves; we're running it through interest rates.
Having said all
that, and given the staff's forecast of where we're likely to be, I'm
equally uncomfortable with the velocity projections. So, that leaves
me in a position of great uncertainty. And in that position, I'd be
more comfortable with "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that with the appropriate
money supply targets, I'd like a vote on the asymmetric directive.
MR. BERNARD. The operational paragraph would read: "In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Taking account of progress toward price stability, the strength of the
business expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and
developments in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets,
slightly greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from June through September at
annual rates of about 3 and 1 percent respectively. The Chairman may
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."

7/2-3/90

-54-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The next meeting is on August 21st.

Mr. Chairman, when is your testimony?

Do you

know?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

The 18th.

The 18th.

Is the Senate first or the House?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's the Senate first, and I think the
House testimony is either on the 19th or the 24th.
MR. COYNE.

It's the 24th.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On revisions with respect to the
projections, Mike Prell says as late as Monday morning will be no
problem. Any changes can be faxed in, I assume, by that time.
MR. PRELL.
convenient.

We use the administrative message system, if it's

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there is no further business, the
meeting is finally adjourned.
END OF MEETING

