Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 2, 1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 2, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne

Boykin
Hoskins

Mr.

Kelley

Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

LaWare
Mullins
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,
Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman, Simpson, and

Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Broaddus, T. Davis, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Kansas City, Chicago, and Atlanta,
respectively
Messrs. Judd, McNees, and Miller, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Boston,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Ms. Ann Marie Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market
Operations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 2, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone.
kindly move the minutes of the last FOMC meeting?
MS. SEGER.

Would somebody

I'll move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a second? Without objection.
Mr. Cross, would you bring us up to date on foreign operations?
MR. CROSS.

Yes, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

Questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. BOEHNE. Sam, could you elaborate some on your comments
about the dollar being less of a safe haven, which certainly has been
true in this latest Middle East crisis? Do you see that as something
that has been evolving over time and the Middle East situation brought
it to a head? Or do you see it as something that is more transitory?
What are your thoughts on it?
MR. CROSS. Well, it's very hard to be sure. It may be that
over time as other currencies tend to be more widely used and as other
markets tend to be further developed one might expect some lessening
of the uniqueness of the dollar. Also, we now have a situation in
Europe where for the first time the political differences and
uncertainties that existed before aren't there, which may have meant
that on this occasion there was more willingness to use some of these
other currencies because they don't see the same kinds of political
East/West problems as before. It could be for any number of reasons.
But it's certainly true that the traders we talk to tell us that the
old timers who work for them were all taking positions that assumed
there would be a lot more movement into the dollar than happened. As
I say, it could be having a significant effect in the kind of
We also detect that a lot of
cautionary attitudes [unintelligible].
people are very hesitant to be very short of the dollar in these
circumstances because they think if there is overt military hostility
the likelihood is very high that the dollar would pop up. So, quite
often recently on Fridays we see evidence that there's a lot of
settling of the books--that people don't like to go home for the
weekend very short of dollars because they fear that if some really
serious hostilities were to break out they could find themselves
suffering very, very large costs.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Other questions for Sam?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll make a comment in the context
of Ed Boehne's question. In this immediate setting I think it is also
true that concern abroad about financial fragility--or whatever you
want to call it--in the United States and in U.S. financial
institutions unquestionably has been a factor in the timeframe of the
last month or so. It's impossible to quantify that, but there's no
question in my mind that that's a factor.
MR. CROSS. Well, that's true. I certainly should have
mentioned that factor. There is hesitation about U.S. institutions.

10/2/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Extending on Sam's remarks, I think
there really is something fundamentally different about a
confrontation where there is the possibility of a whole country or
countries going under from a coup or some instability and the currency
could conceivably--with a very low probability that's still not zero-become worthless. And that probability did exist with the East/West
confrontations for Europe and for Japan. This confrontation doesn't
have that characteristic.
In other words, there's no credible
judgment that one can reach that says this thing will be wiped out.
I
think we saw that reaction in Saudi Arabia where there was this huge
run [unintelligible] just moved as though it was the old dollar
because that type of threat was there.
So it may be that while this
confrontation has negative effects on Europe and Japan they really are
quite limited. And this war effect is very new to them. The real
test will be if the dollar doesn't do terribly much if there is a war,
which is not all that inconceivable assuming that we can-MR. CROSS.
What we also have heard a lot is that instead of
movement from one currency to another currency there has been a surge
of movement to liquidity in many places.
So this tends to be a
greater shift to liquidity than to a currency.
MR. LAWARE.
Sam, at the other end of the spectrum, what set
of circumstances might create a run on the dollar?
MR. CROSS.
One can think of any number of possibilities.
Certainly, one concern is the fact that the Japanese industries are
holding something on the order of $250 billion or so that would be
largely unhedged. And because of what may happen here that could
cause them to get frightened and to start running for cover fast. Or,
as I was indicating in my comments, there are factors in Japan that
could lead to a desire to shift a lot more funds [to yen] for their
own reasons.
One could envisage all kinds of scenarios that could
cause the dollar to start moving down very, very, rapidly, with a lot
of investors all around trying to get out.
MR. LAWARE.
MR. CROSS.

Thank you.
It's a real danger.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Sam?
If not,
I'd just like to take a few minutes to review what occurred at the G-7
meeting relative to the issues to be discussed today. Those of you
who have seen the communique know that a crucial paragraph on monetary
policy brings forth the issue of, as they put it, "that the rise in
the price of oil associated with the Gulf crisis poses two risks: a
risk of inflation and a risk of lower economic growth."
The original
draft that had been worked up by the deputies actually was skewed more
toward inflation problems and had much less in the way of the issue of
recession. But [unintelligible] and Mr. Brady both pushed for a
symmetrical statement --or more exactly a statement that encompassed
both even though [unintelligible] also involved income policies and a
whole slew of other things, which were supported by no one.
Interestingly, however, the following sentence in the communique was
crafted by
, which seems to contradict the basic endeavor
to get balance between inflation and growth, and it reads: "The
Ministers and Governors consider that stability-oriented monetary
policies and sound fiscal policies constitute the correct policy

10/2/90

response." The interesting aspect of all of this is that the
participants who were most strongly concerned about the inflation
, both of
impact of the Gulf affair were the
whom in the previous G-7 meeting had lectured the group on being
careful not to let the inflation genie out of the bottle because of
all the difficulties they were having stuffing it back in. And I
thought it was quite interesting the extent to which they basically
were not pushing for anything other than stability and clearly were
acting against any form of accommodation. My sense is that the other
members of the G-7 were essentially all in the area of stability. I
heard very little in the way of--at least in the table discussions-In side conversations with some of
"interest rates should move up."
the Germans I did get the impression that concern about the major
increase in German government deficits was going to cause some upward
pressure on monetary policy driven largely from the market side. But
that concern did not get expressed in the underlying discussion that
evolved among the various participants. I would suspect at this stage
that pretty much everyone recognizes that if there is a credible
budget agreement here, we will ease. I didn't get too much in the way
of concern about that, although I would suspect that if we embarked
upon significant ease without a budget agreement, we would. To the
extent that these people ever express disapproval in anything stronger
than moving an eyelash, we would get a double eyelash effect or
something like that. But the notion of stability in the context of
individual adjustments was really enforced by the fact that there was
no criticism, for example, of the Japanese [3/4] percentage point rise
in the discount rate on the grounds that that was required to maintain
what they perceived to be a basically stable policy.
There was not too much conversation on exchange rates. There
was a general belief that a weak dollar would be undesirable. And
that was implicit in the communique, following up on the previous G-7
meeting's communique which had indicated that the yen was
exceptionally weak, in language suggesting that the yen had reached a
broadly acceptable range without specifying against which
The general view of the group, even though it was not
[currencies].
explicitly stated, was that dollar stability--in fact, general
stability--was desired, although
suggested that it might not be all that bad if the
yen did actually firm somewhat relative to the other currencies. But
that was not a general view and that did not, of course, find its way
into the communique. I got the impression indirectly by the way he
responded to the editing of the communique that Mr. Brady basically
was not in favor of significant weakening of the dollar. He made
several statements suggesting that, but he made no pronouncements; it
was sort of half sentences. But he was clearly not desirous of
driving the dollar down and probably would be uncomfortable if that in
fact happened. The French at the meeting and the Japanese in public
speeches requested that there be exploration of "a more stable
international monetary system" as they put it. And the G-7 basically
agreed that some looking at the process was authorized, although I
sensed no enthusiasm for the process on the grounds that no one was
thinking that anything useful would come out of it. But because a
study and not an action paper was requested nobody particularly fought
against it.
With respect to intervention, generally nobody wanted to
discuss anything about ranges; nobody even wanted to discuss

10/2/90

contingent intervention. As a practical matter, while it may have
been discussed peripherally, there was less talk about concerted
intervention even in the abstract than at any time since I've attended
those meetings. I would say in general that it wasn't a particularly
dynamic meeting, in part I think because there has been a change in
the participants. Considering the background of all the things that
were going on, it was remarkably quiet and pretty much described by
the communique. There were no sub rosa discussions and no implied
programs that are not in the communique. And there is nothing much I
can report that was not in the newspapers. Does anybody have any
questions or anything they want to comment on?
MR. FORRESTAL. Was there any discussion about the
possibility of recession in the United States and the potential
spillover into other countries?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. There was general discussion of
that in the context of the monetary policy issue. I might say that
there is a high degree of awareness about what is going on in the
American economy and concern about it. But as far as I can tell it's
a limited concern, though clearly there.
MR. FORRESTAL. Could I just follow with one other question?
I've seen some press reports recently that the [Delors] proposal, the
parallel currency, is getting noisier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The hardened ECU?

MR. FORRESTAL. Yes. I understand that it's getting more
support than it did when he proposed it originally. Was there any
discussion or do you have any sense that this is gaining any momentum?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the discussion wasn't at the G-7
meeting but a couple of weeks earlier at the Basle meeting of the G-10
governors. It was clear that the European part of the group had just
come from Rome where they had had a fairly extended discussion, which
sort of pushed back the [Delors] plan slightly. I got the impression
that the interest in the hardened ECU was not that everyone had all of
a sudden looked at this and said "Gee, what a terrific idea."
I think
what happened was that the finance ministers finally had gotten the
message that when you have the type of monetary policy integration
contemplated in the Delors plan a substantial loss of financial
sovereignty is involved. So it wasn't the hardened ECU theme that
created the problem; it turned out to be the vehicle that enabled some
of the governments to back off from their commitments by saying "Isn't
this interesting? Let's look at that."
But I would suggest if there
hadn't been a major plan they would have found something else.
MR. FORRESTAL. I take it that it's your sense that our
trading partners will be following a fairly restrictive monetary
policy for the foreseeable future?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think that's certainly true on
the part of the Germans. It is going to be true on the part of the
Brits and the Canadians until they begin to see more weakness in their
economies. And as Sam had mentioned this morning, Mr. Hashimoto is
already talking about what was effectively turning monetary policy
around. I'm not clear what that means. As of the G-7 meeting, one

10/2/90

had the impression that
discussion of a further
there was no indication
implicit in Hashimoto's

they would remain firm, although there was no
But, certainly,
rise in their discount rate.
of the type of reversal that was even remotely
remarks yesterday.

MR. FORRESTAL.

Thank you.

We don't
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there nothing else on this?
need anything to ratify [any transactions] since, fortunately, I
assume nothing was done.
MR. CROSS.

No, there is no need for any action.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Peter Sternlight.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

Peter, I've been on the call on occasion and
MR. HOSKINS.
I've watched the market tend to focus more and more on the funds rate
as the measure of our policy. To an extent, at least based on your
report, we are beginning to alter our program so as not to indicate
In other words, we had to add
that we made an easing [move].
[reserves] and we didn't do it because the market might have reacted.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Right.

The question to you is: Are you comfortable
MR. HOSKINS.
with that or would you be more comfortable with more flexibility
And if you would [prefer the latter], do you
around the funds rate?
have any ideas on how we can get that without disturbing the market?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have been uncomfortable for a year
or more--two or three years maybe, going back since the October 1987
stock market decline--with the extent to which we give a lot of
attention to the funds rate rather than feeling that we have some
element of flexibility where we would aim at a borrowing gap and have
a rough expectation about the funds rate but where there was room for
the funds rate to vary some around that.
I think what has put us in
the kind of box that we're in now is a weakening of the relationship
between borrowings and the funds rate spread over the discount rate.
I wish there were greater flexibility so that the market could accept
our doing things when the funds rate is a bit to the easy or firm side
of what they think is the central point without their getting all that
I think it
excited about the policy implications of our actions.
would take some kind of public statement to get the market off its
And even then, it's going to be hard to
fixation [on the funds rate].
do because the market is always reaching for something to guide
itself. And unless we can put something else out there--and I'm not
sure what else we have now to substitute for the current security
blanket-MR. HOSKINS.

Well, I don't either.

That's why I asked you.

MR. PARRY. But if it were explained that there would be
greater fluctuations in the funds rate, do you think that's something
they could live with?

10/2/90

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. PARRY.

It will?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. HOSKINS.

Yes, I think that could help.

No. I think that would be--

That would take a public statement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know, really. When we say more
volatility around something, of course, they'll be looking at the
something. Unless there is literally another instrument that we can
employ, even in part, with some credibility, merely allowing the funds
rate to fluctuate doesn't help us all that much because they will all
be competing on who knows what the central tendency is on the funds
rate.
What we really need is another instrument--some mechanism that
captures the degree of tightness in the system better than the funds
rate itself.
MR. BLACK. We need some kind of reserve measure tied to M2,
but there's no way-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
direction.

[Unintelligible]

goes off in the wrong

MR. BLACK. Our present structure was set up to target Ml,
which then ceased to be a good indicator. We have all this
institutional set-up in effect and it's not useful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
In fact, I'm going to come back to
that issue a little later because we've been giving a lot of thought
to that structure not only in this context but also in the context of
reserve requirements, which were originally set up on an M1 targeting
basis.
MR. BLACK.

Very cleverly done, too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The way they set it up, I thought it
would have been terrific if it had worked.
MR. BLACK. I thought it was great at the time, but I didn't
know what was going to happen to Ml.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, if I could add to this for a second.
I think--we'll see whether [Peter] agrees--that things became even
tighter after that Thanksgiving problem we had but loosened up a bit
recently. I think the problem in the last few weeks has been one of
extraordinarily volatile expectations that we were going to ease,
perhaps momentarily. And if we're not doing what the market expects
us to be doing, that's always going to be a problem for the Desk. And
there's also a greater disconnection between the funds rate and the
underlying reserve conditions.
I wonder, without being able to prove
it, whether that isn't partly a function of the problems with the way
these banks are changing their operations to some extent in the money
markets. That creates another set of problems for the Desk. So, I
think we've had some pretty unusual circumstances over the last three
maintenance periods.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

10/2/90

MR. KOHN. But in general, my sense is that we've loosened a
bit over the last few months relative to where we were right after
Thanksgiving.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe so. There was a day recently that we
were able to provide some reserves--I think it was through multiday
RPs--and funds were [trading] a hair under 6 percent and that was
accepted by the market. They thought there was a big reserve need and
they didn't think anything of it on that occasion. But at the moment
I'm more conscious of the occasions when we felt our hands [were tied]
because of the expectations of an imminent easing that Don referred
to, and we didn't move lest they misinterpret our-MR. BLACK. Peter, does anybody think we've tightened any
because we went above our expected--?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

No, I do not think so.

MR. BLACK. I haven't seen any indication of it; I just
wondered if you had.
MR. PARRY. I'd like to pursue a little more your views on
the consequences of passage of the budget compromise. If the
compromise is passed and signed, you feel that that probably would
produce a rally in the long-term end of the market?
Is that correct?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would be a positive. I would not
expect a big rally because there's still that concern about inflation.
MR. PARRY. That, and you said the consequence, if we then
followed that with an easing move, would be that long-term rates would
probably [unintelligible] and not move up. Is that what you're
thinking?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
end to move up; right.

In that context I would not expect the long

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions for Peter?

Martha

Seger.
MS. SEGER. I'm just sitting here listening to Peter and Don
talk about this fed funds fixation and the problems [that creates].
Are you sort of making the case for prompt release of our minutes?
Maybe that would fix it so we could tell people what we're doing
rather than make them try to read it from entrails.
MR. KOHN. I wasn't trying to make that case, no. I'm not
sure that would help them in terms of trying to guess what we're going
to do tomorrow, which is really what it's all about--not what we did
yesterday.
MS. SEGER. It would still give them more guidance than they
now get where they just really are flying by the seat of their pants.
MR. BOEHNE.
release the minutes.
funds target is, much
think the minutes are

I'm not sure, Martha, that it makes the case to
It makes the case simply to say what the fed
the way we say what the discount rate is.
I
so ambiguous that they don't tell you very much.

10/2/90

But if we say the target is an 8 percent funds rate, people know what
an 8 percent funds rate is just like they know what a 7 percent
discount rate is.
MS. SEGER.
case.

Maybe the Greenbook--

MR. BOEHNE. If there's a case in all of this, that's the
I don't see it on the minutes side.

MS. SEGER. Well, I think we need to give them some more
guidance so they don't have to hang on every basis point change [in
the funds rate] and try to equate that with a policy move.
MR. MULLINS. Would there be a benefit in going to a range
from our point estimate? Or would that just-MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I like to think of what we have as a
range anyway. But the market would immediately put the rate in the
middle of the range and if they're looking for-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
of that range.

They'll be looking for the central point

MR. STERNLIGHT. If they are looking for ease, then anything
to the lower side of that range will make them begin to think it's the
first step on the easing side; conversely, if they are looking for
tightening.
MR. PARRY.

But it would make your job easier to use a range?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
the market doesn't.

I tend to think of it as a range anyway, but

MR. BLACK. You are in the [minority].
Of all the observers
you're one of the few who really think that. Don't virtually all
observers think of it as a target?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In principle, you either have an
interest rate or a non-interest rate [target].
The trouble is in
trying to finesse all this; it doesn't work.
MR. BLACK.

You have to be able to predict--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Either we have to say interest rates
don't matter and we basically are targeting some financial variable or
structure of variables or we target an interest rate. And then we're
always going to find somebody who's seeking the central point of
whatever range we contemplate. I don't know what we do about that,
but it's not satisfactory; that's for sure.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. You're absolutely right. As long as
there are legions of very, very well paid people out there whose
livelihood depends upon their ability to understand every nuance in
Mr. Sternlight's activities, we're stuck with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you suggesting something about
creating some more [un]employment?

10/2/90

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Actually, that would do it!

[Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
It's true, though, that there are
literally thousands of people all over the world who do only that.
MS.

SEGER.

[That's] why we need to tell them what we're

doing.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. SYRON.
MR. MELZER.

I don't think it would change it.

They have to find something to look for.
Right.

They'd be looking for

[something].

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. No matter what we did, unless we
really went the whole distance by going through some kind of a
quantity as opposed to a rate-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Or lock in a mechanical

[approach]--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But even that--.
If you go back to
the period in 1980 and 1981 where we really did, at least for a period
of time, [target] the money supply range, we had pandemonium every
Thursday afternoon when the money supply figures were published. And
that gets very frustrating. But I must say it's pretty darn hard to
figure out how to avoid it.
MR. BOEHNE.
If we say, for example, what the funds rate is,
then they will try to figure out what it is we look at when we are
about to change the funds rate.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE. And if we release that, then they'll go back-it's an impossible situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry suggests a significant part of the
gross national product is value added from [Fed watchers].
MR. SYRON.

Nationwide.

MR. FORRESTAL.
back and work for Don.

He has a new instrument.

They can all come

If not,
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Peter?
may I have a motion to ratify the Desk's actions since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

Mr. Prell.

10/2/90

-10-

MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Mr. Prell?

MR. SYRON. Mike, I know a lot of this is because of the oil
issue, but I have one technical and one substantive question. The
technical question: Is the big [drop] that we see in the first quarter
of 1991 in the CPI because of what you already have anticipated on the
excise tax?
MR. PRELL. That is part of the first-quarter effect.
Of
course, with the timing of the gasoline tax that has been proposed,
that means we'll get something before the end of the year.
MR. SYRON. My other question relates to your forecast of two
mildly negative quarters but then quite a bounceback. I know that
it's completely [impossible] for anyone to forecast what's going to
happen in the Middle East, but I just wonder how likely your forecast
is from a much more qualitative point of view. Perhaps I'm factoring
too much into this for how likely I think the credit crunch is and how
much momentum I think this downturn could cumulate once we get into
it, particularly on the consumer confidence side. That may or may not
be offset by the assumption you had to make about when oil prices
would change that.
MR. PRELL. I'm pleased that you said we had to make that
assumption because, obviously, there was some degree of arbitrariness
to that, and we hope that this is a plausible baseline. We feel
somewhat optimistic--but [unintelligible] I think to highlight the
kind of policy issues you confront. Basically, that rebound does
follow fairly naturally from the improvement in real disposable income
that would result from this kind of decline in oil prices.
History
suggests that oil price shocks of the sort we have had do tend to
disturb consumers, and [thus] we see very sharp drops in confidence.
The previous large drops were in somewhat similar circumstances.
Unless the economy really follows through with a significantly
negative performance, one might expect confidence to improve somewhat.
We certainly see downside risks here because of the credit situation,
but we think we've built in some allowance for that in an informal
way.
But should quality spreads widen dramatically, should lenders
really pull in their horns more sharply than we sense they are, that
would certainly be a drag on business spending. We've assumed that
inventories will be kept in very tight check over the coming months;
that's one of the reasons for the weakness in production in the
forecast. We don't have a buildup [in inventories]; they keep
production lines running. So, that positions us for a nice rebound in
production as soon as that underlying demand picks up. But as we
enter into a period of such weakness, there are a number of variables
that could turn more negative than we have [projected].
It's possible
too that we will skate through this without any cumulative decline.
MR. SYRON. Is there an historical analog for a disturbance
causing this kind of muted downturn but then bouncing back this
quickly?
MR. PRELL. Well, I guess one would have to reach pretty far
back to find any example. This is a supply shock. The supply shocks

10/2/90

that come to mind occurred in 1973, which was a period when other
things also tended to exacerbate recessionary pressures, and again in
the 1979-80 period when we had a recession with an oil price shock.
I
But the magnitudes differ and the general circumstances differ.
think one couldn't simply appeal to historical precedent to justify
this forecast.
MR. SYRON.

Thank you.

MR. PARRY. You mentioned the conservative inventory policy
here, but basically it isn't much of a cycle in inventories. Do you
Typically, one expects some buildup
feel very confident about that?
of excess inventories, which are subsequently run off, and then some
increased production as the economy picks up. We go through these
But in truth, these inventories are really pretty
cycles in real GNP.
[consistently] at very low levels; that may be a potential source for
some greater cyclicality than was in the forecast.
MR. PRELL. Well, as I suggested, we've assumed that
businesses do move their inventories very consistently with sales in
this period ahead. Our sense is that in recent years, given the kind
of inventory management practices that have evolved, the pattern
really does support that kind of assumption about their behavior. One
can already see an awareness on the part of businessmen that there may
be weak sales in the months ahead. We have anecdotal reports of
retailers ordering very cautiously for the fall. Basically, we are
looking for the production adjustment to happen very rapidly and
that's when our recession is occurring.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

Mike, my question is about your relatively
MR. HOSKINS.
quick drop--from my point of view--in the inflation rate out in 1992.
My question focuses on a couple of observations. One is that ex food
and energy, the trend has been upward in the last couple of years; and
I'm wondering what you think is going to put the squeeze back on
If the oil price
inflation. The second has to do with potential GNP.
doubles, or under the other assumption increases by 50 percent, that
must have some impact on the potential GNP that you've built in, which
means that you have lower growth for the real economy but you also
I'd like you to sort that out for me.
have lower potential GNP.
MR. PRELL. On the latter point, we really haven't done
You're quite
anything exotic in the assumptions about potential GNP.
right that the shift in the relative price of energy could affect the
productivity of the capital stock; it could have an effect on the
If oil prices stayed very high, one would
level of potential GNP.
I can't state the magnitude;
have to be concerned about some effect.
perhaps Dave has something to contribute on that point. Basically,
though--assuming there isn't a major contraction of supply that is
permanent, so to speak, going out through 1992--I think our forecast
follows quite naturally from the assumption we made about oil prices,
the projection we made for the dollar, and our anticipated increase in
slack in the economy. We have a 6-1/2 percent unemployment rate. We
think that is high enough and the slowness of growth per period great
enough that we should see some downward pressure on real wages. We

10/2/90

-12-

anticipate that import prices will be rising fairly rapidly in the
near term, but as a result of our dollar path [the rise] will be
decelerating and thus that will be a helpful factor in the
deceleration [of overall inflation] by 1992. And we have a favorable
trend relative to overall inflation and energy prices as we go out
through 1992.
So, the cumulation of these things puts [inflation]
back into the low 4 percent area during 1992.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. PRELL.

Thank you.
Dave.

MR. STOCKTON. On the potential outlook question, I'd say
that given our basic forecast, which is just sort of a continuation of
a modest rise in the relative price of energy--abstracting from this
temporary rise--that we're not expecting any significant scrapping of
the capital stock. And that is the principal way in which the
potential output falls in the short run. Obviously, if [energy] were
to be maintained at that higher relative price, there would be greater
scrapping of the capital stock and greater substitution away from
energy that would [lead] to a reduction of potential output.
MR. PRELL. This is a complex question--one we really want to
look at in the weeks ahead. As we noted in the Greenbook, one still
has to be very tentative about one's assumptions on potential GNP.
And we've yet to address that in that broader production framework.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you look at the GNP data rebased to
1987, you tend to get lower growth rates [unintelligible], of course,
slower productivity. And when you take a look at the potential, the
question is: Are you going to be viewing it solely in the context of
1982 dollars or in 1987 dollars, which I assume is the base that will
be emerging relatively soon? And that base is .1 or .2 less, as I
recall, on a systematic basis.
MR. PRELL. Well, that's just one more of the uncertainties.
And, of course, if and when there are revisions of the data, that will
alter the sectoral distribution of value added as the result of the
repricing of computers and so on. And that could alter one's
impressions of what has been going on in productivity performance.
MR. HOSKINS.

Let me just follow up on--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

President Guffey.

I'm sorry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Roger.

MR. GUFFEY. Looking at the forecast, Mike, it appears to me
that a good deal of emphasis was put on the net export sector. You
have it coming back fairly quickly. What kind of assurances do you
have, given the uncertainty of the Middle East problem, that that's
really going to come about?
You have it coming back very quickly, it
seems to me.
MR. TRUMAN. There are really three factors there. The
answer is that we can't give you too many assurances, obviously, for

-13-

10/2/90

the reason that you cited: We have the same [uncertain] oil situation
here. There are some short-term effects built in, which cause this
low that's going to look like [unintelligible]. As a short-term
factor, we took account of the fact that we're not going to ship any
more grain to Iraq right away but that the grain will go somewhere
else as we get into 1991.
So, that tends to give you a short-term
decline that magnifies the bounceback. Then in the fourth quarter to
the first quarter, with the negative growth in the United States,
imports are held down. So that gives you an arithmetic effect as far
as net exports are concerned. Then, as we get further out into the
forecast, the lower dollar that has come about over the last year
tends to give a boost to exports as well as to hold down imports. The
growth assumption that's in here has been marked down somewhat from
recent forecasts; it was marked down last time and it was marked down
this time consistent with the effects that we have in the U.S.
economy. And we have quite slow growth built in, as the Chairman
mentioned earlier, for Canada and the United Kingdom, for example; we
have negative growth in those two countries. On the other hand, we
have some resumption of growth next year, especially in Canada. So,
that does give a boost in that direction. We also have a somewhat
rosier outlook--or let me say a less negative outlook--for Latin

America in 1991, which gives us a boost to [exports].
big factors.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Those are the

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I'm back on my housing kick. If I'm reading this
page correctly, you are estimating housing starts for this present
calendar year at 1.2 million, going down to 1.15 million next year,
with this present quarter actually being the low quarter--although the
next quarter is going to be about the same. It surprises me that we
see this downturn ending so quickly--unless you're a lot more
optimistic than I am about the credit situation, which, obviously, you
are.
MR. PRELL. I suspect so. But that doesn't mean that we're
expecting things to return to the kind of situation we had three or
four years ago. I must say that on the mortgage side, as opposed to
the construction side, we still don't see signs of any great addition
to effective demand in that market. But I think the construction
credit side will continue to be a touchy situation for a while longer.
As you know, we have assumed that there would be some gradual
improvement in access to credit by builders who have decent projects
to propose. But the key here is that we're looking primarily to the
weakness in real income over the next couple of quarters to be the
major drag on housing demand. And as that situation improves, we
expect some people to come back into the market and provide some lift
to housing demand. The level to which we go back is still a
relatively low level of overall housing activity; it certainly does
not go beyond what one might think the longer-run demographics would
suggest should be the basic level of housing demand. So, we don't
think we have a very aggressive forecast here as we look out to 1991.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have a number that you use for
sort of gross extinctions--in other words, the equivalent of the age
There
of stock in the passenger car market--from the housing stock?
is a figure that is basically the net extinctions, which is related to

the total number of operable housing units and the total number of--

10/2/90

-14-

MR. PRELL. Well, the figures that we've built into our
thinking would involve about 400,000 units a year to replace
dilapidated or demolished units and meet the second-home demand. If
you add that to the demographic trend, we estimate that the basic
housing start level ought to be somewhere at 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 million
units--maybe toward the lower end, if you want to be conservative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So we're at the point where the vacancy
rate increase is negligible and the housing starts number is following
with the demographics?
MR. PRELL. Well, we are sort of building into this forecast
the notion that we're going to absorb some excess supply at this
point. That's one moderating influence in the growth of starts over
the next couple of years.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. PRELL.

That's just residential, right?
That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MS. SEGER. Mike, how about this heavy flow of horrible
publicity about real estate problems, such as the latest Newsweek
cover story. If you [don't] own a house, it seems to me you'd get a
slight case of cold feet about buying one because it practically
guarantees a big loss on your investment, whereas a few years ago
practically everyone--especially around this area--who stepped into
the housing market expected to make a killing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

Can I just add to that?

Isn't that right?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The equivalent Newsweek cover at the top
of the market was exactly at the top of the market. And then we got a
signal that maybe-MS. SEGER.

Yes, a bleeding signal.

MR. PRELL. I think we've been pointing for some time to the
altered psychology of this market. The investment motive for buying a
home in many areas of the country is not very strong at this point.
There are still areas where prices are reasonably firm. On the whole,
though, the picture is certainly one of a flattening out of prices for
both new and existing homes. It looks much like the kind of rate of
increase or stability that we saw in the last recession. But interest
rates are anticipated to be a bit lower. They're at the low end of
the range we've seen in the past decade or more. And there is some
basic underlying demand. Now, houses might get smaller. We've seen a
lot of moving-up-the-scale by homebuilders in recent years and perhaps
if there's some moderation in demand for shelter, it will take the
form in part of less extravagant houses. But at some point we're
going to have this pressure to house this population. While we may
have doubling up and so on for a while, I think there is some
underlying support here.

10/2/90

-15-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But Governor Seger is right.
It could
just as easily go to a million annual rate for a quarter or two and
still be consistent with-MR. PRELL.
It could go even lower than that.
It's a small
sector.
It has some side effects but it would take a very deep plunge
relative to our forecast to have a major effect in altering the
outlook.
MS. SEGER.
It's small, but it involves a lot of small
business people who write their Congressmen.
MR. PRELL.
Well, you're moving into another sphere.
you could say that might-MS.

SEGER.

MR. PRELL.
fiscal policy.
MS.

SEGER.

I'm not;

it makes no

That might

[hint]

I guess

sense here.

at some offset in terms

of

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
Mike, I was interested in the general tenor of
your presentation, which was: "We are projecting two consecutive
negative quarters but we don't really believe it very much."
MR. PRELL.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. PRELL.

That's a slight variation of what I tried to

say.

There are no hard data to support it.
We can't

see it yet.

True, you talked about new orders, which looked
MR. MULLINS.
Also, you could make the point, which you made,
fairly depressing.
that the purchasing managers index would be rather consistent with
your forecast, it seems to me.
As for consumer spending, August--the
first post-oil-shock month--didn't look too great and some of the
third quarter will be [what happened in] July. But again, the auto
Yet the forecast has
sales really are holding up even in September.
been lowered for the fourth quarter by 1-1/2 percent and for the first
quarter [of 1991] by a little over 1-1/2 percent based upon apparently
no hard data supportive of it.
What did you see that fed into such
dramatic changes, despite the fact that the hard data didn't really
compel you to do it?
MR. PRELL.
Well, as I noted, there were several [factors].
One of the biggest single considerations was the significantly higher
level of oil prices that we have in the fourth quarter and in the
first quarter of next year, which is going to squeeze the real
purchasing power of households by a significant degree.
MR. MULLINS.
So, if we reduce the oil [price] forecast to
where it was in the August Greenbook that would account for most of
the--

10/2/90

-16-

MR. PRELL. That would account for at least the majority of
it; I wouldn't say it would account for all of it in a [strict]
mechanical translation. We thought there were other factors in the
environment too.
The general inflation trend looks a bit worse and
the excise tax hit also implies somewhat greater inflation in the near
term and still further erosion of real income. We also looked at the
credit market developments and at least intuitively judged that there
is more restraint being imposed there than we might have anticipated
in our previous forecast. We try to take into account the anecdotal
information. I mentioned that as something that certainly has looked
negative and I think it would be silly for us to ignore that totally.
MR. MULLINS.
constraint?

Do you see hard evidence of the credit market

MR. PRELL. Hard evidence?
Well, obviously, the trends are
visible. The lending practices surveys that we pick up aren't that
up-to-the-minute, but the recent survey showed a slight widening of
quality spreads in the bond market.
Very clearly something that has
impressed us is the turmoil in the banking sector. That is something
we can't yet document in terms of its effect on their lending, but it
seems to us to suggest some significant further constraint on them.
MR. MULLINS.
May I ask a related question on the
[projection]?
We have now gone through six quarters with GNP growth
averaging a little over 1 percent. And capacity utilization, it seems
to me, hasn't come down that much. We have talked about why
unemployment hasn't gone up so much--because of the participation
rates. What's your view?
Is this about what you'd expect: a 2
percent drop in capacity utilization?
MR. PRELL. We have had some reasonable increases in
industrial production thus far this year. Indeed, there is something
of a tension between the industrial production numbers and the GNP
numbers over the course of this year. The relative movement is
pushing the limits of what one might have expected. But the natural
consequence of that is that we don't have capacity utilization coming
down a great deal.
I don't have an answer for this.
These are
somewhat independent data sets and they sometimes do diverge.
They
are also both subject to revision. And where the truth lies, I can't
say with any certainty.
MR. MULLINS.
Could one explanation be something analogous to
what happened in the labor market, in the sense that the labor force
hasn't grown as rapidly as we expected?
Perhaps the capital stock has
not been growing, in fact.
MR. PRELL. Well, in a sense this is a mechanical
calculation. All the variation in capacity utilization essentially
comes from the variation in industrial production. We don't measure
capacity month-by-month. I guess one might say that there hasn't been
anything very obviously strange about the relationship of capacity
utilization to price behavior this year. Materials prices have not
been collapsing; the PPI for finished goods has not been collapsing.
This doesn't suggest that capacity utilization really has been falling
dramatically.
So, I don't see any indication that we've been led
astray by these numbers.

-17-

10/2/90

MR. MULLINS.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mr. Prell?
President Hoskins, didn't you have a question?
MR. HOSKINS.
I was just going to follow up on your comment,
but it's so far removed now that I don't think we ought to put Mike
back on the rack to torture him more on that.
MR. PRELL.

I could use a couple more inches!

MR. HOSKINS.
If I listened to your comments correctly, [the
implication] was that if we do have a slowing in real GNP and
potential GNP is also slowing, we're running off a gap or slack model
and the 6-1/2 percent unemployment isn't going to buy us the same
reduction in inflation. That was the only point I was trying to make.
But it isn't [unintelligible] and nobody knows.
MR. PRELL. Well, the point we tried to make is that if
potential GNP is growing more slowly, one has to lower one's sights on
what kind of GNP growth we can have and achieve a given degree of
slack. That, I think, is the cutting edge on this issue.
MR. ANGELL. Mike, following up on David Mullins' questions
in regard to the fourth quarter: I note that you have nominal GNP at
2.6 percent for that quarter.
If my memory serves me correctly, we
hardly had any quarters in the 1981-1982 recession that had nominal
GNP that low. That 2.6 percent is an extremely low nominal number.
I
wondered: How does V2 on a one-quarter lag basis look with 2.6
percent? We really have a fair idea, don't we Don, as to where M2
We
might be in the third quarter relative to the second quarter?
could put that to bed and then take this number [and determine] what
kind of a V2 change we would have.
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.

For the fourth quarter?
Yes.

MR. KOHN. We have a minus 2 percent velocity. Now, we
wrestled with this issue, and we tried to address it at least in a
sentence or two in the Bluebook. Obviously, we did not have a
comparable slowdown in money to accompany the slowdown in nominal GNP.
Just from a modeling perspective, we find that the models are driven
by consumption, and nominal consumption remains quite high. A lot of
that is prices--oil and whatnot--and it's not real. But nominal
spending--dollars flowing through--remains quite high, and that should
help to support M2.
From a more theoretical perspective, the notion
is that holdings and increases in holdings of M2 are related in some
So, we
sense to notions of permanent income and longer-term trends.
wouldn't ordinarily expect money demand to react very sharply
contemporaneously to slowdowns in nominal GNP.
It would work through
in the sense that it averages through in a slower path in nominal GNP
over time. That's how we tried to square this circle. We really
don't expect a comparable slowdown in M2 for those reasons.
MR. PRELL. Governor Angell, I might just note that the
relatively low deflator we have gotten for the fourth quarter--

-18-

10/2/90

MR. ANGELL.

I noticed that.

MR. PRELL.
--is something of an artifact of our assumption
about oil prices, the oil import pattern, and how fast those prices of
imported oil flow through to finished products, and so on. The fact
that we had a big bulge in the oil price gives us this temporary dip,
which is then reversed in the first quarter. That isn't to say we
don't have a pattern of slower nominal GNP growth over this quarter
and the next; but it is still a relatively low number.
MR. ANGELL. But on the nominal [GNP] there's also a rather
significant move back from what looks like a 1990 nominal of about 5
percent. That's not for the [calendar] year, but for the Q2-to-Q2
period; then it looks as though it goes from 5 percent nominal to 7
percent nominal. But I don't think it needs any more elaboration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
would somebody like to start the Committee discussion?

If not,

MR. FORRESTAL.
I will start off, Mr. Chairman. I would have
to say that the business and consumer attitudes we have found in the
Sixth District since our last meeting suggest a quite fragile economic
outlook. The people that I've talked to in the past several weeks
have become increasingly negative, with just a few exceptions. We
have been looking with interest at the oil sector, the energy sector
on the Louisiana coast, expecting that perhaps the higher oil prices
might have given rise to some greater interest in investment in that
sector. But we have been told by our contacts in the industry that
there is just too much uncertainty about the price of oil in the
future.
So, they're not ready to embark at this point on any
significant added investment.
The only bright spots that I can find in our economy are for
the most part in the export-producing industries.
The industries that
are competing with imports are still shrinking, and that's
particularly true in the apparel area. Retailers in the district are
anticipating substantial caution on the part of consumers, which I
think is certainly justified. Interestingly, they're delaying orders
for Christmas merchandise; they think that manufacturers will need to
clear out goods at lower prices later on.
I'm not sure that their bet
is quite good on that score since manufacturers' inventories are quite
lean.
So, it's hard to tell how their strategy will finally come out.
Now, what I've been talking about is really a reflection of
attitudes and anecdotal information. The hard data that we get from
the July numbers suggest that the District is doing fairly well in
comparison to the rest of the country.
In the month of July, for
example, unemployment fell just a little, which moved the rate a bit
closer to the national average. But we did get hard data for August
for the state of Florida and that suggested that there is going to be
a significant increase in the rate of unemployment for the month of
August.
Picking up on what Mike said about the credit crunch, the
business contacts that we have are reporting increasingly stringent
credit policies at banks. While I'm not in a position to say that
good projects are not finding financing, the atmosphere created by the

-19-

10/2/90

documentation that is being required is producing a cautionary effect.
So, the anecdotal information in the District is quite negative.
As we look at the national economy, our forecast is similar
to the one in the Greenbook, although we don't actually show declines
in the fourth and first quarters. Our services consumption sector is
certainly not strong, but it's not as weak as that shown in the
Greenbook and that keeps our GNP from turning negative. Also, our
Now, having said
investment spending forecast is not quite as soft.
that about the Atlanta staff forecast, I want to throw in a caveat and
say that I suspect that our forecast is not incorporating the
anecdotal evidence that I've talked about but rather is using the hard
numbers.
So the errors, if any, in our forecast are likely to be on
the down side.
I think the oil shock came at a time when business
confidence was already quite low, and that has caused projects which
might have seemed a little doubtful to be put on the shelf. There are
pressures on businesses to reduce expenses and that could quickly lead
to reductions in both output and employment.
The other issue that is a concern is the weakness in the
banking system. Unfortunately, the media attention to this problem is
certainly not helping. And it's in the banking sector as well as the
So, I think the financial sector
real estate sector, Martha.
difficulties are probably adding to the tax-like impacts of the oil
In these circumstances, it seems to me that one could easily
shock.
come up with a negative judgment about the national economy. And that
is my judgment; I find myself turning quite negative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, at present it's really not clear
what impact the developments in the Middle East are having on the
On the one hand, there are anecdotal
Twelfth District economy.
reports that do suggest a considerably less optimistic attitude by
business leaders in the District, and we've also seen some slowing in
We do a survey of business leaders asking them whether
retail sales.
they expect recession in the next 12 months, and in the most recent
survey 40 percent of the survey respondents said they do expect a
recession. That represents a change from only 4 percent several weeks
That to us was a rather significant change. While the attitudes
ago.
of most of these respondents have changed considerably, when we then
asked them whether they actually had made changes in their business
plans, we found that a number are taking an increasingly cautious
attitude toward investment and operating costs, but the vast majority
really have not changed their plans at this point. When we talk to
retailers, we find that quite a few have experienced either slower
sales or actual decreases in sales of nondurable goods in August and
early September. These are not published data; these are just reports
At the same time, however, the recent published
from individuals.
Employment, for
data don't show very much in the way of weakness.
example, showed some improvement in July and August over what was a
bit of a sluggish performance in the second quarter. Employment
That
levels in August were 3.2 percent higher than a year ago.
compares to 1.6 percent for the rest of the nation, so it's a very
strong performance.
with it,

As for real estate, although this number has a little problem
real estate loans--single-family and home equity loans--have

10/2/90

-20-

continued to expand at a rate of 22.7 percent in the past year.
If
you look at the monthly seasonally adjusted increases in the past
seven months, they have ranged between 13 percent and 45 percent.
I
must admit that some of that is due to the bank restructurings,
because S&Ls are becoming a less significant factor, particularly in
the state of California and also in Arizona. But even stripping that
out, there is underlying strength in real estate loans in singlefamily and home equity loans in the Twelfth District.
If I can turn to the national outlook for the moment, the
basic path of the Greenbook forecast certainly seems plausible to us.
We expect one or two extremely weak--and I guess they could be
negative--quarters. We would say that is primarily resulting from the
oil shock. We then would expect that to be followed by a pickup of
growth in the first half of next year.
I think one of the primary
sources of strength is going to be in the net export area, resulting
from the 15 percent decline in the trade-weighted value of the dollar
in the past year. We also expect, using the Greenbook's assumptions
with regard to oil prices later on in the period, that consumer
spending should pick up in 1991.
Inflation certainly is going to be
higher next year--probably somewhat over 5 percent, as indicated in
the Greenbook.
Inflation will be fueled not only by higher oil
prices, but we ought to keep in mind also the impact of the decline in
the value of the dollar, and more importantly, underlying wage
pressures.
The unemployment rate at its current level suggests that,
even without the oil shock, the economy would have been straining at
its capacity to produce in the months ahead and that that would have
been a further impetus to strong underlying price pressures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. This is obviously a very volatile and highly
uncertain period and any economic forecast is going to be subject to
an unusual degree of uncertainty. At the same time, I think we have
to avoid overemphasizing these uncertainties. To me the main thing
that has changed is that we have this oil problem in the Middle East
and we don't know how that is going to affect the price of oil.
Given
the kind of assumptions that the staff has made about what will happen
to the price of oil, I believe their forecast is a very plausible one
and I think the economic projections make sense. I would guess that
the odds of error are about equal in both directions.
The key feature
of the forecast to me is not so much that a recession is predicted,
but that the recession the staff is projecting is relatively shallow
and brief. And when you think about recessions that we've had in the
past, they have almost always been preceded by some kind of
overheating of the economy: inventories have been bloated to some
extent, usually inflation has accelerated rapidly, and interest rates
generally have risen rapidly. But those conditions really don't exist
for the most part today. So again, I think the staff's projection is
pretty well on target. I make this point because I think it implies
that the policy approach that we take ought to be cautious and
measured, like the one that we have been taking in recent years.
I
don't think there's any cause for panic now even though we obviously
need to be alert to what is going to happen in the Middle East.
So far as our District economy is concerned, usually I don't
see anything that's all that different, but I come out with a little
different view than Bob Forrestal did.
I don't think the Beigebook

-21-

10/2/90

report reflects conditions as well as what we've heard since then
because our most recent anecdotal information suggests that economic
activity is still growing for the most part, but at very slow rates.
The sharp slowing that we had been reporting early in the year seems
to have subsided. The main weak point in our area, as is true I guess
in most other places, is certainly commercial building. We have some
major problems in the Baltimore-Washington-Norfolk corridor.
It looks
as if we increasingly will have to deal with the kind of real estate
problems that some other parts of the country have been through.
Apart from that particular situation, however, I would describe the
activity in our area as still growing, but at a very, very modest
pace.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In a District context,
there really is very little recent specific data that will give a
meaningful indication as to where the economy is going. Everybody is
in a state of suspended animation--waiting to see how some of these
major uncertainties will work out.
But I agree with Mike that there's
a considerable dichotomy between the sentiment out there and the
underlying facts. On balance, though, I think the District economy is
continuing to show further moderation. We're still doing a bit better
than other parts of the country, but I think the growth rate is coming
down.
Despite that, I'm quite surprised, really, that some of the
basic businesses are better than I might have expected. The steel
business, for example, continues to be strong; and as the year has
gone forward it really has shown improvement. They started this year
expecting shipments of about 80 to 81 million tons; that number has
come up and we're close enough to the end of the year that 84 million
tons looks like a very safe [bet by the] fourth quarter. Order books
are basically full; there are some orders being delayed but no
outright cancellations that I'm aware of. Meanwhile, though, those in
the steel business are trying to raise prices where they can and when
they can, and to some extent the increases are sticking. The
construction business in the Midwest has finally hit the air pocket
that others have experienced. The August numbers, both residential
and nonresidential, showed declines--not perhaps as significant as in
other parts of the country--but they were down, and that's the first
time we've experienced that. General attitudes of those in the
construction business are, understandably, quite pessimistic.
In the auto sector, sales expectations certainly are being
reduced. The third-quarter number for cars and light trucks together
came in at 14.6 million. The fourth-quarter number is now down to
14.2 million and that brings 1990 down to 14.3 million; there has been
For 1991, at least
a steady erosion as we've gone through the year.
at the company I talk to, they are expecting 14 million at this point;
but they have brought that down from 14.3 million the last time I
So, it
talked to them and from 14.9 million the time before that.
clearly has been coming down.
In the September numbers that Mike
referred to, fleet sales apparently had an impact both on the first,
but maybe most particularly, the second 10-day period of September;
those sales were moved forward a little earlier than is normally the
case to deal with production schedules.
The fourth-quarter production
schedules for the auto companies are higher than last year, but last

10/2/90

-22-

year was a comparatively low period. Clearly, the production risks
are on the down side which, of course, is exactly what happened in the
third quarter. They had a very big production increase scheduled for
the third quarter and they reduced that right through that period. As
an aside, the heavy duty truck business has been and continues to be
very, very soft.
The news out of that area is bad.
The agricultural sector continues to be strong. Another week
or so of this good weather and crop production is just going to be
excellent.
Farm income, despite low commodity prices, is going to be
"pretty good," which means really very good. There is some
uncertainty and the budget resolution adds to that uncertainty. As a
consequence, the agricultural equipment business seems to have
plateaued. And as the major manufacturers look forward to next year,
they think it's possible that equipment sales have plateaued and that
1991 will not be as good as 1990, and that's the first time in 2-1/2
years that we've had that comparison.
On the price side, I must say as I talk to a lot of people
around the District, that they are using opportunities to raise prices
where they can. Many of them felt they got burned the last time
around on this energy issue and this time rather than waiting and
putting through more major increases on an annual basis they are
trying to add a little here and a little there whenever they have an
opportunity. Whether the competitive conditions are going to permit
that remains to be seen.
What to me is the most worrisome is this attitudinal issue.
While the current level of activity seems to be pretty good and there
is certainly no evidence of accelerating deterioration, most
businesses are worried about a recession. And many of the CEOs that I
talk to are running their businesses as if we are going to get into a
recession.
They are looking at their plans for 1991 very carefully.
They are trying to curtail capital spending where they can. The risk,
of course, is that this could become a self-fulfilling prophecy and we
could experience something of a downturn as a result. Therefore,
Mike's forecast looks entirely reasonable from our perspective.
Because of that and given the budget resolution and the other caveats,
with respect to policy I think we need to be alert to the opportunity
to respond to potential weakness.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the First
District goes, the situation is not very ambiguous. Activity has
clearly slackened and it is becoming softer--with a lot of variation,
of course, sector by sector. In the real estate sector, of course, we
are seeing some adjustment in prices.
Residential prices on average
are down about 15 percent; condominium prices are down 40 to 60
percent depending on where they are; and commercial rental rates are
down about 33 percent.
Consistent with that, 90 percent of the
banking assets in the District are now in institutions that we have
rated either currently or prospectively as 3s, 4s, and 5s, and about
55 percent are in institutions that are 4s and 5s.
As you talk to
people, it is interesting that in many ways it seems that businesses
are gloomier the closer they are to the consumer. Sales of white
goods and appliances generally are quite poor and are poorer than we
expected, even given the housing cycle. Car sales have been bad but

10/2/90

-23-

not really awful, with essentially mixed changes as they have been
nationally and fewer sales of small trucks. Talking to [retailers in]
different types of apparel stores, what we found--and I suppose this
isn't unexpected--is that the discounters are doing significantly
better than traditional upstairs stores, but even they are finding an
enormous amount of price sensitivity. Real specials when they run
representative after they had an
them--I talked to a
extraordinary special--will bring people in, but on a day-to-day basis
people won't come in. And, one interesting thing that some of the
people who run these discount chains tell me is that they obviously
are keeping their inventories very lean, but they have the perception
that the people they buy from also are keeping inventories lean and
that's one reason they are not expecting a terribly good Christmas
season. They think they may not see the surplus of goods coming into
Interestingly--I'm not
them that they have seen in earlier periods.
sure it means an awful lot except noise--consumer confidence bounced
[Laughter.]
up in the region from 28 to 37.
With our manufacturers, the outlook is somewhat more mixed.
Computers are quite weak, even including their export sector; that is
a relatively recent change. But I will say--maybe this is consistent
with what Mike was talking about regarding expectations on the new IBM
systems--that people who produce fabricated metal boxes that the
computers go in say that they are doing reasonably well and that they
are expecting pretty good orders further down the line. Manufacturers
of longer lead time products that utilize manufacturers
[unintelligible], such as those who produce power systems and
locomotives, are still doing reasonably well.
The credit issue continues to be very, very difficult. There
is an enormous amount of nervousness about this and, as other people
have said, it's a daily story in the newspapers and on the talk radio
shows, which is kind of an ultimate index of these things. Some
significant tightening is probably appropriate in home equity line
conditions by banks. And we have seen some businesses that really are
very substantial in size actually cutting back their capital spending
or being more cautious on capital spending because of a concern about
how much more debt they want to take on. They are becoming very, very
worried just about the environment and the attention that is being
paid to different quality paper. In that regard, mutual funds that we
talk to are very, very nervous about all types of bank paper and a lot
of them have cut back on it. And we're seeing substantial outflows
from junk bond funds, which again I suppose is what one might expect.
As far as the national outlook goes, we're pretty much in
agreement with the Greenbook, although we have this question of
whether we will get as much of a snapback as quickly. But again, I
think that is a slightly different perception on the credit side. I
would say that with respect to that one issue, which we think might
cause some cumulation of this [slowdown], there really is a lot of
nervousness about the financial fragility question. Looking at the
latest two examination reports on shared national credits and highly
leveraged transactions, the increases in classifications in those
areas are just very, very substantial. So the concern I would have,
even if we get into what should be a relatively mild downturn
precipitated by a supply interruption, is that that could cause
significant problems for some of these institutions, which will

10/2/90

-24-

further tighten the credit situation and may expand a slowdown beyond
one induced by a supply constraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. As for the District, I would say activity in
terms of what we can measure is still slowing; I would guess we're
probably bouncing along around zero right now in the District. One
relatively bright spot, at least through June 30th, is the banking
area. For the first six months of the year, we're showing at small
banks in the District return on assets of 1 percent, return on equity
of 12 to 12-1/2 percent, and really no significant buildup in
nonperforming loans. Now, I don't think that's going to hold up
necessarily through the balance of the year, but that sector so far
looks pretty decent.
In terms of the numbers on the large reporting
banks, there's not a lot of credit being extended but my sense is that
that's somewhat of a mutual thing. I think there's just a sort of
paralysis. Dick, you mentioned this too: I'm not sure borrowers, even
if the credit is available, are all that anxious to borrow in this
environment.
I had a dramatic example of something we have heard about
from a number of people this morning.
I was in a couple of areas in
our District last week where geographically the economy is really
doing quite well, not only statistically but also if you talk to
people they say business is going well.
But their attitude is much
more negative than the reality of what they're dealing with.
I think
that pervades people's actions in the conduct of day-to-day business.
The other feeling I get is that there's not a lot of sense
that monetary policy is somehow at fault.
In other words, I'm not
getting accosted by people saying: "You guys have really screwed up;
you really ought to be doing something differently."
I'm just not
picking that up.
Perhaps the corollary to that is that there is a
general malaise out there, a lot of uncertainty, paralysis--however
you want to describe it.
I'm not sure we have it in our power to snap
the economy out of it.
And maybe yesterday's stock market reaction-and I realize this is just temporary--gives us some insight into the
influence the Middle East situation has on expectations and this
malaise that has set in: the slightest whiff of some resolution there
really had a very positive, temporary, impact on attitudes.
Turning to the national situation, I personally would not be
surprised to see one or two negative quarters, and I wouldn't really
have any quibble with what Mike has projected. We look at monetary
policy from perhaps a somewhat different perspective than Mike, but I
think we're saying essentially the same thing. Our assessment is that
the current course of policy is unlikely to exacerbate whatever
recessionary pressures exist.
I think there is some sense--and I
mentioned this a meeting or two ago--that some people might criticize
the Fed for being too tight. And yet if you look at the latest three
months--whether you look at reserves, the base, narrow money, or broad
money--compared to the prior 12 months, there really has been no
tightening of monetary policy on that basis.
In fact, some of the
measures suggest somewhat of an easing. Anyway, my view is that we
have built a tremendous [foundation], or whatever you want to call it.
We have wrung out a tremendous amount of excess liquidity over the
last three years that had been built up from monetary stimulus or

-25-

10/2/90

whatever in the mid-1980s. And if we can just come through this next
period here with a reasonably good monetary policy still intact-probably a combination of good luck and good policy--the prospects for
making significant progress on inflation down the road are really
pretty good, I think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For some time I have
commented on reasonably good economic conditions in the District and I
think by objective measures that is still the case: The economy is
continuing to expand at least modestly. Of course, every
generalization has holes in it and, as Si Keehn reported, farm
implement sales clearly have leveled off--and they had been quite
strong in the spring in our District. Agricultural conditions in
general are very good, but there are remaining pockets of drought, so
there obviously are ongoing problems in those areas. The construction
sector has weakened in some locations. Having said that, and having
reported that I think by objective measures the District economy is
expanding, like a lot of other people who have commented I think what
has changed recently are attitudes, which clearly have deteriorated
significantly. There's a good deal of concern out there; we're even
picking up some questions about the status of the large money center
banks, which is a topic that doesn't come up very often in our
District. But there is some concern about that. Attitudes clearly
have worsened as a generalization, but there are exceptions. I
happened to be in a meeting with the treasurers of many of the
corporations based in the Twin Cities and they almost universally
reported business as strong. Now, these companies tend to have very
large international exposure, not just selling abroad but operating
abroad. So, they're not saying the U.S. economy is strong per se.
But they are reporting that business for the most part is strong.
There were a couple of exceptions; but in general I was surprised by
the tenor of their remarks and the comfort they seem to have, at least
looking at their businesses worldwide.
In regard to the national economic outlook, I don't disagree
much with the Greenbook forecast. Our own model has us avoiding a
recession, although we have a continuation of three or four more
quarters of very slightly positive real growth. But we can also
calculate probabilities of recession with the model, and clearly the
probabilities have gone up relative to those calculated prior to the
previous FOMC meeting. I think that's just a statement of how the
risks have shifted; that clearly argues that there are greater
downside risks for the real economy. Unfortunately, the inflation
numbers, as Mike commented, also have been disappointing irrespective
of food and energy prices. And our model doesn't provide much comfort
on the longer-term inflation outlook either. So, I see risks sitting
out there in both directions. It's not a pleasant outlook to
contemplate, obviously.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Dallas District
seems to reflect many of the national trends, but overall we may be
doing just slightly better than the nation now. The picture is quite
mixed, however, and virtually all segments of the region's economy are
growing more slowly than earlier in the year. The higher energy

-26-

10/2/90

prices help fewer people and hurt more people in our District than was
the case years ago.
So, the net impact is less certain. Residential
construction activity has shown a modest pickup from the extremely
depressed levels of the last several years, but nonresidential
construction is flatter now, with the exception of the Houston area.
Retail sales have shown some very slim gains in recent months. The
refining petro-chemical business has held up relatively well lately.
Other areas of manufacturing have been somewhat weak. We did meet
with our advisory council on small business and agriculture a few
weeks ago. Our agricultural conditions seem to have improved,
certainly in recent weeks. Outside of the issue of credit
availability, which incidentally is not a new issue with us, the
economy may be doing considerably better than it had been over the
past several years of meeting with that group.
Looking at the national economy, I have no real disagreement
with the staff's Greenbook forecast.
Intuitively, I wonder if the
third quarter will be quite as strong as they're indicating, but I
would not have a great quarrel with it.
We don't see any evidence
that we're heading into a cumulative downturn. As a matter of fact,
as I look at Mike's forecast and think about that outcome, it would
not be a bad result, if it could actually be accomplished.
It seems
to me that the assumption is that a steady monetary policy would
accomplish that result.
So, in spite of all the uncertainties and
concerns, I would tend to pay a bit more attention to the inflation
picture rather than [to the possibility of] the economy slipping over
too far.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The District economic indicators are generally
weak and, as elsewhere, business and consumer confidence is low and I
think deteriorating. Employment is falling in the District;
manufacturing is slumping; construction is off; retail sales fell in
August and the first part of September; and bank lending is declining.
And at the anecdotal level, there is more concern on the part of the
ordinary public and the business community about the soundness of
banks.
It's hard to measure, but I think it's there and I think it's
growing. I'm also hearing anecdotal evidence about the slowing
payments of accounts receivables. Again, it's hard to measure, but
they seem to have slowed a good bit. One businessman told me at a
meeting that he doesn't even hear "the check is in the mail" anymore;
people just say that the money isn't coming, which I think is a major
change.
At the national level, I think the risks are on the down
side. My hunch is that we're facing a recession that will be more
pronounced than contemplated in the Greenbook. I think business and
consumer confidence are likely to get worse and the stresses and the
cracks in the financial system are likely to weigh more substantially
on aggregate demand during the coming months than is built into the
forecast.
We talk about a cumulative downturn and we say we don't see
the evidence for a cumulative downturn. I think we're probably
looking for the kind of evidence that was typical of recessions that
we had when the economy was more dominated by manufacturing. We tend

to look at sales and orders and inventories and that sort of thing.
We have a different kind of economy and I think the cumulative

-27-

10/2/90

downturn may have a different kind of anatomy this time. We had a
demand side softening of the economy coming into the summer. The
economy had slowed a good bit.
Then on top of that we had the supply
shock, which has caused it to slow more. Now we have the financial
fragilities. And it seems to me that that's the cumulative set of
forces that will take us into a recession rather than having business
people misjudging sales, seeing their inventories build up, and then
I think we're in a different kind of
cutting back on their orders.
It's important for us to resist inflation in this kind of
economy.

environment and to reduce inflation over time; but it's also important
to buy some insurance against too deep a slump in economic activity
where we would then find ourselves in a situation--if the economy
starts to get away from us--in which we're forced to ease too rapidly
in a very short period of time. I think we've bought a lot of
credibility in recent years by trying to stay ahead of the economic
curve, and I think we should continue that approach to policy even in
the face of the uncertainties that we're experiencing at the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the national economy
first, I think the forecast that Mike and his colleagues have put on
the table is as good a forecast as you're going to get right now. Our
own bank forecast is very similar in all of its major elements to
Mike's forecast. But having said that, I think the point Mike made at
the outset and that several others have made is very important: There
really is a sharp dichotomy between attitudes and expectations versus
what we see in the economic statistics and what those hard economic
statistics would suggest in terms of a forecast. And I think there is
a danger in that environment of the classic self-fulfilling prophecy.
There have been several comments made about the financial
fragility aspects of that. Let me just add a couple of insights in
that area. First of all, part of what we're seeing in banking,
broadly defined, is also being seen in other countries. There is a
similar situation at least in many respects in Japan and, while it's
not widely talked about, there are symptoms of the same kind of
conditions beginning to develop even in the London clearing banks
because of asset quality problems and overextension of real estate
loans and so on. So, while the problem to date has received a lot
more attention in the United States, it is not one that is in all of
It has secular elements
its dimensions unique to the United States.
to it, especially in this country, in terms of even greater questions
in the marketplace as to how these institutions are going to generate
the earnings that they need not only to raise capital but also to
maintain reasonable rates of return for shareholders. But right now
there clearly is a very, very pronounced cyclical element surrounding
this issue of credit quality concerns.
Looking at that from the vantage point of the major money
center banks, there are three areas: the LDC loans, the HLT loans, and
the real estate loans. Right now what we see is a clustering of
weighted classified asset ratios in the money center banks in New
York. For the institutions that have been the subject of a lot of
this recent attention, those weighted classified asset ratios are now
in the range of below 20 percent, which is not great but certainly
should be manageable. I would say right now that by far the greatest
risk of further deterioration in asset quality is in the real estate

10/2/90

area.
The LDC situation, if anything, is better, especially after all
the chargeoffs that were taken for Argentina. The exposures in that
area essentially now are in four big countries: Mexico, Venezuela,
Brazil, and Argentina--not that the others are totally insignificant;
but of those countries two are in pretty good shape.
The HLT
situation, while laden with uncertainties, again I would judge as
manageable. But the big, big question is on the real estate side.
Even if, as I think, the situation right now is better than a lot of
the market scuttlebutt would have it, it's certainly not as good as
we'd like to see it.
And it's very important to recognize that if you
just take those seven institutions, you're talking about banking
assets of about $700 billion, which is something like a quarter or a
third of domestic banking assets. And with only one or maybe two
exceptions, for the foreseeable future the growth in assets in these
institutions is going to be very, very restrained because of capital
considerations, leaving aside whatever judgments one might want to
make about credit screening and those types of things.
I think it's
also important to keep in mind that the foreign banks, especially
Japanese banks, that have been a very important source of the net
growth of credit in the United States are not going to be a source of
that kind of growth in the future, at least in the foreseeable future.
Again, I'm leaving aside what we mean when we talk about credit
crunches.
I think we have a situation in which a very large number of
institutions, both foreign and domestic, are simply not in a position
to be doing a lot of lending because of de facto constraints, and
appropriate constraints, coming from the capital side. But at the
moment my assessment still would be that the situation, while not
pretty, is certainly not as difficult as some of these reports would
indicate.
I should also say in the area of financial fragility that
while the spotlight at the moment is on the banks, it should also be
kept in mind that the securities houses and the insurance companies
are by no means exempt from these problems.
Indeed, I would stipulate
that some of the potential sources of vulnerability in the securities
industry could be even more acute than some of the ones in banking,
even though that is not a subject of great conversation at the moment.
Against that backdrop, a question that keeps running through
my mind is: Why are attitudes so sour?
Now, presumably everybody is
looking at the same numbers that we're looking at.
What is it that
has produced this very, very substantial deterioration in attitudes
and expectations?
It seems to me that there are at least three or
four factors at work here. One is that I do detect, even among the
most aggressive businessmen, a recognition now that inflation has
proven to be much more stubborn than we expected and than they
expected. There was a time when we talked about inflation that a lot
of people would say to us "You're fighting the last war."
They don't
say that anymore.
I think there is a recognition that the core
inflation rate has not gone down and probably has crept up.
So,
that's a factor.
I think the budget process, leaving aside what you
think are the results in terms of numbers, has taken a major toll in
terms of expectations or attitudes. On Wall Street and on Main Street
that has been viewed as a farce and I think in its own way has clearly
undercut attitudes and expectations. Again, no matter what you think
of the program itself, which I actually think is pretty decent, we're
still staring at this incredibly massive deficit for next year. You
can dress it up any way you want, but I think that number has been a

-29-

10/2/90

shock to people as well. The third factor that I think is very, very
important in terms of this souring of attitudes and expectations has
been a decline in asset values. For the typical household it really
has struck right in the breadbasket because between stocks and houses
there has been a very sharp psychological adjustment if not a real
adjustment. One of the things that sharply distinguishes this period
from other periods that we've gone through in the past is the fact
that asset values at the level of both the household and the corporate
sector are declining in many cases. Some of that, of course,
especially in real estate, is a result of the excesses that went
before. Nevertheless, it is there.
I also think that there are renewed and heightened concerns,
even among people who don't normally think about this question, about
the reliability of our external sources of finance. All these news
reports about the Japanese pulling back and other things are catching
the attention of people who normally don't even give those types of
issues a second thought. In a way, Sam's earlier comments about the
exchange rate are a manifestation of that. So, you take all of that
and superimpose the Middle East on top of it and the conclusion I come
to is that we shouldn't be terribly surprised that expectations and
attitudes are as sour as they are. When you put it all together, it
seems to me that what we have right now that is different from most of
our earlier experience is either the reality or the danger of a
significant element of illiquidity and/or credit rationing beginning
to manifest itself in asset markets, especially real estate. And that
does seem to me to carry with it some dangers that are quite different
from some of the things that we've had to deal with in the past.
Indeed, I would be concerned that any further or more widespread
illiquidity, again especially in real estate markets, could very well
be the thing that tips some of these expectational factors into more
underlying behavioral factors.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
District itself, the economy continues to grow moderately and there
are mixed results in individual industries or economic areas of
activity. In the energy sector, for example, the higher oil prices
have pushed up the rig count modestly. For example, in August the
count was 282 in the District and in September 301. However, that
followed a drop in the rig count from July to August. But it has come
back and, as has been stated around this table before, the question is
whether or not there is enough equipment and skilled labor to meet the
demand. The last and important part of that equation is whether or
not there are enough lenders out there willing to finance oil
speculation exploration. Having been burned in past years, I'm not
sure that that kind of financing will come from District banks.
Whether it will come from Boston's probably is not very clear either!
With regard to the agricultural sector, farmers have put in
the bin the largest wheat crop since 1982. The corn and soybean crop
look very good, with some concern about the bean crop being nipped
with a little early frost. But with regard to the wheat crop, given
the lack of exports to Iraq that has already been mentioned and the
projection of restricted or lower levels of exports to the Soviet
Union, the reaction in the market is simply to [unintelligible] the
big harvest. The lower exports and less demand clearly have dropped

-30-

10/2/90

the price of those commodities substantially.
In the livestock
industry, on the other hand, both hogs and cattle are going great
guns, particularly with the prospect for cheaper feed in the future.
As for automobile assembly activity in the District, auto
makers continue to shut lines down or to shut down entire assembly
factories.
For example, in Oklahoma City a plant will go down a full
week in October and in Kansas City a Ford plant will shut down a week
or two weeks, depending upon their order levels. As a result, it's
off and on. There isn't much lost income when those auto workers are
not working, however, because of the arrangements under the auto
contracts.
So, it's really not a matter of cutting their purchasing
power but rather a question of how much they're actually working and
what kind of orders they're getting for particular automobiles or
trucks.
On the other hand, in the aircraft industry, which was
mentioned this morning by Mike--and Wichita is a big player in this-the billings for 1990 and 1991 are projected to be about 30 percent
higher than last year, year-over-year.
So, that industry is still
clicking along very well. With regard to construction, activity is up
rather significantly over year-ago levels: about 30 percent in
nonresidential and 5 to 7 percent in residential.
So all in all, the District, although not booming by any
stretch of the imagination, is doing as well as or better than the
nation. And that is important with regard to the outlook in the sense
that a lot of people I talk to say "Well, we're doing pretty well, but
I think we're in a recession."
When you press them on why they
believe we're in a recession they say they watch the news or read the
newspapers and given what's happening in the Middle East they simply
think that times are [not] as good as they otherwise would have been.

But there's no real evidence that we're in a recession.
With regard to the national economy, we go through the same
exercise that the staff here does with regard to projections and with
basically the same assumptions. One thing we did not build in this
month was the fiscal restraint that would take place with regard to a
$35 billion budget agreement. Even with that, we're a little less
optimistic than the staff in the sense that we would project an
additional quarter of flat growth--not negative, not positive, but
flat--in the second quarter of 1991. Otherwise, it looks very
similar.

But given the uncertainties that are out there, I don't

think one can put a lot of faith in the long-run projection. There
are too many uncertainties. As a result, it seems to me we probably
should be doing nothing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. First on the national outlook, I don't have a
lot of problem with Mike's forecast. But there is a very large error
band around forecasts, and as the Chairman indicated last week to the
business economists, that error band is increasing, not getting
smaller, certainly relative to 20 years ago. That error band is a
couple of percentage points either way. So, I'm not so worried about
the forecast as I am about our perceived response to it. As several
people already mentioned, we had an oil price shock; that was a real
shock. There's not much we can do to increase output because of that.
We have had a wealth loss and I don't think that calls for much of a
response by us. Some of the other concerns, of course, relate to our

10/2/90

-31-

ability to fine tune in some sense. I don't think we have a very good
record on being able to pick out when the appropriate time is to
increase the rate of growth in money and when the appropriate time is
to shut it down. Nor do I think the evidence from the academic
community, at least as they judge policy in terms of the importance of
expectations, supports our doing anything other than providing a
stable monetary policy.
I would judge stability by the rates of
growth in M2, and we've had a pretty stable rate of growth for three
years as Tom Melzer mentioned. And with Don's numbers--they are
coming up--it looks like we're going to be fairly close to that number
of the last three years.
So, I think the problem now is not making an
error to signal the markets, essentially the currency and bond
markets, that we're running a risk of making some of the mistakes that
we did in the past--that is overdoing it in the face of a potential
recession. So, I think we need to find some way to [provide] some
certainty or at least not increase the instability about the future.
I suppose one could make an argument for tightening policy as a way to
send a signal.
I'll save that for later.
Let me talk about the District. The Fourth District is doing
generally better than the nation, but not a lot better. As just one
example, our employment in manufacturing in the last year has been
flat while the nation's has declined about 2 percent.
Our
unemployment rates, after tilting up in the second quarter in Ohio and
Pennsylvania, now are back at 5.3 and 4.8 percent respectively. So,
the level of activity is holding up pretty well.
Capital goods
producers, which we have a [unintelligible], are still filling their
order books, but they are less optimistic.
One turnaround has been in
heavy duty truck activity; the orders there are starting to revive.
Also, the export side, which has been a strength for us, still seems
to be strong but we're beginning to get some signs of a softening
there. We recently talked to an economist at one particular
construction machinery company who indicated that they had experienced
a very sharp falloff [in demand] for construction machinery worldwide
starting in August.
So, there are some signs that the economy has
softened, but as far as the numbers go, in general the Fourth District
seems to be holding up okay.
In terms of attitudes, they are very similar to what people
have indicated around the table.
I went through the District last
week on a bunch of road trips and when I talked to individuals they
always seemed to have a good reason why their business was doing okay.
Everyone had his or her own peculiar reason--we just got lucky or we
got this order that will take us out through the second quarter of
next year. But there is this pervasive view of impending disaster out
there. I think there is some tightening in terms of cost control
within the larger firms because of that, even though their order books
haven't shifted much. Overall, I don't think the District has changed
much other than in terms of the attitudinal caution because of the oil
price shock.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have just a couple of comments about two
industries I've been following closely in the last several months.
One is autos.
Quite a bit has been made of the fact that deliveries
in August and September have looked pretty healthy, and that has been
used as an indicator of consumer spending not falling into a sewer

10/2/90

-32-

someplace. What I picked up from some analysts within the industry
were two things: (1) that the seasonals are atrocious because the auto
industry no longer has the regular seasonal swings that it used to, so
that applying the seasonal factors that we do doesn't make a lot of
sense; and (2) that the auto sales and these deliveries statistics
really were distorted this time.
Si alluded to it, but didn't expand
on it. They were distorted by fleet deliveries, but these are fleet

sales that are controlled by the auto companies themselves, primarily
to car rental agencies.
All of the Big Three own car rental agencies
and they use deliveries to them to sort of cook the books, if you want
to say that.
They can more or less determine what kind of sales

statistics they want to report by getting either more orders placed or
fewer orders placed for their car rental subs. And there was an
exceptional amount of that done in September for a couple of big
reasons. One is that they simply didn't have enough orders coming
from the traditional sources--purchases by folks like you and me--to
get their assembly plants cranked up. They needed to get more
strength in orders, so they chose to provide it in that way. Also,
there is this continued push in the industry for market penetration.
There's a real horse race out there. It's as if nobody wants to blink
and no one wants to cut back and run the risk of cutting their market
share statistics still more. So, they are really trying to hold their
production up. Then there are the rating agencies--Moodys and
Standard and Poors--and those folks are really checking carefully on
the Big Three these days with threats of downgrading their debt
obligations. Apparently important factors considered are production
and market share as an indication of future viability. So, that's
another factor entering in. Anyway, I was warned by two different
people that these statistics should not be taken at face value at all.
Also, I got an interesting statistic on showroom traffic, which would
be the kind the consumer would usually think of; it has dropped
substantially to about 15 percent below a year ago. And what they
call the closure rate, or the number of deals that are actually closed
as a percentage of the individuals they deal with, has dropped by 20
percent just in August. It was pointed out to me too that inventories
are building and that the auto inventories themselves are probably
about 4 days above normal and that truck inventories are getting up to
about 20 days more than the dealers would like to have.
Another industry that I was probing Mike on is homebuilding,
because I've been talking to a lot of homebuilders in the last couple
of months, and there really is a problem out there. The financing
situation is getting more and more attention; it started out as an S&L
problem in the form of limits on loans to a single borrower but now it
has spread way beyond that. We are hearing of more and more
homebuilders failing and closing their businesses or liquidating, etc.
Small business groups in general, I think, are showing a lot of
nervousness. They seem very negative. Retailers who are in the small
business category seem to be very cautious about their Christmas
orders. Again, as Bob Boykin said, small businesses always have
gripes about getting credit, but I've never heard them as loud as they
are this time because now they're talking about having had credit but
then the lines were cut. So, this is a little different from lack of
availability initially. And these credit availability problems are
way beyond small business. Again, we're hearing it from businesses of
all sizes and in many different industries.

-33-

10/2/90

So, I wouldn't be surprised to see the couple of negative
quarters that are shown in the Greenbook. I guess what I would be
surprised to see is the kind of snapback next year that the staff is
assuming.
I'd like to see it but, frankly, I doubt that it will
happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, let me focus for just a moment on
the budget deal that was struck this past weekend.
It seems to me
that the basic dilemma we have been struggling with for months now has
been intensifying recently; even before the oil shock, the economy was
having some problems. We have a perception that we are going to
weaken substantially, largely driven by the oil situation. But even
before that I was disappointed in the level of economic activity--in
the second quarter, for instance. In the case of the financial
system, we know there is a lot of pressure there and a great deal of
credit stringency in the banking system that is playing back into the
real economy. Taken by themselves, these kinds of factors would push
one in the direction of easing. On the other hand, the inflation
situation seems to look worse, again driven by the oil situation. But
even before that occurred there was precious little progress being
made; maybe there was some deterioration. So, there's a concern that
[higher prices] are becoming embedded, which would lead one in the
direction of firming.
So, what we needed was a way to break out of the impasse.
I imagine everybody would define the
And we now have a fiscal deal.
I
ideal fiscal deal differently, but this one I'm sure is not it.
would hope that it's a new genre in the shabby history of budget
deals; I would hope that this one is going to turn out to be firmer
and to have less smoke and mirrors in it than those we've had in the
past. We don't know that much about it yet, but it looks that way.
I've been trying to find more reports on the teeth that may be in the
enforcement part of this and I haven't found very much yet. But there
is some evidence that there are teeth in it and that's encouraging.
It is a multiyear commitment, which I think we all felt was very
important. And I think it has a good configuration to it: it's about
the right size early on and then grows as it goes down the line.
Oh, sure it could! We could turn out
Could it be another snow job?
to be as disappointed as we've been in the past. But if it works, I
don't think it needs to be all that it is cracked up to be in order
It could go far toward restoring our
for it to do a lot for us.
It would by
fiscal health; it could help the saving rate a lot.
It should help
definition, I guess, help the saving rate a lot.
investment a lot, which I think is the absolute key to the future of
In the area of reducing inflation, it would
this country's economy.
seem to me that there is the possibility of more progress available
here than in anything that we could do at this point through monetary
policy by cooling excess demand and providing relative strength to the
dollar. In general, we've all been talking about the malaise in
attitude that we have around the country and I think it could go a
long way to [reversing] that. Again, I don't think it has to be as
If it's
good as it's touted to be in order to be highly beneficial.
not passed, we're quite likely to be due for a very painful trip
through the wringer.
If that should occur, I think the Fed is
probably just going to have to look to the long-term best interests of
the country and kind of let the short term fall out as it may. But if

-34-

10/2/90

it's passed, it can only help--and perhaps can help a great deal.

The

question is: How much?
Keeping in mind the fact that we're still
going to have very large deficits to be dealt with for the next couple
of years at the minimum, I think that if it's passed, we should be

looking for appropriate ways to support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor Mullins.

I generally agree with the staff's forecast.

I

think we're facing a stalled out economy that is likely to dip for a
quarter or two into negative territory. I'm a little less optimistic,
as a number of people are, on the [prospects for a] consumer-led
pickup in 1991. First, that assumes oil prices are going down as the
major impetus; we'll see what happens there. I also worry more about
further erosion of consumer confidence, given the fragility of the
banking system, new taxes both on the [state] and federal levels,
continued real estate value problems, and also just the experience of
a recession. People haven't seen one in 8 years and many of them were
not adults at that time. I also would sign on to what most people
have said about attitudes. I would just make one additional point.
President Corrigan mentioned asset values falling. I think we also
have to take into account the fact that debt ratios of individuals and
firms are relatively high. And with the economy slowing, a lot of
them are facing the prospect of servicing debt. Before, there was an
easy way out: you could sell the house at a higher price or you could
split up the firm and sell [parts of] it off. I think it's not a
cheery prospect facing those constraints and living with them; there
is some sense that the good times are gone in a lot of markets.
I'm also a little less optimistic on the export side, due
primarily to concern about the growth of foreign economies. It seems
to me that when you see the stock index in Japan go from 39,000 to
22,000 that is not bullish. Germany also has had a reduction of 30
percent in stock prices pretty recently. I'm concerned about the oil
impact in eastern Europe. Obviously, Canada and the United Kingdom
are not in great shape, but the dollar should help. I would just
perhaps be a little less optimistic overall on the pickup. We also
don't see the momentum to a downturn; we don't see a free fall. I
think Ed is exactly right: the world has changed in some sense, and
maybe we will not see the typical inventory cycles of the past.
Instead of seeing a momentum to the downturn, we have seen a
ratcheting down, it seems to me. We had a near-term growth path of 1
to 1-1/2 percent and it was disrupted by the oil price shock.
I also agree with Mike Kelley on the budget deal. I think it
is contractionary. While it is an embarrassing spectacle to see one
of these made like sausages into law--and this one isn't law yet
either--it does have some real taxes and some real cuts in it. Mike
Kelley mentioned the enforcement agreements. What they have in this
in effect are little decentralized Gramm-Rudman sequester constraints
by categories of spending: defense, domestic spending, and the like.
And if more is spent than the budget allows on those categories, in 15
days you go into a sequester. And by the way, those detailed GrammRudman constraints last for a couple of years and then go back to more
macro constraints. And on entitlements and revenue bills there is a
constraint that they must be pay-as-you-go or there is sequestration.
So, I am encouraged by the discipline they have tried to build in;
even the rough discipline of Gramm-Rudman, I think, has been

10/2/90

beneficial.
I wonder if we would have had even this without that. By
the way, I think the markets responded positively to the budget deal,
although they were lucky to have a day in which oil prices came down!
[Laughter.]
On the inflation side, I agree that no real progress is
apparent.
I continue to believe that the right approach is a stable
monetary policy and I think we should see slack opening up.
I think
that's essentially what we should do; about all we can do is to
maintain a moderately restrictive stance.
I also continue to think
that we're not in the 1970s scenario and that if we do [maintain that
stance] there is little realistic danger that the oil price shock will
get generalized into inflationary expectations, especially given the
state of the economy.
My real concern continues to be the credit markets.
It's not
at all clear to me that we are maintaining a constant stance.
It
seems to me that with the slower projected growth in economic activity
and constant short rates, it's hard to avoid a conclusion that
monetary conditions may have tightened. The budget deal at the margin
is more contractionary than we projected in the Greenbook. And even
though a couple of people have mentioned that the monetary aggregates
are back on their growth paths, that's due almost exclusively to the
growth in two components--currency and money market funds.
The core
components of money continue to creep along and that has been going on
for seven months.
From the beginning of 1990 through the third
quarter, savings deposits have grown at 3/4 of a percent annually;
small time deposits have grown at 3/4 percent; large time deposits
have contracted by 8 percent; other checkable deposits have contracted
by 1/2 of a percent; money market deposit accounts have grown at 4-1/4
percent, but that growth was mainly in February and March; and demand
deposits have rebounded 2-1/2 percent.
So, the reason M2 and M3 are
back on track is because of the rapid growth in currency--much of it
for export, which I think is not much related to economic activity-and money market funds.
Money market funds this year have grown at 12
and 22 percent for the two categories.
Again, I think the increase in
money market funds is not responding to increased economic activity
nor is it likely to engender greater growth. It's responding to
problems in the stock market. At the margin it does increase credit,
but it increases credit to a specific segment of the economy:
investment-grade institutions, and the Treasury and commercial paper
markets.
Indeed, the SEC has a rule out, as you may know, to restrict
investment of money funds in below A1/T1 paper. Now, to be honest
about it, it's really not fair to cut out a couple of categories.
But
it does seem to me that when you look at the recent reaction of money
market funds--and we can understand what's going on in currency and
the consistency of all the other core money categories and the
persistence of this very slow growth at well below our lower range-that there is a concern that money is growing more slowly than we
projected and endorsed.
The final point I would make in this vein, which has been
made by a number of other people, is something new in the condition of
the banking system. There have been well publicized concerns about
the FDIC fund, which is projected to be $10 billion at the end of the
year and then perhaps go into single digits.
Insurance fees on banks
have increased from 8 basis points to 19-1/2 basis points in a little

10/2/90

over a year and the prospect is that they will go higher as will the
capital ratio.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's 23 basis points in the budget--

It's 23 basis points in the budget deal, which
MR. MULLINS.
brings in $4 billion over 5 years. This is not what we talked about
earlier in the summer; it's not [the limits on] loans to one borrower;
It is a lot of big losses in a lot of
it's not examiners' zeal.
Commercial real estate problems are evident throughout
institutions.
the banking system. Community banks, small regionals, large regionals
and money center banks all have significant investments in commercial
real estate.
I think we will have several more quarters of bad news
while the accounting reality catches up with these institutions. More
generally, I think we're in for a protracted period of retrenchment in
the banking industry both to deal with the asset quality problems to
build capital, as Jerry mentioned, and also to figure out how to be
I think all this has translated into
profitable in the new world.
higher funding costs for banks, lower stock prices, and bank debt
yields at junk bond levels. And it seems to me inescapable that these
sorts of pressures in the banking industry have shrunk or restricted
Specifically, I would be concerned that they have limited
credit.
credit to a very large portion of the economy, those small businesses
and large businesses that are not investment grade. I'm less
concerned about the investment grade institutions; they have the
It's difficult to make a case that the rest
public market to go to.
of the economy has an easily accessible alternative source of funds.
One can see
I look at insurance companies; they're not doing so well.
some of the impact on finance companies. But if we do have this
contraction in the banking industry, it certainly has to have
tightened conditions for a major portion of the industry.
So, I think we're currently facing a stalled out economy,
which is projected to dip into negative territory. What concerns me
on top of that is the increasingly tight credit market conditions.
With the lags in the process, I think we do have a risk of turning a
I agree with Dick Syron
mild downturn into a fairly ugly situation.
that herein lies the potential for a cumulative deterioration. I'm
more concerned about this problem this time than last time--first
because the economy has weakened; secondly, because the core
components of money don't seem to be picking up; and finally, and most
importantly, because the pressure on the banking industry seems to
have tightened and the tourniquet has been turned an extra notch. I
I'm just concerned that what
would still believe in a stable policy.
we are getting is one which is more constrained than what we
projected, endorsed, and would like.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.
I won't presume on the Committee to try to
You have all heard
restate or recite all of my views at this point.
my concerns about the fragility of the financial system. Perhaps I
can shorten my remarks by simply associating myself strongly with both
Ed Boehne's statement and Jerry Corrigan's statement.
In addition, I
think that the banks are really scared and have become super cautious.
I think bankers are demoralized.
I've been talking to a lot of
bankers in all parts of the country over the last several weeks and I
have never seen them [exhibit] a lower sense of optimism and

-37-

10/2/90

bewilderment as to where to go from here. And that will make the
credit crunch worse in the future than it is at present, particularly
if there are signs that the economy actually is going into a period of
recession. Perhaps under those conditions, the momentum in a downturn
might be very surprising and might cause the recession to last longer
and go deeper.
I have to say that, being a cynic, I believe that the budget
deal is a sham and a delusion. If you had walked across the Sahara
Desert without a canteen, you would think the water in Boston Harbor
was [potable].
[Laughter.] And yet, in thinking or contemplating any
move toward ease as a result of the perceived window that we have here
because the markets have reacted favorably to this budget agreement, I
worry about the dollar because we have an environment of rising
interest rates elsewhere in the world against the contrast of perhaps
lower rates here and a softer economy, which is less inviting to
investors. Yet I think a case might be made that perhaps at least
some modest move toward ease has already been discounted in the
exchange value of the dollar. So, I'm concerned that perhaps this is
the time to make a very slight move toward a bit more accommodation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. There really has not been any money shock that
has synchronized all the sectors of the economy and there is no
inventory correction cycle underway. This is not a recession as
generally defined. Never before have we had a recession in which
monetary policy eased 12 months prior to what somebody says was the
likely high point. I don't agree that June was, but somebody thinks
it was. It clearly is a synchronized slowdown in the U.S. economy,
but it is more in the nature of an event related to buildings and real
estate and, consequently, banks and thrifts. We have to be careful if
we really want to be forward looking, not to look backward at the real
economy. If you are trying to be forward-looking, that's always a
disaster; you can't get ahead by looking backward.
Now, I think there are some considerable risks, but those
risks are in the years out ahead, not in the 6 months ahead of us.
The considerable risk is that we will go through this slowdown event
and end up with inflation at a rate of 6 or 7 percent and end up with
a set of easings that tips the dollar loose. I do agree with the
analysis of Sam Cross that there still is a safe-haven effect on the
dollar. The considerable risk is that we will throw the monetary
policy tool away before we have the ability to use it. I would not
enjoy being in a situation of a declining dollar with all that means
for future inflation. That could then mean that inflation doesn't
peak in the third and fourth quarters of 1990; the peak might be out
there further ahead. So, it seems to me that the exchange value of
the dollar is a real restraint on us, but I don't see any reason to
admit that to anyone outside this room. But I would hate to see us
get into a position where we no longer have any potential to do it
because we have a spread of 300 or 400 basis points between the
Treasury bill rate and the 30-year Treasury. It seems to me that
under those circumstances then, the fears that people have about
downward risks certainly would be justified. So, I think there is
considerable risk. I do believe the U.S. economy has a lot of
recuperative ability.
[Unintelligible]--and I'm not able to tell as
well as David is how each of the parts go--but if monetary policy is

10/2/90

-38-

reasonably steady and stable, then I think the adjustment mechanisms
can take place and can take place in an environment in which we get
some of these corrections made.
I must admit that when I first came

on board I was pleased that we had engaged in monetary policy actions
But looking back on it, I
that I think avoided a recession in 1986.
have a feeling that what has happened in Boston and in New England and
elsewhere would not have been carried to such excesses, if we had let
So, I'm just urging
a correction take place a little earlier.

caution.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're running late, as I'm sure you're
all aware, so we do have coffee out there which I hope is not too

chilled. And lunch is not that far away. So, let's make the coffee
break a bit shorter than usual and then reconvene.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Mr. Kohn.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Mr. Kohn?

MR. HOSKINS. Back to David's comments about the components
of the aggregates: Instead of looking into that aspect, let's look at
[velocity].
You put a memo out in June, I think, saying that there
might have been a shift in M2 velocity. If that were the case, isn't
the [recent] resumption of growth inconsistent with that? Wouldn't
you expect lower growth rates?
MR. KOHN. Well, I think we're still seeing that velocity
shift. That is, if you look at the resumption of growth that we've
had on a quarterly average basis, we're still seeing in the third
quarter a quarterly average growth of only 3 percent even with the
last two months being strong. And that's about 2-1/2 percentage
points less than the model was predicting for the nominal GNP we think
we have gotten. We have growth in the fourth quarter projected at
about 4-3/4 percent on a quarterly average basis; it's 4 percent
month-over-month. And even that, I think, is close to 2 points less
than the model predicted. So, yes, there has been some pickup in M2
growth, but certainly if it slows down to the 4 percent pace, that's
still consistent with the velocity shifts we thought we were getting
before. We have about 4-1/2 percent for the year and that's a 1-1/2
percent shift over the year, which is not completely out of line with
past history though on the outer edge of it. So, I don't think the
pattern really contradicts what we were talking about at midyear; it
may be a little stronger, probably impelled by these uncertainty
factors. I think the underlying shifts are still there. Governor
Mullins remarked about the deposit components still being weak, and
that was part of the picture.
[Banks] didn't need to make loans; they
didn't need deposits; they weren't going to compete for funds and I
think that's still true.
MR. PARRY. Don, the three alternatives you talked about are
different from what was in the Bluebook, right?

-39-

10/2/90

MR. KOHN.

Slightly, in the sense that as I thought about the

sort of-MR. PARRY. Is there no analytic support at all--something
that might suggest that the inflation problem is severe and should be
dealt with?
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.

For the tightening alternative, "C"?
Yes.

MR. KOHN. I think there is some support for it. If you
thought it was sufficiently severe, my feeling was--I think I used the
word "practical" as I presented these-MR. PARRY.

That doesn't sound very economic.

MR. KOHN. Under the circumstances of a tightening fiscal
policy and widely expressed concerns about credit conditions, my
feeling was that an alternative C was in the Bluebook but I didn't see
expending a lot of the Committee's time on it so close to lunch.
MR. BLACK.

You took time to add an "A+" though.

MR. KOHN. No, the easiest alternative I had was exactly the
same as this--an "A minus/B".
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

MR. FORRESTAL. Don, you may have said this, but I missed it
if you did.
If we did alternative A in one step, 50 basis points,
what do you think would happen to long-term rates?
MR. KOHN. I think they'd go down. Peter, I think, may
disagree. The market is not expecting that, but in a situation in
which the economy is seen to be very weak and fiscal policy is moving
toward restraint, whether it's enough or not, I think long-term rates
would go down. They wouldn't go down by anywhere near the 50 basis
points, though. It would be a restrained reaction. And if the dollar
fell and if the incoming data in the subsequent couple of months
didn't confirm the economic weakness [unintelligible], then bond rates
would end up two months from now higher than they are right now.
SPEAKER(?).

Absolutely.

MR. STERN. I'd like to follow up on Lee's question. In the
M2 forecast for the fourth quarter, have you included anything for
this flight to liquidity? Or is it based pretty much on the way you
think velocity is deviating from-MR. KOHN. We have a little, but slowing down. This is not a
war forecast or something like that. We have conditions settling down
somewhat, but still we have allowed a little for the flight to
liquidity. Though we still have this velocity shift going on, it's
not as much as we had in the third quarter; we have much less in the
fourth quarter in a settling down kind of process.

10/2/90

MR. SYRON. Ted, can I ask you--this is slightly different
than what you assumed--what your view is on the pressure on the dollar
under "A" and then "A prime," if we part with the assumption that
something is done on the budget deficit?
MR. TRUMAN.

Which one is which?

MR. SYRON.
"A" is the traditional "A".
"A minus/B," I guess.

"A prime" is

MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think you would get a reaction with "A,"
quite pronounced, if you get it all done at once. With the two-step
process the way Don described, you might get a reaction with the
second step, depending on what the circumstances were at that time.
As Sam said earlier and Don suggested, I think there is something
built into the market at this time. Sam, you may want to comment
again in light of what has been said. We probably would get some
adjustment.
In some sense there was an adjustment yesterday,
essentially anticipatory. The exchange market came back a little
today; I think the adjustment may have been overdone.
Certainly, you'd likely get a reaction if there
MR. CROSS.
were the larger move. On the more moderate one, I think the markets
are expecting it but there might still be a reaction, even though they
are expecting it and have built it into their thinking, on the grounds
Basically, I think the general
that it would sort of confirm it.
attitude toward the dollar is negative and that kind of easing would
tend to confirm that the Committee may be going in that direction.
So, you could get a reaction even on the smaller move.
MR. SYRON. Could I ask your degree of nervousness about a
cumulative decline on either of these things?
MR. TRUMAN.

Falling out of bed?

MR. CROSS.
There certainly is that possibility. And if it
happens this quickly and spreads through all the other markets and has
all these effects on interest rates and the stock market and
It's
everything else, then we have a real mess on our hands.
But the
impossible to assess how big the possibility of that is.
market's view toward the dollar is generally negative.
So, there is
some susceptibility--some fertile ground to see something starting as
a movement down, which could then lead to a lot of efforts to get out
and protect the dollar. That is a serious possibility.
MR. ANGELL.
Sam, what would be the odds of the dollar
engaging in a significant downward move if we stand pat on policy--

that is, take the third alternative?
MR. CROSS. Well, the dollar has been stable for the past few
weeks, basically, except for the strange things going on with the yen.
MR. ANGELL.

So, we could be somewhat encouraged to believe

that it might be stable or even slightly strong again?
MR. CROSS. Well, as I say, if you cut away from all of these
things, as far as we can tell the general sentiment toward the dollar
is negative. Markets are talking about moving further toward 150 on

-41-

10/2/90

the mark and toward 130+ on the yen. So, that is the sort of
framework we are dealing with. After having heard the statements of
the Chairman and various other things that have gone on, the markets
certainly would not be surprised to see the middle option move tied in
with action on the budget. That is probably the general expectation
of most people out there.
MR. MELZER.
MR. KOHN.

How is the long end behaving today?
It's up a little, but not much.

MR. GUFFEY. We talk about the prospects for the longer end
and the dollar if we ease. Do you have any concern, given all the
commentary that has taken place with respect to the fragility of the
banking sector, that if we were to do anything before the budget is
really set in concrete that it would be misinterpreted? Maybe
misinterpreted is not the right word. Rather, would it be thought
that we reacted to the fragility of the banking system and as a result
would that propel the market into greater negativism and
[unintelligible]?
MR. KOHN. As I indicated in my briefing, I think an action
before the budget is at least more wrapped up than it is now would be
a little confusing to the markets. They wouldn't know whether you
were responding to fiscal policy or to credit market conditions and
that sort of thing. Under those circumstances, I would advocate that
the Chairman look for an opportunity to explain that and explain what
was propelling the Committee and give the reasons why you did it.
I
think that would be important, especially if it were separated from
the fiscal policy response.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don?
If not, let
me start off by giving you as quick a review as I can on the budget
plan. I realize the inclination of John LaWare and I sympathize with
it, but having looked at this I'm inclined to believe that the degree
of criticism is a bit overdone. However, I might add that the fact
that it is a bit overdone may make it difficult to get it passed on
Friday because there is a lot of "real stuff" in here. Let me define
what I mean by real stuff. I would say that any program that requires
a majority of both houses of the Congress and a Presidential signature
to be reversed would be defined as being enforced. If you go down the
list of all the various items that they have agreed to--though I must
tell you there is a disproportionate amount of tax and tax-type stuff
in there, much more than I would prefer--it does have the
characteristic of enforceability. The consequence of that is that
$500 billion is not a number which I would argue has no smoke and
mirrors. My view of $500 billion is that it has always had some smoke
and mirrors in it no matter what; it's a question of how much. If we
get a reconciliation bill and an affirmation of what David Mullins
calls the "mini Gramm-Rudman," they've actually come up with something
that is a lot better than anything they have done before.
There are a few holes in the system which can break through
between the budget resolution on Friday and the actual 13 or 12
individual budget items that have to be, according to the
reconciliation instructions, on the floors in the House and Senate and
in place by October 19th. But I don't think they are very large. In
other words, once you lock in the reconciliation on the floor in both

10/2/90

-42-

houses, given fairly rigid instructions to the various committees
within each house as I understand it, the leeway is not all that
considerable. There is some fudging possible, for example, in the
agriculture committees where they can take the $13 billion and knock
off a couple [billion].
I don't think that can be done in any of the
other ones in any realistic way. No I take it back. There is one
other, but it is not very important. You can't do it, for example, in
the civil service lump sum; that's specific and that's it. The postal
affairs item is one that's in there. In any event, there are a number
of items in which there can be slippages between the reconciliation
and the final passage, but I don't think enough to make all that much
difference. The probability of passage is fairly high in the Senate
but a very close call in the House. The markets responded positively
to it and to the anticipation of it, but as David said, they were
lucky that they ended up with the oil price decline. Sometimes luck
is not always bad! I would think that the consequences of that deal
being voted down on Friday would be very adverse in the markets.
There would be disillusionment the likes of which would be very large.
And even though it's the Administration's position that they may need
more than one vote to get it put in place--in other words, lose it and
then come back at it--I'm not all that certain. I think that if they
lose it, unless they lose it by just a handful of votes, it's going to
be final.
There's not much to say on the Middle East issue with the
exception that it's fairly clear that the futures markets have fairly
persuasively forecast some form of war. We have $35 oil when in fact
production has pretty much closed the gap on what has been lost. And
inevitably, consumption has to be down 1/2 million barrels a day at
these prices. The supply/demand balance is not all that different
from what it was before the invasion of Kuwait. What we're looking at
is a large number of refineries around the world that are concerned
about being shut down because of inadequate crude or bidding in the
market for inventories that already exist. What we have is not a
flow/price effect, but basically an inventory adjustment/price effect.
There's no knowing where that number will go because there's nothing
that one can readily evaluate with respect to price changes under
those conditions. I think there's enough of that buying to hold the
price up for a while. The forward markets are discounted $10 to $13 a
barrel. And there I think we are looking at a bimodal distribution in
which part of the forward market reflects a war that actually
happened--loss of the Iraqi/Kuwait oil but also some Saudi oil--and
the other part is the expectation of a war where nothing is destroyed
or there is no war and everyone goes back to production. If they go
back to production, prices will fall below $20 a barrel in this
environment. This is not a market in which it is going to go back to
$21 and stay. This is a market which has an over-inventory, high
production levels, and an awful lot of cheating out there which no one
yet has figured out. I cannot believe that Libya is producing at
where it says it is; it's not the way they behave. As a consequence,
what we have is a highly uncertain situation. When we were here the
last time, we were discussing when and if war might break out. I
think it's still the case that lots of materials are moving across the
ocean to Saudi Arabia. We're obviously not positioned; if we were,
all that stuff wouldn't be coming. So, we are not ripe yet for an
ultimate confrontation on either side. It's only when we get to that
point that the issue will be enjoined and resolved or there will be
military confrontation. But that's weeks away, maybe well into

10/2/90

November. What we're likely to get is a
it's going to go either way and probably
weeks after that, hopefully. In fact, I
gone up rather than down in the last two

heating up to a point where
will get resolved within six
think the odds of peace have
or three weeks.

So, we have that large uncertainty out there. In the
interim, we have all the issues that everyone here has been
discussing. I do think the evidence clearly suggests that we have a
credit implosion going on. We can see it all over the place.
I don't
know whether the word "crunch" is a relevant notion, but everything is
really being pulled back. Commercial banks, on the basis of
restrictive capital requirements and fear of not being able to meet
the requirements, are pulling back. Asset quality results are giving
them some concern. And while I don't know how to read it, I think
that Ed Boehne is right in the sense that what's happening here is
some sort of pressure.
I may change my mind in three or four days,
but I still think we're in a situation in which there are forecasts of
thunderstorms and everyone is saying well the thunder has occurred and
the lightening has occurred and it's raining, but nobody has stuck his
hand out the window. And at the moment it isn't raining. The point
is, as best I can judge, that the third-quarter GNP figures in the
Greenbook are not phony.
I think they are relatively hard numbers.
They can get revised down; they are being put down more and more but
the economy has not yet slipped into a recession. Now, that may
change next week, but I think it's important to distinguish between
forecast and history.
In any event, we have some really significant pressures out
there. And at this point what strikes me as our major concern is that
if we're going to maintain a semblance of monetary stability in an
environment in which credit pressures are tightening the market, then
I think we have to find some mechanism to ease.
We probably should
ease at some point, really, to offset the credit crunch--with or
without a budget deal.
But what I would recommend at this particular
stage, in the context of all of this, is that we go asymmetric toward
ease today with an understanding that if the budget resolution passes
we go down 25 basis points, say, on Monday, but stay asymmetric.
There is still a possibility, although I think the odds are falling
very sharply, that the budget deal--although it can't fall apart after
the reconciliation--can get muddied in a certain sense. I would
hesitate to go more than 25 basis points on the budget resolution
itself because it's not the ultimate final deal, although it is most
of it. And I think it would be appropriate to respond to that.
In
that context, I would just stay asymmetric, and if the economic data
look very poor on Friday, it might be desirable--especially if the
budget deal finally makes it--to go down again, although I'm not sure
that that would be the appropriate response. But what I would suggest
at this particular point is to presume that under certain
contingencies we would move. If there is an area of uncertainty about
the events as they emerge, it would probably be desirable to have a
telephone conference.
In fact, this is a very touchy period and if
there's any uncertainty or questions about what is actually happening,
I think it would be appropriate for us to have a conference. At lunch
we will be discussing an additional action that the Board is currently
contemplating, which is the reserve requirement issue that I mentioned
to you previously. It is not supposed to involve interest rate
effects, but does have an anti-credit crunch implication if the Board
does decide to move in that direction. So, in light of the fact that

10/2/90

the credit pressures have picked up, if anything, in the degree of
stringency and--having looked at the plot of retail M2 excluding the
elements that you suggest--that monetary growth clearly is pretty
slow, I would agree with the way you put it, David: that we are
tighter than we had intended. So, in the context of a budget
agreement and this stringency, I would think it appropriate to take
the types of actions under the various contingencies I have outlined,
and I throw that on the table as a recommendation for discussion.
Are
MR. GUFFEY. May I have a clarification, Mr. Chairman?
you talking about Friday or are you talking about early the following
week?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. GUFFEY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

Probably Monday, I would assume.

I think it's a holiday.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

Not Friday, no.

It is?

Columbus Day.

It's not a holiday for financial markets, though
MR. BLACK.
it is a bank holiday.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's a bank holiday?

For the Federal Reserve and commercial banks
MR. ANGELL.
it's a scheduled holiday.
MR. BLACK.

But the securities market will be open.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
when the banks are closed?
MR. BOEHNE.

How do you implement monetary policy

You wait until Tuesday!

[Laughter.]

MR. MELZER. May I ask a question on the luncheon discussion?
Will that
If you decide to do that, how do you think that will play?
be perceived as some sort of an easing in policy or will it be
perceived as a technical matter?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
requirements?
MR. MELZER.

You're talking about the reserve

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we hope it's perceived as a
technical issue. But it is a non-interest rate easing effect in the
same sense that if you reduce taxes on commercial banks, some of it
goes through into increased loan availability. How much depends on
I don't think it will be perceived as an
what the incidence is.
easing.

-45-

10/2/90

MR. KEEHN.

What might the timing of that be, assuming you go

through with it?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We haven't quite decided.
MR. KEEHN.

I would say sooner rather than later.

Fairly near term?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would assume so. In fact, how
that is perceived will be dependent on the words that Joe Coyne puts
out with the action! The purpose of that is to emphasize it as a
technical issue, which it is.
It's basically something that we have
been discussing; as you can see, that memorandum has been on the

Board's agenda for quite a long while.
MR. HOSKINS.
I have a question. If this problem with
banking is a kind of nonprice rationing, I don't see how lowering
prices at the banks is going to help a lot in terms of availability of

credit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
requirements?

Are you talking about the reserve

MR. HOSKINS. No, more generally about lowering interest
rates. If [banks] are tightening their standards and they don't want
to make real estate loans, then lowering rates 1/2 point probably
isn't going to change them.
MR. SYRON.

It will improve their earnings.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I disagree with Mr. Hoskins. Basically,
if you're a commercial bank and you're concerned with your capital,
you pull back; and the method by which you pull back is an asset
rationing that opens up your margins. In other words, the way you
ration essentially is either through increases in price or through
asset quality. To the extent that you're opening up, if the federal
funds rate moves down, you may bring the level of loan rates down.
That's the tradeoff. So in that sense, it does make credit available.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, we can discuss it some other time. I can
see the reserve requirement effect a little better and, by the way, I
would be in favor of something like that because it is a direct tax.
You do increase capital almost instantly for them; that's clear.
What's not so clear to me is whether you increase demand for loans
when you lower the funds rate and all loan rates go down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You don't increase demand, you increase

supply.
MR. HOSKINS. Or you'll increase supply if bankers are not
rationing on the basis of price but on the basis of credit quality.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but credit quality and price are
interchangeable in anybody's portfolio.
[Unintelligible] if you tell
me I'm making a loan at 12 percent and I think the borrower is a
deadbeat, I would say I want 30 percent; that's the same credit
restraint.

-46-

10/2/90

MR. KEEHN. Could I ask an operational question to be sure I
have this clear?
You're suggesting that we ease early next week, say,
Tuesday.
Is the purpose of that easing to respond to the tightening
that has taken place in the market?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
resolution passing.

No, that's in response to the budget

MR. KEEHN. That was the question. Are you then suggesting
we would ease 25 basis points near term before that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, no action prior to Tuesday.
if we did it sooner, it would be very confusing.

I think

MR. LAWARE. But you are suggesting a second 25 basis point
[move] when the budget agreement is wrapped up?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

After the budget agreement is wrapped

up.
MR. KEEHN. That would be after the 13 individual
appropriations have been done and the situation clarifies?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.
conditions?

Yes.

And this is primarily in response to the credit

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's a combination of both the
budget agreement and credit conditions.
If the budget issue were not
on the table, I would still argue for the easing of 25 basis points.
I'm just saying on combining the two, it depends on how the budget
agreement-MR. PARRY. Because there's more weakness than that imparted
by the supply shock?
If, as I thought was stated, most of the
weakness was a result of this supply shock, there's nothing we can do
about that really.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh no, it's more weakness than that.
I
would say that the appropriate policy under the oil price supply shock
is to do what we were doing before--to try in a sense to maintain the
same money supply growth pattern we would have had prior to the oil
shock, absorbing a lower level of physical activity and a slightly
higher level of inflation largely because we can't avoid either of
those two.
I would say that the appropriate action is essentially to
be where we were.
It's not to be accommodative; it's not to try to
stop the rise in prices, because we can't.
MR. PARRY.
some extent.

Well, one can do something about the inflation to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I'm trying to say is that there are
two types of inflation. One is the oil price pass-through. The other
is whether it embodies itself in the wage structure.
It's the second
that we have to be very careful to avoid.
MR. PARRY.

That's right.

10/2/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we believe that the oil price goes up
and the [unintelligible] comes down and there's no wage effect, it's a
complete washout. There is no way to keep the [higher] price in there
unless it embodies itself in some nonprice cost, in other words wage
costs, cost of capital, or something.
MR. PARRY. I guess I see the tradeoffs perhaps somewhat
differently. You are computing the Greenbook's forecast of what is
likely to happen to the oil price but the Greenbook's forecast of
interest rates is constant.
If you had interest rates declining-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not using the Greenbook forecast.
I
frankly think that if we take Mike at his word, this one is a real
problem. But I would say that I see no reason for us to change the
policy patterns that we had in effect as of July. Basically, the
targets that we constructed for the money supply should not change as
a consequence of the Middle East crisis.
That's what I think should
govern what we're doing. If we do that, in my judgment we do not
accommodate the inflation process.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if you would favor this move
without the budget agreement because of economic considerations,
wouldn't it be wiser to link it more to those economic considerations
so we don't have this precedent of having acted because fiscal policy
has acted?
I think that could set a precedent for us in the future
that--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That may be, but the number of budget
agreements that we're going to see making a precedent is going to be
so few that-MR. BLACK. You have a point there. You still stressed it in
the context of a longer-term objective of trying to control inflation,
given that the aggregates have picked up some, but a lot of that
pickup may be fictitious.
It seems to me that under those
circumstances maybe a little lower interest rate is compatible with
keeping the money supply running at the rate we had in mind all along,
and couching it in those terms-MR. MULLINS.
MR. BLACK.

Make it economic not political.
Yes, that's essentially what I'm saying.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don't disagree with that, but the
issue basically is that I don't see how we can get around not
responding to a real budget agreement.
This is a real budget
agreement. There is no question that there is a significant
absorption of purchasing power coming out of the system. No one has
ever seen a joint monetary policy/fiscal policy switch pulled off, and
I don't think we're going to see it here. But I do think that there's
a general expectation [of an easing response], which we'll have great
difficulty getting around, at least on the verbiage side. Let me put
it this way: If I had the impression right at this stage that the
economy was strongly inflationary, I think the argument we would make
is that we should do nothing unless that budget agreement were making
the economy go through the roof. That's not where we stand.
I would
argue for some ease, as indeed I have, because of the credit
stringency issue over the last several months.
If anything, what

-48-

10/2/90

evidence we have suggests that that stringency has gotten worse in
recent weeks.
MR. BLACK. But I would still express that in terms of
reiterating our long-term objectives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Oh yes, absolutely.

MR. BLACK. This is perfectly compatible with that and it's
not throwing in the towel [on inflation]; that's what we're concerned
about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it is important for us to
emphasize that we have set target ranges for the money supply. If
growth veers outside of them the Committee would then act
[accordingly], and I think that anything we do in the next six months
had better keep monetary growth well within those ranges or we're
going to accommodate this oil price thing. And then I think we're
going to be in the soup.
MR. BLACK. All I'm saying is let's make that a part of the
statement.
I think most of us would agree that that is the way we
want to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think that's right.

That's acceptable

to me.
MR. BLACK. It's hard to know, really, what funds rate level
to pick out of thin air that will give us the rate of growth we want
I was cheered by the pickup in M2, but when you
in the aggregates.
examine it you wonder if that isn't part fictitious.
I think that a small part of it
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
does show up, but David is right: it's in M1 and money market mutual
funds.
MR. BLACK. To me, if in fact M2 is really still relatively
weak, then this easing is perfectly compatible with the policy that
aims toward price stability. But if M2 for some reason or other
strengthened a great deal beyond what we think, then-If M2 were
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way, Bob.
at the upper edges of its range at this stage, I would feel very
uncomfortable. And my judgment is that David is right.
One has to be
careful about taking out individual components; when you look at a
price index and say without this, this, and this-MR. ANGELL. We don't know how to read M2, and certainly we
don't know how to read it disaggregated.
That's nonsense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you arguing that the money market
mutual funds are not in this basic thing?
MR. ANGELL.
I'm arguing that we do not have sufficient
knowledge about where the increased liquidity is located or whether or
not being located one place versus another place makes a difference.

-49-

10/2/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
accumulation [unintelligible]

But we do know the motives for the
assets.

MR. ANGELL. But we do not know that the motive for holding
the assets is what affects behavior.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I would say, basically, that if you know

the motive for holding it, you know what the behavior is; that's the
definition.

We know the currency--

MR. ANGELL. But does anybody believe that if someone has
$40,000 in a money market mutual fund that he is less apt to buy an
automobile than if he had the $40,000 in-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
If he just moved it out of the
stock market, I would say the answer is yes.
MS.

SEGER.

Because they're scared to death of the stock

market.
MR. ANGELL. But when the stocks were sold, someone bought
the stocks. There's no use going on.
I'm not going to be convinced!
[Laughter.]
MR. HOSKINS.
Don, what is the relationship between the
changes in the components of M2 that you can discover and spending in
the economy?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't want to make a point of this,
and I don't think David wanted to make a point of it, but I think it's
not an irrelevant consideration to try to disaggregate on occasion.
Even if we don't disaggregate, we still get moderate growth. Go
ahead.
MR. KOHN.
I think I'll stay out of it!
[Laughter.]
Obviously, we aggregate these things; they work better that way.
SPEAKER(?).

Good choice.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm ready to answer particular
questions, but I do think we ought to get going on the policy
discussion.
MR. SYRON. Just a specific question, Mr. Chairman.
I have a
lot of sympathy with what you suggest.
The specific question has to
do with timing. You would envision next Tuesday. Would you also
envision, without putting too fine a point on it--I know this is an
action by the Board--the reserve requirement action being announced
around the same time?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It could be or it could be earlier.

MR. BLACK. I'd feel a little better if I knew how that
reserve requirement matter worked out.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I got confused about a different
disaggregation problem. The thrust of your suggestion, Mr. Chairman,

-50-

10/2/90

was that next Tuesday you would envision, in an almost automatic
fashion, an adjustment of 25 basis points in the funds rate?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

If the budget resolution passes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm just trying to clarify the two
steps here. You have said, assuming this budget resolution gets
passed in the Congress, that on Tuesday of next week there would be a
25 basis point adjustment in the federal funds rate. You then
stipulated that there might be another?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
asymmetric toward ease.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

At that point we would stay
Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And we would contemplate another move if
the economic data and/or the budget deal suggest that.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, given that you're thinking about
moving on Tuesday after a holiday on Monday, we won't know then how
the markets will react to the budget resolution being passed. Would
you consider-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The stock market will be open on Monday.
And we don't do anything until 11:30 a.m., so the markets will already
be open on Tuesday-MR. GUFFEY. Well, 24 hours can make a difference in the way
the market reacts to digesting what happens on Friday. That is my
point. And I would delay [our move].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Until Wednesday?

MR. GUFFEY. Yes. Also, it complicates the Desk's problems,
being the last day of the reserve period.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That wouldn't be a problem; that would be
the middle of the two-week reserve period.
MR. GUFFEY. Oh, that's right. Okay. I'd just like to see
how the market reacts to the budget activity before we go forward and
complicate matters if it is a negative reaction.
MR. SYRON. But the budget action this week--excuse me--is a
binding decision, right?
SPEAKER(?).

That's correct.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is a decision that is about 80
percent bound, maybe more than that, if my recollection is correct.
Theoretically, it's 100 percent binding, but I think as long as we
have Bobby Byrd and Jamie Whitten up there-MR. BLACK. Is this change in the reserve requirements going
to have any real impact?

-51-

10/2/90

MR. MELZER. What will it do to the growth rate?
calculate an effective growth rate of reserves?

Can you

MR. KOHN. We would make a shift adjustment for this, so all
our published data [would reflect that].
Traditionally, whenever we
publish reserve requirements, as St. Louis does for its monetary base
requirements, we would make a shift adjustment.
In dollar terms it
would drop the monetary base.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Forrestal has the floor.

Can I get the discussion started?

Bob

MR. FORRESTAL. Oh, I was going to ask a question.
I don't
want to prolong this either so I'll quickly ask the question and then
make my comments. Suppose they don't pass the budget resolution, when
do we face sequestration?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's an interesting question.
Theoretically it is supposed to be effective--well, they are going to
vote Friday night so I guess it's Tuesday morning.
MR. FORRESTAL. Tuesday morning.
If we face sequestration
and it's real and they don't change it, then the contractionary force
in the economy is even greater.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you going to believe that that
sequestration is real for the first 24 hours?
I wouldn't.
MR. FORRESTAL.
I don't know; that's a judgment call. My
point is that I think we need to be prepared for that contingency.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would be very hesitant to move
upon the sequestration, which is readily reversible by a majority of
the Congress and the President, especially given the size of the
sequestration we're looking at; it's not credible.
So, I'd be a
little careful.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, if you want to get the [policy]
discussion going, let me say that I agree with your prescription. As
I said at the meeting last time, I think that there is greater
weakness in the economy than the forecast suggests. And I think that
weakness was already present at mid-summer before the Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait.
So, I think it would have been appropriate to ease at that
time, and I think the argument for easing at this point is even
In the interest of time, I won't go into the whole litany of
greater.
reasons why I think that.
Suffice it to say that I have two points.
I think that we have established a great deal of credibility. We can
continue to use that credibility, but I think it's time to use it and
to exercise leadership.
And I think that'll be understood. The thing
that appeals to me about the 25 basis point move is that we can test
the market a little as well and see what the reaction is before we
move to the second step.
If we had a sharp drop in the dollar or a
runup on the long end of the maturity spectrum, we'd know that. So, I
agree with what you're prescribing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

10/2/90

MR. MELZER. My preference would probably be alternative B,
asymmetric toward ease.
If I were voting I wouldn't dissent against
the 25 basis point move downward. In any case, I'd be very sensitive
to growth of the aggregates--sensitive to their heralding a possible
slowdown and a decline in market rates, and thus pegging the funds
rate at too high a level.
So, I can identify with the general
I'd like to make three other comments very
sensitivity that you have.
quickly. One, I agree with what Bob Black was saying.
I'd much
rather see the rationale here being made in the context of what's
happening in the economy--expectations with respect to how that may
affect our performance against monetary aggregates and so forth as
opposed to [the budget issue].
I'm just thinking back to how the
unintended credit tightening rationale played in July; and if we can
put [our action] in a broader context of the economy and our broader
goals, I think we'd be better off. Secondly, I'm very goosey about
tying too much to budget deals, particularly if there are two steps in
that. My assumption has always been that that is a political position
more than an economic position.
I understand why we're there and I
don't-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
consistent with--

But it's not inconsistent;

it's a little

MR. MELZER. No, I understand. But, again, in an economic
context I might have some questions as to the extent of the response
that would be necessary. My only point is this: If we make one
adjustment that's perceived to be in connection with that, that might
be quite enough. If we make another one, the perception might be that
we're following right along.
I don't think people will necessarily
distinguish between the budget deal and fiscal restraint, and there's
a lot more fiscal restraint promised down the road. And I'd hate to
see us get into a linkage where we sort of condition people to think
that there is always going to be a monetary policy offset.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I honestly don't think that's--

MR. MELZER. Okay. Well, I just wanted to express that
concern. And then finally, I really don't know about the adjustment
in reserve requirements, but I'm sure you are weighing it in the
context of everything else you have in mind. As you know, people have
been taught to think in terms of the three tools of monetary policy.
And I'm not sure how that would play, particularly in conjunction with
the two contemplated easings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Why don't we discuss that at lunch?

MR. MELZER. That's fine; that's a concern I have that I
don't know how to accommodate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, I would agree with the program with all
these different components.
The reason is that I'm not upset with
[unintelligible] there is in the Greenbook that we need to do
something about inflation in sort of a [unintelligible].
But I don't
think we're going to get it--and [this reflects] my own degree of
nervousness about the financial markets--without doing something. As
I look at this, I think the reserve requirement part is important.
I

10/2/90

-53-

look at the reserve requirement part as having something to do with
bank earnings and the longer-term threat to [the viability of] the
financial system. I look at the 25 basis points that will be done
early next week as something that is in return for what is--when you
assign probability to it--a significant degree of fiscal restraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I would absolutely agree with your proposal as to
both timing and methodology, which I would gather is alternative B as
Don verbally described it, with asymmetric language now and an
assumption that we may move next week with a continuation of
asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the price level consequences of the
oil shock are my greatest concern, and I would hope that we would take
actions to make sure that those price level consequences don't get
embedded in underlying inflation. And I think the inflationary
pressures were significant even before the oil shock. It seems to me
that the best way to deal with this situation would be to have an
unchanged funds rate. So, I would support that alternative, whatever
it is--"B," or "B-A", or whatever.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I agree with the decision that Tom Melzer has
expressed and I also agree with what Bob Parry has suggested.
Monetary policy does its job best when it looks at the price level.
And this is not a monetary event in terms of its cause and it is not a
good precedent to have a linkup with fiscal policy. It really is the
worst form of fine tuning because it is being made on the basis of the
real economy and then it is linked up with fiscal policy. And it has
the potential of being 50 basis points, so I cannot support this
policy action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

I support your proposition.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your proposition with one
caveat. I am still quite worried about the exchange rate creating
problems for us. So, I would urge that after doing the first step we
go quite slowly and test the waters before being committed irrevocably
in any sense to the second step.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the way things are working, I
would suspect that if we get to the first step, we should have a
telephone conference to evaluate how that step went because we can't
project a sequence of events that is at all complex through to the
next FOMC meeting. I just don't think we know how to do that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

A lot could happen.

Governor Seger.

10/2/90

-54-

MS. SEGER. I certainly support an easing move, basically
because of the spreading weakness in the economy that I think was
apparent even before August 2nd, the credit crunch situation, and the
fragility of the financial system that doesn't seem to be getting
better. My preference would be for something called maybe "A*," which
would be an immediate 25 basis point cut reflecting those concerns, to
be followed by another 25, which would be the reward to the boys on
the Hill for doing the budget.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, I have some sympathy with the concerns that
have been expressed about the real economy. Unfortunately, I have the
impression that we're losing sight of the inflation situation as we do
that. As I said before, I think there are equivalent risks here.
In
that environment, I would favor stability in policy. And as I look at
the alternatives, something like the growth of M2 that we would get
under "B" would be acceptable to me.
I could even imagine going a bit
beyond that--that is, trying to make sure that growth in M2 didn't
fall below the 4 percent or so anticipated in "B," which would then
involve some slight easing. But I have the sense here that we're
talking about going beyond that for reasons that I don't find very
compelling.
Those have to do with the composition of M2, and/or real
estate problems that are long-term, and inventory problems that we
certainly aren't going to solve with policy actions taken here today.
So, I must say that I'm uncomfortable with where we seem to be headed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What would you do?

MR. STERN. I'd be willing to contemplate an asymmetric
directive and even a 1/4 point move in the funds rate depending on
what happens on Friday--the economic data, and how the aggregates are
looking and so forth. But I think I would want to stop there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would certainly say, assuming that is
done, that we would go back to the Committee.
So, you have another
shot at it in the sense that, as far as I'm concerned, it is not a
self-evident process. We would evaluate how that move went-MR. HOSKINS.
There's one problem. If we go back into a
Committee meeting and then we come out with asymmetric language again,
I think a lot of people don't like to dissent around asymmetric
language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, that's not what I'm getting at.
I'm
talking about a basic discussion of what the actual response was.
Jerry is raising a crucial question. If we all of a sudden find that
the dollar is loose on the down side, we'd be crazy to move again. My
suspicion is that the members of this Committee will evaluate what has
happened pretty much the same way. Each of us is going to be looking
at the same data.
I don't contemplate that as a particular problem,
frankly. President Boykin.
MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as much as I would like to
support what you're recommending, I have some difficulty doing it.
I
guess to me the Greenbook forecast looks a little more realistic than
it does to others.
I'm afraid we might lose sight of the inflation
situation.
I'm more concerned that the timing would be premature by

10/2/90

several weeks if we did make a move. It seems to me that the last 1/4
point move was tied to the credit situation. And I have to confess I
don't fully understand--we'll discuss it at lunch--but if you do the
reserve requirement change, it's to address that. That seems to me at
least a nod in that direction. So, if that is a nod, I would want to
wait a while longer and let the economic data come through before
doing what is being contemplated. So, I would not favor it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, I favor your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,
but I regret deeply that it will look like an endorsement of this nonagreement, which I cynically still have great doubts about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Governor Kelley.

I support your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this is a time when we have to be
extremely cautious, as everybody has suggested here. We have had
recent increases in the core rate of inflation; we have weakness in
the dollar and complete uncertainty as to how this budget package is
going to play. The more I look at it the more it bothers me. For
example, I don't know whether the public is going to [react] the same
way. And there is this nervousness in the bond market, which made me
lean initially toward doing nothing on the federal funds rate. But to
me changing the federal funds rate is not really a change in policy;
it's a change in policy if we really are trying to do something with a
rate of growth in the aggregates. And you have satisfied me that your
intention is to try to keep to what I think is an appropriate target.
So, I don't think that's a change in policy. The market, however, is
going to look at it as a change in policy, and that's why I suggested
earlier that we couch it in terms of not having abandoned our long-run
target, but just as a way of implementing what we want to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I agree with that.

MR. BLACK. So, I would go along with it.
It wouldn't have
been my first choice, but you're probably more right than I was when I
got here. As to this second step, I sure would agree with Jerry
Corrigan--as you did and I think everybody has--that we want to look
at that one very closely. But to the extent that we can disabuse the
market of the notion that we really have changed the thrust of our
policy every time the federal funds rate jumps a little-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would say that we have a specific
operational problem that we have to find a way of resolving. Just to
be locked in on the federal funds rate is to me simplistic monetary
policy; it doesn't work.
MR. BLACK. As I've said before, it's a modern day version of
the real bills doctrine. We set a particular rate and the market gets
all the money it wants at that rate. The only way we have to
encourage it to take more is to lower that rate, or the only way to
discourage it is to raise the rate, which is what we had under the
real bills doctrine. And I don't like the initiative for the

-56-

10/2/90

It ought to
generation of the money supply to come from the market.
be supply determined rather than demand determined since the long-term
velocity of M2 looks like a pretty stable function to me now. So,
I don't have the answer, as I indicated
I've always endorsed that.
earlier. We just don't have any reserve measure that can be expected
And I am very
to control M2, so I don't know what the alternative is.
frustrated over that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

I was going to give the case for alternative C
MR. HOSKINS.
Given what's on the table here, I
that Don didn't have time to give.
think I better address the issue.
MR. KOHN.
up for next time.

I'll talk to you after the presentation; save it

I think there is a danger of our losing sight
MR. HOSKINS.
of what the fundamental job of a central bank is, which, of course, is
to bring down inflation over time. And this is the kind of period
when I think we typically have lost sight of that in the past, so I'm
very cautious about any wavering at this point in time. Monetary
I think our growth
growth is returning to the 4 to 5 percent range.
I dissented in February because I didn't want
ranges are rather wide.
[M2] to get to 6 percent this year; I wanted us to keep the rate of
So, I would not be happy to see M2
growth around 4 to 5 percent.
I don't think we have the credibility that
surge up to that level.
some people around the table think we have, though of course that's
debatable; I think we have to earn it yet. But with respect to policy
moves, I'm very concerned about the reaction in the marketplace--that
So, I do
they might see us as tossing in the towel on inflation.
think that the explanation that you give--and I would prefer to link
this motion if it carries to the economy and M2--needs to be done
carefully. Again, I didn't want to tie it continuously to the credit
crunch because then we're locking ourselves in. As the banking system
gets weaker, which I think is a structural problem over time and not a
cyclical problem, we'll be tying ourselves to something like that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When we talk about credit stringency
here, hopefully you're referring to a sort of supply-side effect of
restraint in the context of weakening demand. In a sense if we're
trying to maintain a steady supply and the markets are tightening up
independently of what we are doing--at, say, an 8 percent funds rate-I think this is a classic case of what's wrong with [focusing policy
on] an 8 percent funds rate or some other fixed funds rate.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, I would agree if I could see a little
more clearly that that was happening. If, as I think Don suggested,
we begin to see some real weakness in M2, then we would recognize this
as a severe credit related problem. I don't see that yet, and that's
why I'm having a little trouble right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's very internal.

MR. HOSKINS. My preference, of course, contrary to popular
opinion, would be not to raise rates at this point, but to stay where
we are.
I would agree pretty much with [others on] this side of the

-57-

10/2/90

table that 50 basis points is a lot to do.
that for the reasons I've suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm uncomfortable doing

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I support the proposal. I also agree that the
best way to deal with this situation is to try to keep a stable
policy. I think that's what we should do and about all we can do.
And that's what this proposal seeks to do.
I also agree that it's
useful to get the market attuned to a little more flexibility in the
fed funds rate and to get market participants to think some about the
difference between the monetary policy stance and a specific interest
rate.
I also think the timing is right.
Given the lags in the
process, if we wait much longer, we run the risk of this credit
situation producing some real damage six months from now and turning a
mild downturn into something that could be more severe. The dollar is
a concern. Looking at the alternatives, the alternatives are perhaps
not too kind to the dollar as well, if we were to have a more severe
downturn and trouble in the banking system. So, I don't see any easy
way out for the dollar, given the situation we face.
In terms of the
size of the move, the long-bond market has come down about 40 basis
points and I think following that roughly in magnitude would be
consistent with a stable policy of monetary restraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to delay the 1/4
point [move] until there is something more concrete to support it in
the economic data than what we're looking at now. I don't see that we
would be creating a greater supply, given the credit crunch, simply by
dropping the rate 1/4 or even 1/2 point.
It's rather like pushing on
a string. As a result, I'd wait until either one or two things
happened: until either the economic data suggested that it's
appropriate to ease or until the budget agreement itself is actually
put together with some certainty. Now, that may be three weeks; that
It's October 2 now, so that's
may not be until the 19th of October.
about 2-1/2 weeks away.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me rephrase my proposal in the form
I would recommend alternative B asymmetric
of a voting proposal.
toward ease, with the presumption that if the budget resolution passes
both houses there would be a 25 basis point decline [in the funds rate
objective] on Tuesday morning or Wednesday or sometime around then.
Implicit in the proposal is that I'd like to remain asymmetric toward
ease but--and this is something of a change from what I indicated
earlier because I'm sensing different views in the Committee--that's
as far as I would go.
It would merely be an asymmetric position with
no presumption of a [further] move. And if events materialized in the
usual manner, in the way they have not under an asymmetric directive
since the last FOMC meeting, what I would suggest is that it has the
same status of that. That is, under the same conditions we would move
and there would be no implication of further action or the necessity
of automatic action either as a consequence of an October 19th budget
agreement or anything else.
Obviously, if the economic data all of a
sudden turn sharply adverse, that would trigger it; that's the type of
thing I would use.
So, that's the proposal that I would put on the
table and request that we get a vote on.

10/2/90

-58-

MR. LAWARE. Excuse me, are you suggesting that whatever
second move might happen would be subject to a [conference] call?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there will be a call in any event
to evaluate the first move, assuming that we have one, to get some
judgment [on the reaction].
But that has nothing to do with the-MR. HOSKINS.

There's no implied second move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

There's no implied second move.

No automaticity.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There's no automaticity;

that's correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just one other point: As I listened,
Mr. Chairman, I thought there was a lot of wisdom in the suggestion
that several people made about not tying this unduly to the budget
resolution in your public statements. The more I think about that,
the more I think it would be embarrassing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would say that the budget
agreement would not be a relevant reason to move were it not for the
fact that there was a weak economy. One can basically say that in the
context of squeezing down the deficit, there is a little more reason
but the fundamental reason is the economy and not the [budget]
agreement.
MR. ANGELL. Could we just be asymmetric and then see what
happens in the marketplace after the budget deal and then you simply
would have the authority [to call for a move]?
Or do you feel you'd
be in a position of saying yes or no?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, are you saying: Suppose something
happens, would I feel obligated to request the Desk to move even if I
thought at that point that it was a mistake because of some events
that had occurred?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
accept that.

Well, that's a good question.

I would

MR. ANGELL.
Okay, in other words we will have asymmetric
language and it will be simply the Chairman's judgment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, that's my inclination, as I've
indicated, if [the legislation] passes and nothing else of
significance happens to prevent action. But I grant you that if
there's some adverse market response or if something peculiar happens,
it might not be desirable to move. At that point, however, I think it
would be appropriate to have a telephone conference to discuss why.
But my inclination would be in that direction.
MR. ANGELL.

But it's sort of like what we had in July?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Exactly.

-59-

10/2/90

MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's my point.
Any further comments?

MR. BLACK. One thing to bear in mind is that the employment
report comes out on Friday and that's significant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me be very specific.
This is an
asymmetric directive. Asymmetric directives are not automatic by
their very nature. However, I do suggest to you that if the Congress
passes the budget bill, I would intend to implement the easing. It is
conceivable that other events concurrent to that may make that unwise.
That's as far as I'm going.
MR. BOEHNE.

Let's hurry up and vote.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Please.

MR. BERNARD. The language would be: "In the implementation
of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Taking account
of progress toward price stability, the strength of the business
expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments
in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly greater
reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over
the period from September through December at annual rates of about 4
and 2 percent respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that
reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting are
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of 6 to 10 percent."
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, in light of our abilities on the
funds rate, I wonder whether it would be a little more accurate to
pull that range in a bit.
The 400 basis points-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

We've raised this issue before.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suggest the following: May I ask
Don Kohn to submit a recommendation to this Committee on that
question, because we've been doing this for long time?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with you that we probably
[unintelligible], but let's not muddy this.
MR. PARRY.
SPEAKER(?).

We could discuss it over breakfast.
We'll be here at breakfast.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Please call the roll.

Okay, we're voting on the directive now.

-60-

10/2/90

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Let us have lunch.
END OF MEETING

