Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 27, 1990

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 27, 1990, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Hoskins
Johnson
Kelley
LaWare
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Keehn, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
and Boston, respectively
Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist
Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey,
Promisel, Rosenblum, Siegman,
Simpson, and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Smith, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Bowen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis
Messrs. Balbach, Broaddus, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Scheld,
and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City,
New York, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Fieleke, Judd, Ms. Lovett, and Mr. Meyer,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
San Francisco, New York, and Philadelphia, respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis

1.

Attended portion of meeting devoted to discussion of foreign
currency operations.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 27, 1990
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor LaWare has moved that it is a
good morning. Are there any seconds?
MR. JOHNSON.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.
It's too early to tell!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Can I have a motion to approve the

minutes?
MS. SEGER.

I'll move it.

MR. SYRON.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
bring us up to date?
MR. CROSS.

Without objection.

Mr. Cross, would you

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. BOEHNE. When is the last time that the Fed did not share
in intervention with the Treasury?
MR. CROSS. Well, there have been occasions when we didn't
share for brief periods and in modest amounts. For example, there was
the time--not within the past 18 months or so, I guess--when the
Federal Reserve had very few, if any, yen balances and we were
intervening for Treasury. And there have been some other occasions
where for one reason or another there has been some modest activity by
one or the other. But basically, we have participated 50/50, roughly
speaking, with the Treasury for a number of years. It might have been
It has been
[since] about 1980, at the time of the Carter bonds.
pretty much that way with these minor deviations.
MR. KEEHN. Sam, related to that: Did they ask us to share,
and what did we say by way of opposition?
MR. CROSS. Well, the Treasury is very interested in having
us share; they regard that as very important. We told them that we
had reached a point where it would require a further expansion of our
authorized limits in order for us to be able to intervene anymore. As
to taking that issue up at that point, particularly in the light of
these doubts about the intervention with respect to the mark, we said
we would wait and review the matter and look at the limits in the
light of our discussion with the Committee since we already had set up
this discussion and were planning to conduct a thorough review. So,
we told them that we would not operate [for System account] until we
had an opportunity to have this more comprehensive discussion with the
Committee.
MR. FORRESTAL.
them that?
MR. CROSS.

Yes.

Did that make them very unhappy when you told

3/27/90

MR. FORRESTAL.
I had another question, Mr. Chairman. Going
back to the yen: Part of the weakness of the yen has been attributed
to the rift between the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance,
beyond the more general political problem. But they did do the
discount rate increase of 1 percentage point. Does that suggest that
that rift has been healed or is that ongoing and will it prevent the
Bank of Japan from taking further anti-inflationary steps?
MR. CROSS.
It's hard to say.
The rift went on for so long
that by the time the 1 percentage point change was actually introduced
it already had been totally discounted in the market and market rates
didn't change.
So, rather than being seen as a sign of forcefully
getting hold of the situation, it perhaps was taken by a lot of people
as still a following of events--following the curve or trying to catch
up and being dragged along belatedly when circumstances forced it.
So, it did not come out with a result that was strong and positive.
Whether these differences are going to be less in the future is a
little-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, there is really a quite
important difference between the Minister of Finance and the Governor
of the Central Bank of Japan.

I'm not sure they're going to be able to patch that back
together immediately. As far as I can see, it is subject to
continuing problems. Any further questions for Sam?
If not, may I
have a motion to ratify his actions since the February meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight either on
actions or on leeway questions?
MR. BOEHNE.
I have a question. Peter, I thought that your
Annual Report on Operations for 1989 had considerable food for

3/27/90

thought, and there were two points in that report that leaped out at
me.
One was your concluding comment, which I suspect you wrote with
your own hand, in which you talk about how essentially we have moved
back to federal funds targeting, even though we don't call it that,
and an almost wistful philosophizing about how there ought to be a way
I'd appreciate any comments that you might
to move away from that.
have on that.
The other point that leaped out at me was the
collateralization of currency. You made the really rather astounding
point that for the first time since 1957 the System portfolio actually
was reduced and that our leeway on collateral is really rather thin.
I think that would be worth talking about. But beyond that, I think
that is a sensitive political issue. Some years ago--I forget whether
it was in '82 or '83--there was considerable Congressional interest in
the use of foreign exchange as collateral for the U.S. dollar. We
I think Chuck Partee and some other
made some pledges, as I recall.
If you link that issue with what was just
people testified on that.
talked about a moment ago--in effect, the first split with the
Treasury in a long time, and the issue as to who is the senior and who
is the junior partner, which was a very sensitive one Congressionally
in the '73-'74-'75 period--it just strikes me that we may have a major
issue developing. These two volatile issues were sensitive separately
and I would think that when you put them together it could be a major
issue. I don't want to step into the topic [on our agenda] later, but
it does seem to me that we're opening ourselves up to bringing back
If they come
some of those issues that we have fought in the past.
back together, we could have a big fight on our hands.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
over into the other area.

Let's leave that, because it does step

MR. BOEHNE. Okay. Then I will go back to my first question
about the comments [in your Annual Report].
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know that I have very much to
add to the kind of philosophical comment I put in the Annual Report.
I do think that what we do now is somewhat different than the overt
fed funds targeting of the 1970s. But it certainly has become pretty
You can call it a wistful look at the
darn close to it in substance.
past.
I think there are regrettable things about fed funds targeting
I think it's
and I am hopeful of being able to get away from it more.
going to be difficult to do until we have more confidence in something
like a relationship of borrowing and the spread of the fed funds rate
But just in our day-to-day operations I think
over the discount rate.
we can carefully seek out opportunities not to let ourselves be too
tightly trapped into the perception that we target the funds rate,
because part of the box that we get ourselves into is built up just
We carefully appraise
out of our own interactions with the market.
What will
each day's operation. What is the market expecting of us?
they make of it if we do this or don't do that?
And it's only by
rather carefully taking opportunities to stretch their tolerance that
I think we can begin to build away a bit from an excessive focus on
the fed funds rate.
MR. HOSKINS. Peter, I was interested in your comments on
Drexel. In particular, do you sense any change in security firms'
Secondly, do we send
behaviors coming out of the Drexel [situation]?
any different signals to primary dealers now about how they manage
their affairs or--?

3/27/90

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we certainly had been sending some
very clear signals to Drexel, too, about how they managed their
affairs. We felt very deep concern about the charges they took and
the wrongdoing they admitted to, and we had them on very stern notice
about what we expected of them just from the standpoint of being good
citizens in the market.
As to general changes in market behavior, as
I mentioned, there is this greater tenderness about the financing of
investment banking firms that does still linger in the wake of rumors
that were rampant for a while but have quieted down now. It has made
many firms look carefully at their own exposure just so they won't get
themselves in excessively exposed positions; they will take that
lesson to heart.
In the areas that I regard as Drexel's greatest
excesses, in the junk bond underwriting, I think that lesson really
was being delivered well before their demise just because that market
was virtually coming to a halt during much of last year. You just
can't do those things, and probably shouldn't be trying to do those
things, with highly leveraged buyouts to the extent that they were
during their heyday.
MS. SEGER. I just want to make sure I'm listening correctly
to what you said about Drexel. When a firm is a primary dealer do I
understand that that gives us the authority to advise them on what
they do in the area of corporate finance as well as securities?
Is
that what you're saying?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would say we have a concern about
all firms. Obviously, we want to be sure that the entity we deal with
is properly capitalized and that it conducts itself properly.
MS. SEGER.

Right.

MR. STERNLIGHT. But we have said in our standards for
primary dealers that we have a concern about their general financial
standing and the reputation of the parent or other affiliates as well
as the immediate entity that we deal with.
It's not that we go out of
our way to give a lot of advice on how they conduct themselves; but if
we felt disturbed about their conduct in some other area, we would
feel it was incumbent on us to say something.
MS. SEGER. Where do we overlap the SEC then?
their basic responsibility: to oversee these firms?

Isn't that

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, our role is not a regulatory role.
It's just part of our business relationship with a counterparty. We
don't want to do business with an entity whose reputation we're not
comfortable with.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the things that the Drexel
case shows is that if there are serious problems in one part of the
firm, those problems cannot be isolated from the rest of the firm. In
that case, even though the primary dealer that we do business with had
capital in excess of regulatory guidelines and all the rest of it,
once the name of the firm was so badly tarnished, people wouldn't do
business with the government security firm even in a context of book
entry transactions in government securities.
So you can't fully
isolate or insulate the primary dealer from the affairs of the firm as
a whole.

3/27/90

But if we ever have a need to raise a concern about the
affairs of a firm as a whole, we always do it in very close
collaboration with the SEC. We go to extraordinary lengths in all of
these types of issues through the day-to-day, at times hour-to-hour,
very close if not intimate, working relationship with the SEC. The
SEC is always center stage. Again, in the case of this company, it
also happens to be true that some of the most serious problems that

were encountered once the chute went up happened to be in entities
that were not regulated by the SEC at all. So both we and the SEC had
the problem of these unregulated entities being the focal point of
some of the greatest sources of tension as they applied to markets

generally. But, Governor Seger, we do try to maintain what we loosely
think of as a fit-and-proper standard that's built into the written,
published guidelines for primary dealers. What it essentially tries
to say is that we recognize that even where, as in this case, the
business entity that we're doing business with is fine--indeed, this
was a good government securities dealer--if the rest of the firm gets
into deep trouble, no matter how good the entity is that we're doing
business with and even though it may be a business entity to itself,
it will be contaminated by the problems of the rest of the firm. And
that, of course, is precisely what happened. We try to walk that fine
line, and there is no case where we would make the point about any
other aspect of the firm without close consultation and collaboration
with the SEC.
MS. SEGER. Well, that's why I asked: to see if I was
understanding Peter's comment about junk bond financing correctly.
Because whether or not they choose to underwrite junk bonds is-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We would never say anything about
whether a firm should be doing junk bond financing or not. We might
make a comment, as we did in this case, about the overall liquidity of
the firm--about the ability of the firm to meet its obligations in the
event of adversity. And we might stress, as we did, that they ought
to be thinking seriously about how they would respond to problems.
But we would never say they should or shouldn't do this or that. We
would always be very, very general. If we thought something specific
needed to be said we would call Mr. Ketchum or Mr. Breeden or somebody
[else at the SEC] and say: "Look, you ought to be aware of this." We
were the ones that first called to the attention of the SEC the fact
that the excess capital was being taken out of the broker dealer. We
never told them what they should do about it, but we certainly
informed them of it; and it was up to them what they did about it.
MR. JOHNSON. Jerry, don't we have a legal authority to set
terms and conditions for primary dealer status when they do business
with the Fed?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
they don't have to.

Right.

So, if they don't want to be part of that club,

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's correct.

Oh, sure.

MR. JOHNSON. So it's not like we have regulatory authority;
they don't have to be a primary dealer and buy and sell securities
with the Fed.

3/27/90

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Technically, I don't think we have
legal authority.
I think it grows out of-MR. JOHNSON.
Is there any legal issue about the terms and
Legally,
conditions we might set for a dealer to do business with us?
could we say we don't like the rest of your business and we're not
going to do business with you?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Oh, sure.

Have we done that?

Have we pulled a primary

dealer?
MR. JOHNSON. I don't know if we ever have.
I'm just saying,
as Peter pointed out, that as far as our business relationship with
the dealer goes, I think we could probably set any conditions we
wanted to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
statutory.
MR. JOHNSON.

That's right;

that's because it's not

But of course they don't have to do the

business.
We agonized
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It's a very fine line.
in the period after Drexel had pleaded guilty under what the U.S.
attorney [unintelligible] and had entered into this agreement with the
SEC.
There was just no question that the government securities entity
itself had nothing to do with all these problems. And we agonized
about the kind of point that Governor Johnson is making: Should we, on
the basis of general fit-and-proper standards, terminate in a public
way our relationship with the firm? As I said, we talked about it at
great length and finally decided that doing that in a public way,
given all that was going on, probably in and of itself would have
So what we did,
produced the immediate demise of the firm as a whole.
in effect, was put them on a formal probation. We put them on notice
that if they failed to live up to all of the commitments they had made
to the U.S. attorney and to the SEC, we would publicly stop doing
business with them. But it was one of those very tough calls on an
issue; I think in retrospect our instincts were right.
Had we just
overtly, publicly, stopped doing business with them instead of
privately putting them on notice and putting them on probation, it's
now very clear to me that that action, had we taken it, would have
caused the demise of the firm; it was that tender.
Now, it happened
anyway.
I must say I would rather that it happened the way it did
than as a result of some overt action on our part.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there any new evidence as to whether
or not, when the firm is fully liquidated, there will be any capital

left?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

It's still hard to tell.

I don't really have a final answer on that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I recall one of the major subs, which is
the public side of the SEC regulation, has a note to the parent
company that presumably would be the vehicle by which any excess

3/27/90

capital up in the regulated sub would go through the parent and back
down. But if there are other obligations of the parent, does that
line stand in any securer position, do you know?
I'm talking
specifically about the commodity stuff.
MR. PATRIKIS. The holding company you're referring to is
called the Trading Corporation, which did foreign exchange, oil, and
We can use as an example the
commodities [trading].
Central Bank, which dealt with the Trading Corporation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's exactly the issue I wanted to

raise.
MR. PATRIKIS.
Say there's a $125 billion loan, either gold
If the Trading Corporation is a general creditor of the
or bonds.
parent because it [unintelligible] funds to finance the parent's
holding of bridge loans and junk bonds, that sub would share with all
other creditors of the parent equally. So, if there are trade
creditors, whatever creditors [unintelligible] with the parent all
have an
come before the shareholders of the parent. The
in that they got a guarantee
advantage over the
from the holding company. They have legally to collect two
[unintelligible] for distribution with the sub and themselves and if
the sub had distribution. At least from what the lawyers of the
say, they are hoping to get at least 70 cents on the
dollar. Now, if they get that, that means that the shells of the
holding company don't get anything. All these central bank creditors
of the Trading Company will all have to collect before the
shareholders will collect, unless someone says that this subsidiary
ought to be subordinated--that it's unfair for the other creditors of
the holding company--in which case all of those who did business with
And that's what the fighting is
that subsidiary will come in second.
going to be about in the bankruptcy court: who is going to stand first
Then we may just see what's going to be
in the line of creditors.
left for the shareholders, if there's any equity left at all.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the problems, too, in terms
of what may be left is that you have to take the common things like
their leasehold obligations. Their leasehold obligations, believe it
or not, are in the area of $11 million a month.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And there are a lot of leases.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And there are a lot of leases.

Any further questions of Mr. Sternlight?

MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, are the market participants that you
talk to expressing any concern about the Comptroller's examinations in
Are they talking to you about the
various parts of the country?
possibilities of a credit crunch?
MR. STERNLIGHT. In our calls with some of the major money
center banks we do hear some reference to that. But I think they're
talking more just about what they hear generally. I don't get the
sense that they're talking about their own situations having been
impacted that severely, although some of them do tell us that they
It's a
have been taking a more conservative view in their lending.

3/27/90

mixed sense that I get.
It's not so much because of regulators
bearing down but more just that in light of general conditions in the
last year or two they have wanted to take a more restrained view about
their lending programs.
But the nonbankers are not focusing on it

MR. FORRESTAL.
very much?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there have been some articles in the
press talking about the whole subject and some of the market
participants--nonbanks as well--will refer to that. Some of them see
it as a factor in shaping their economic outlook to some degree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, is there any evidence that where
American banks are pulling back on this issue the Japanese are moving
in?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I have not encountered that, Mr. Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, you do hear it in real estate.

I know of one instance having--

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I know of two or three instances in
Boston where foreign loan production officers, foreign representation
officers, have come in and taken over real estate deals with
established developments in two cases and with a new development in
another case.
MR. JOHNSON. I was just looking at those credit data
yesterday. What's interesting is that everybody talks about the
contraction going on in real estate financing, but in fact from what
the data show that hasn't slowed down at all. It's really just the
business credit that is slowing down, which is quite disturbing. That
is the source of the credit slowdown; it's not in the real estate
area.
MR. HOSKINS. One of the arguments bankers use on that is
that they have commitments and that once you're in, you're in--you
have no way to get out. So they keep putting new money in, and we
won't see the real impacts of this tightening-MR. JOHNSON.

Until they're all drawn?

MR. HOSKINS.

Yes, until what's in the pipeline dries up.

John might--

MR. PARRY. Manley, were you talking about total real estate
[financing] or real estate [financing] provided by commercial banks?
MR. JOHNSON. I think I was looking at both, but it was the
total that I was talking about.
MR. PARRY. There has been some switching, of course, in the
commercial banking industry.
MR. JOHNSON. I know. I looked at both of them. But I was
thinking of the most aggregate numbers. If I remember, those numbers

3/27/90

were still clicking along at 15 to 25 percent annualized growth and it
was business credit that was really slowing down.
MR. KOHN.

Business credit at commercial banks slowed down

around the turn of the year. Some of that was the slowness to [move
to] lower primes, so commercial paper surged at the same time. And a
lot of it was merger-related financing. If you take out the mergerrelated financing and add back in the commercial paper, you get a very
sluggish picture in short-term business credit. But it's a picture
that's been present since at least the beginning of 1989.
MR. JOHNSON.

Right.

What's real estate doing there?

MR. KOHN. Well, I just have the bank real estate data.
We're estimating for March, on a very preliminary basis, about a 10
percent increase. That follows increases of 13 percent in February
and 7 percent in January. The January number, however, was probably
affected by writedowns. Last year we were running in the 10 to 12
percent area and that seems to be continuing pretty much.
MR. JOHNSON.
annualized.

Yes, I was wrong; it's about 10 to 12 percent
But there has to be a big FIRREA effect there.

MR. PARRY.

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, it could be. That doesn't show any sign
of deceleration, to me at least. There is that weak January relative
to trend but February is as strong as ever in there.
MR. KOHN.

And March is close to February; it's just a little

[less].

MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.

MR. SYRON. Manley, I think what's happening--if the evidence
from our small neck of the woods has any relevance to this--is that
some of the larger and pretty much creditworthy developers are finding
alternative sources of credit and they really haven't slowed down a
great deal. The smaller and medium-size firms in the C&I loan area
are suffering somewhat as a fallout of this experience. They find it
difficult to get working capital; [their access earlier] had existed
on a relationship basis with institutions that now have difficulties
because of the real estate problems.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes.

MR. SYRON. There's a change in the composition because the
foreign banks are not coming in and picking up that financing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mr.
Sternlight? If not, first can I have a motion to ratify transactions
by the Desk since the February meeting?
MR. KELLEY.
MS. SEGER.

Moved.
Second.

-10-

3/27/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Secondly, can I have
a motion to approve the leeway request of Mr. Sternlight?
MR. SYRON.

Move it.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on to
the staff reports on the economic situation with Messrs. Prell and
Truman.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]
MR. TRUMAN.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. PARRY. Ted, I have two questions. You mentioned the
assumption about the path of the dollar. Is that the declining
I can't remember
[unintelligible]? Could you give me some numbers?
what you were assuming before.
MR. TRUMAN. We're assuming from now on, [after] the first
quarter, that the dollar will decline on average about 3 percent.
MR. PARRY.

This year.

MR. TRUMAN. For the rest of the forecast period--taking
account of the adjustment through the first quarter, which still is
negative. And that compares with 5 percent in the last forecast.
Then you adjust for the higher inflation abroad and that's where I
sort of got the 1/2 percent.
MR. PARRY. You pointed to some areas of strength that may
show up in Eastern Europe other than in East Germany. The second
question is: Isn't there another side that perhaps doesn't get as much
attention, and that is that there could be some very important sources
of weakness as well? One gets the impression that in places like
Hungary and Czechoslovakia orders from the the Soviet Union have
declined very substantially in the steel industry and other areas as
well. Isn't it conceivable that in 1990 growth in those areas may
actually turn out to be less than was anticipated before the-MR. TRUMAN. I think so.
been on the German situation.
MR. PARRY.

The major focus of our analysis has

Right.

MR. TRUMAN. Basically, as far as the rest of Eastern Europe
is concerned, we took the general level of exports of those countries
with the United States and added on $1 billion or something like that
by the end of the forecast period just to get some sense of where one
would be going in the future. But I agree with you that in the short
run we could have some negative impacts.
It's a little hard to factor
all these things in because each country is moving at a different
[pace.]
In Poland, on the one hand, although things seem to have gone
downhill in terms of domestic production, they have gotten, as a

3/27/90

-11-

consequence of the changes there, a great amount of increased access
to foreign exchange. How that nets out in terms of their hard
currency current account position and potentially demand from us and
other countries is a little harder to estimate. And, of course, the
oil question, which is in fact a negative impact in the forecast
[unintelligible] oil price.
It's one manifestation of
[unintelligible].
MR. PARRY. It's even exaggerated in those countries because
prices were being subsidized.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. I have two questions.
One is: In looking at the
most recent CPI number, how much weight are you inclined to give to
possible changes because of weather-related factors and seasonals in
Will things
apparel, with much warmer weather early in the year?
Is there a
potentially even out with the spring season earlier on?
possibility that the seasonals were affected, perhaps biasing up the
CPI excluding energy compared to the CPI?
MR. PRELL. Well, we've anticipated seasonally adjusted
declines over the next couple of months in apparel prices, which would
not have been the pattern with the customary introduction of seasonal
So, in effect, the answer is
apparel over the past couple of years.
that we are taking this as something of a special factor that should
Indeed, we've
unwind over the next couple of months to some degree.
lowered our forecast of the ex food and energy CPI increase for the
But the cumulative effect
second quarter from what we previously had.
of the last few months of data in this overall category--even though
there are special things like transit charges and other items that
seem to be one-time events--has been that the trend is a little
higher. It just seems to fit with the general circumstances of
overall spending being stronger--knowing that that profit margin
pressure was there, which businesses presumably would like to relieve
[Unintelligible] the context of import prices turning
to some degree.
upward, thus relieving a bit of the competitive pressure. So it all
seems to fit together in this direction. We've raised [our forecast
of] prices ex food and energy this year; they change Q4 to Q4 by .2
percent, a fairly modest change.
MR. SYRON. The second question I have is that I'm rather
struck by the change in the [unintelligible] of the Greenbook. Over
the next two years where you come out at the [end] is not terribly
different from what you had last month.
MR. PRELL.

That's by design of course.

I hope everyone--

MR. SYRON. But what is different is this assumption for
What I'm wondering
quite a substantial increase in short-term rates.
is--you can answer this question either way--where we would come out
at the end of this period in terms of the growth of inflation and also
capacity utilization if we didn't have that increase in rates that's
Conversely, if
built into your forecast. What would your answer be?
we wanted to have significantly more meaningful progress on prices-and I'll let you give the magnitude--how much higher would your
assumption be for an increase [in interest rates]?

-12-

3/27/90

MR. PRELL. Let me say first of all that in terms of the
change in rate assumptions from last time, as you may recall, what we
indicated at the February meeting was that we didn't anticipate any
significant change but in terms of what we had written down in
quantitative terms there was a modest upward drift in rates.
So the
rate increase in this projection is not quite the 1 point and 1/2
point that I referred to.
It comes more quickly. We had had rates
just drifting up through the projection [period] pretty easily.
Whether or not one would characterize this as substantial could be
debated.
Certainly, in terms of cyclical movements in interest rates
that in the past have caused major changes in the direction of the
economy, a 1 point change in the funds rate really wouldn't look all
that dramatic. Using our quarterly model and holding the funds rate
at the current level throughout the forecast period, we would end up
with a higher level of real GNP at the end of 1991 by about .7
percent. And because of the long lag in the price effects, we
probably would see an inflation rate next year only .1 or so higher
than what we have in the forecast. As we've emphasized many times, it
takes some time for those inflation changes to reemerge. One could-MR. SYRON.

What kind of unemployment rate would you have at

the end?
MR. PRELL. We would have an unemploymnent rate about 1/4 of
a point lower. That's really not a very big difference, and I guess
that's consistent with what I've said about the kind of shock that a 1
percentage point interest rate change at the short end imposes on the
economy.
Clearly, if one wanted to move the inflation rate down,
these can be applied in reverse. You'd need a substantial rise in
interest rates to make significant progress within 1991 to bring the
unemployment rate up much more quickly and reduce capacity
utilization. The trajectory going into 1992, however, is an
altogether different story.
If the unemployment rate were to go in
excess of 6 percent next year, presumably we would begin to see some
significant deceleration in prices in 1992, all other things equal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I guess this is directed to Ted.
I still have a
hard time accepting your idea that the dollar will depreciate, even
though you're saying you expect it to depreciate less than you had
expected a month or so ago.
I really can't go through this whole
scenario and get a depreciating dollar to be consistent with a tighter
monetary policy and rising interest rates.
I just can't seem to get
that into my mind as something reasonable.
I hope you're right
because, as you know, I have concerns about our ability to export-little things like that!
I don't have a problem with the outcome; I
just am worried about the likelihood of getting it.
MR. TRUMAN. I'm not sure what I hope, actually, at this
stage!
I think there are three points. One, which is the basic
story, is that we had some improvement--and I'm excluding capital
gains and losses--in the current account in the last quarter of last
year.
That was $1 billion at an annual rate and some further
improvement is projected there. We had the view that although this
external adjustment problem is shrinking that the general adjustment
problem would tend to weigh on the dollar. And we have essentially
adjusted in light of the stronger [interest] rates. We moved from a

-13-

3/27/90

modest weight to 60 percent of the weight or something like that. I
don't think there's any magic in this; it certainly is possible that
the dollar could be unchanged over this period. It wouldn't make much
difference in terms of the immediate forecast because most of the
effect of the exchange rates, at least in the context of the forecast
and how we put these things together, is the adjustment from the
middle of last year--that part moving through the pipeline. So, one
would take maybe .3 off the growth of GNP over this period if the
dollar were unchanged from the first-quarter average levels and maybe
$3 or $4 billion off the current account level, if you believe the way
this black box works on these things. The one point I should mention
is that to the extent that the dollar's nominal strength were
associated with [higher] inflation abroad, then in real terms you
would be in about the same place. If inflation went to 6 percent in
the major industrial countries on average and the dollar was
unchanged, or if it [depreciate] by 3 percent relative to where we
are now, in terms of the way things worked out that would be about the
same. The [depreciation] essentially would offset the inflation
abroad. So, one needs to set that partly aside. That's the best I
can do. We've been wrong before and no doubt we'll be wrong again-which way I'm not sure.
MS. SEGER. I'm just nervous about the 7 percent advance in
the dollar vis-a-vis the yen since our last meeting. It reminds me
how difficult it is to get these estimates right even over a short
period of time.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we don't even try to do it over a short
period of time. One factor that hasn't been focused on very much is
that the current account adjustment in Japan has been quite impressive
in dollar terms. A piece of that is the J-curve. But they've had
about a $30 billion adjustment over 3 years in that current account
position. So that's 40 percent, essentially--on the same order of
magnitude that we've had, if you want to put it that way. Part of it
is the J-curve; part of ours last year also was the J-curve effect.
Some of that is going on but there are some questions about how that's
going to play out. You could even tell yourself a story that the
current account adjustment is going more rapidly in size in Japan
overall--

MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

MR. TRUMAN. --and that it continues here overall and,
therefore, the expected level of the yen/dollar rate in the future is
Now, that certainly is possible. There are a
[unintelligible].
number of people who worry about the fact that we could get ourselves
in a situation in which the U.S. current account position is in
balance, however one wants to define that, and the Japanese current
account position is in balance and we would be stuck with this large
continuing imbalance in the [bilateral] trade balance. And that, I
think, bothers some people for a variety of reasons. But it is
something that can't be ruled out.
MR. PARRY. Another point is that in the first quarter the
trade-weighted dollar was down at a double-digit [rate] in spite of
what happened to the yen. So we have a very substantial decline in
the trade-weighted--

-14-

3/27/90

MS. SEGER. Yes, but actual trade decisions usually are not
based on the weighted average; they're based on movements in specific
currencies and the arrangements between specific countries.
MR. PARRY.
trade that's done.

But they are weighted according to the amount of

MS. SEGER. Well, the weights are based on ancient history.
I think if you look through how they--

it on

MR. PARRY. Well, that would give more to Japan if they did
[ancient] history because Japan had a higher weight.

MS. SEGER. All I'm saying, though, is that when you look
forward I believe you have to think in terms of a very micro analysis
of the foreign exchange markets if you're going to think about what
the impact is going to be on our country and our economy.
MR. PARRY.

Well, you'd use a lesser weight for Japan.

MR. TRUMAN.
[Unintelligible] uses lesser or bigger weights.
On the import side we tend to
In fact we use two weighting systems.
use import weights and on the export side we tend to use multilateral
weights. We have looked at multilateral weights in the models in
terms of whether changes in the weighting system give you much
difference and the answer is "no," even though Governor Seger is
correct that they are ancient weights that haven't changed that much
over time. Obviously, the weakness of the yen is affecting the
outcome and we tried to take that into account.
On the other hand,
the strength until very recently of the DM and other European
currencies, and the Canadian dollar for that matter, is on the other
side.
We have a lot of trade with Canada and they have a huge current
account deficit at the moment. They do even up.
Whether we have
gotten the balance right in terms of these aggregates is obviously an
open question.
MS. SEGER. Also, Bob, I think you'll notice that more of our
trade is with countries such as Taiwan and Hong Kong, etc. And the
last I checked, their currencies were not picked up in the weighted
average at all.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PARRY.

It is in the forecasting process.
Yes.

MS. SEGER. No, I'm talking about that series we run on the
weighted average; I didn't think they were in there. Anyway, one
final question for Mike:
With tighter monetary conditions assumed and
rising interest rates and the FIRREA effect, how are we likely to get
housing starts this year of about the same magnitude as last year?
MR. PRELL. Well, last year was somewhat erratic; the course
was generally in a downward direction even though interest rates came
down in the latter half of the year.
I would say that we have had a
very hard time getting the base level from recent months, given all
the weather effects, so there is clearly a bit of guesswork there.
We've looked at the permits for the last couple of months, though, and
they likely are not as affected by weather--particularly in the

3/27/90

-15-

single-family area where we haven't had the HUD effect.
Using that as
some benchmark, we thought that something that had an underlying level
roughly consistent with that pace would be appropriate for the coming
months.
I don't expect some little payback for the faster starts of
houses in January and February, but basically that's what guided us.
And we don't have very much interest rate movement this year.
So
we're just assuming starts are going to be in that area. This is the
area where some of the other forecasters--mortgage bankers, the
homebuilders, and others--are putting housing starts, so we have some
company. But, obviously, because of the construction loan issue,
there's considerable uncertainty about these figures.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you very much.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I just want to follow up on some of the
comments on the international side. First of all, responding to what
Bob Parry said, I agree that the trade-weighted dollar is still--I
don't know if it's down but it may be down slightly. It depends on
what point you're talking about but-MR. PARRY.
I'll tell you: it's the fourth quarter of '89.
If you compare that to the estimate of the first quarter of this year
is it down, Ted?
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PARRY.
MR. JOHNSON.

17 percent at an annual rate.
17 percent on the weighted average.
From when?

MR. TRUMAN. The average of the fourth quarter of '89, which
was 97 plus, to the average of the first quarter which is [93 on our
index].
MR. PARRY.

[Unintelligible].

MR. JOHNSON. Okay. You're right; one can play those base
games.
But what struck me was the trade-weighted dollar going back to
the end of this huge swing in the dollar. When I pull out that chart
and look at the long-term trend in the dollar in the last three years,
since 1987, it looks like noise.
It just looks like little
fluctuations around a flat or maybe gradually upward drifting pattern.
Pull out a long-term chart of the trade-weighted dollar sometime and
you'll be struck by what you see; in the last three years it looks
I
like just a little fluctuation. And it looks a little soft, too.
can't believe that anything can result from those kinds of
fluctuations one way or the other. But going forward, I think there
is a shift, at least in the atmosphere, along the lines of what Ted
Truman indicated. At least it seems so to me. But what that tells
me--and I'd like a response on this--is that there is a trend of
upward pressure on the dollar, and maybe it won't materialize, for the
But as you said, Ted, there's serious doubt now
following reasons.
They seem to be
about the deutschemark being the anchor for the EMS.
willing to accommodate the unification in Germany at the expense of
some inflation. I don't know how much, but the fact that they haven't
moved rates relative to expectations already is raising some serious

3/27/90

-16-

doubts. And the DM has even weakened; the dollar was at 1.64 and now
it's around 1.71 from the low point. If you look at the Japanese
situation, obviously, there's a lot of turmoil going on. There are a
lot of expected inflationary pressures, financial market problems,
governmental weakness--all those kinds of things. When I look at that

setting, it's really hard for me to see the trade-weighted dollar
depreciating in that scenario. Even if rates rise there, as you
pointed out yourself, there's a good chance that those will be nominal
rate moves that aren't even keeping up with inflationary pressures.
And we've already seen that nominal rate differentials have narrowed
dramatically against the dollar and the dollar hasn't weakened. There
has been a rise recently in the trade-weighted dollar, but that's
mainly because of the DM. The fact is that the dollar has come down
against the DM over the period [since] last fall, but other EMS
currencies have been tied into that to some extent. Looking forward,
as long as we maintain our anti-inflationary policies, I can't see
anything but upward pressure on the dollar. Explain to me how the
dollar is going to depreciate in this environment.
MR. PARRY. Well, if you look at Germany, Ted did explain it
in the sense that if there's going to be greater economic activity in
eastern Germany, it's going to affect western Germany in that the
return on capital is likely to rise. If the real rate of return on
capital in Germany rises, I would assume that investors would make
portfolio shifts into-MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I would argue that that effect has
already taken place. That's why the dollar is down about 15 percent
or so against the DM, from 1.9 to 1.7. But going forward, if they're
going to have an inflationary experience out of this, then-MR. TRUMAN. But there clearly is room for a different
scenario, a more rapid inflation scenario, and that's why I put that
forward as a risk. As the staff usually does on these things, we sort
of bend part way in that direction in putting together the overall
forecast, but not all the way. To the extent that we get both more
inflation and more economic activity than we've built in, we are going
to get more corrections on the current account.
In addition to the
real versus nominal split, we would get more in terms of just the
adjustment process and the dollar could well appreciate. This is not
a very finely-tuned point [estimate of the] deficit. There is another
point, which your first comment illustrates, that I think should be
emphasized. Again, it can be viewed in two directions. Given the
fact that the dollar has been in this channel--a wide channel, but a
channel--for three years now, one might argue that the current account
performance has been remarkably good. Indeed, in the last year or so
it has been much better than most models would have predicted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Than what?

Models.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You're talking about the adjustment

process?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The U.S. current account position is doing
much better than [predicted].
We were saying a year ago that with the
dollar staying where it was the current account was going to

3/27/90

-17-

deteriorate and it has not. Now, you were saying that indeed a
process is going on here which is outside of the exchange rate,
however you want to weigh the process; or you could say that we have
the [weights] all wrong and somehow the past will catch up with us.
It is an area of uncertainty in terms of the whole outlook.
MR. JOHNSON. I can see it's definitely uncertain. I would
say that's one plausible scenario; what seems to me equally plausible
is that the dollar becomes strong from this point on.
MR. TRUMAN. But if it's on the inflation side, I don't think
it will affect the basic forecast very much.
MR. JOHNSON.

I certainly agree with that in the short run.

MR. TRUMAN. Okay. And if it's because of prospects for
economic activity, then presumably that will help us. And one
question is: To what extent is this featured appropriately in the 18month forecast?
MR. JOHNSON.

Just trying to create a little noise.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mike, one of the interesting parts of monetary
policy is that we have options of being sometimes correct and
sometimes incorrect on the forecast, but we also can be sometimes bold
and sometimes timid. I'm wondering why it is that in your forecast
you have us being so timid. That is, you're saying 100 basis points
higher on short-term interest rates toward the end of the year. Well,
if you're correct in your forecast, why not bring that interest rate
increase by and large into the second quarter? Wouldn't that produce
a better achievement of Federal Reserve objectives? That would, of
course, make Ted's forecast wrong. But wouldn't that be the bold
thing to do, Mike?
MR. PRELL. I couldn't do that if it would make Ted's
forecast wrong! I'd never hear the end of it! This is something we
have to deal with every time we put together a forecast. Essentially,
we're trying to give some indication of how we think monetary policy
probably will have to move in order to bring about what we discern to
be your objectives. One element in terms of how forceful an action we
build in here is our assessment of whether the outcome we have would
seem to be consistent with your objectives. Obviously, you all have
somewhat different objective functions to some degree; and I think the
key feature of this is that as we get toward the end of 1991 we don't
have a discernibly different inflation trend than we did in the prior
forecast. It's one where we feel the peak has been reached and things
are turning toward a lower trend of inflation, but only very slowly.
Indeed, one might debate whether that is the proper objective and
whether we caught that right.
In terms of the timing of the interest rate increase, I
suppose in this instance I've indulged in some effort to temper this
somewhat with uncertainties that I've noted. I've reached the
judgment that, given that the real boost to domestic production is
forecast not to occur until 1991, there was an interval here in which
one could await some clarification of some of these uncertainties

3/27/90

-18-

before moving what I characterized as a fairly moderate amount.
If
one felt you had to move 2 percentage points or 3 percentage points in
order to rein things in, then whether it would make sense to have this
all happening in about 3 or 4 months' time or to spread it out over a
longer interval would have presented us with a different issue.
But
in effect, we've tempered this in terms of timing on the basis of the
many uncertainties that we think exist right now.
MR. ANGELL.

So--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So to interpret Mike, what he's saying
is that he's not worried about Ted's forecast; he's worried that if we
raise rates right now it will affect his forecast!
MR. PRELL. We've always recognized that possibility.
I want
to emphasize that matters of timing, given these small amounts, would
not make a great difference in our projections. That's maybe one
argument for why we should always do something smoothly. But we also
try to capture the uncertainties and the policy realities that exist.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm reading into your answer that you're
suggesting we be timid because you think you may be wrong. That's
always the wise thing to do: to be timid if you think you may be
wrong. But clearly what you've shown on the path in regard to the
employment gap that you believe is necessary for price level stability
is not occurring as rapidly in the 1990 forecast as you had
anticipated previously. And I guess one [unintelligible] your lack of
boldness in wanting to create that kind of employment gap so as to
achieve the proper price level improvement for 1991, because clearly
the 1991 price level forecast is unacceptable.
MR. PRELL. Some of my colleagues would argue that we've been
bold, in a sense, in not raising our wage forecast more than we have.
In that sense we have taken the lower unemployment rate and said it's
not going to have a significant effect on the wage outlook because
we've taken a fairly optimistic view of the incoming information. And
I suggested that that was a risk. It's in essence saying we may be
able to get by with a somewhat lower unemployment rate in the short
run than we thought previously. I tried to highlight that risk. We
mentioned it explicitly in the Greenbook. And that's one reason why
we didn't feel the compulsion to put in a more aggressive move in
terms of timing on the-MR. ANGELL. Well, I may have done you a disservice because
you may have been forecasting that we wouldn't be bold rather than-MR. PRELL. We're always in this tough position and we try to
be as neutral as possible, not injecting ourselves into the short-run
tactical decisions.
MR. SYRON. I think that has something to do with the
characterization of what kind of time period and whether [an interest
rate move of] 100 basis points is significant or not significant.
There's a difference between whether it's significant or not
significant in terms of the real economy and whether it's significant
or not significant in terms of how much the Committee moves in a
relatively short time.

3/27/90

-19-

MR. PRELL. Well, I think we can look back to 1988-89 and see
that the Committee really has moved significantly at times.
MR. SYRON.

Come back to--

MR. PARRY. But you never incorporated change in policy in
the intermeeting period just immediately ahead, right?
MR. PRELL. Sometimes we have when it looked like you had to
move a considerable amount within a short period of time in order to
head things off. Normally, we don't build things in immediately.
MR. PARRY.

Sure.

MR. PRELL.

But there have been times when we have.

MR. ANGELL.

No further questions.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You were finding this meeting very dull
and you're finding a way to stir it up!
President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE.
least commented on.
MR. BLACK.

My question has already been answered, or at

You got reckless there for a minute!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, I have a much narrower and less provocative
It has to do with profits. We have seen this pressure on
question.
profits for quite some time now. Is that pretty widely distributed
across the economy or is it concentrated in a few sectors of
manufacturing or where?
MR. PRELL. There are some sectors in manufacturing that one
But it
can identify as having suffered relatively more than others.
isn't only manufacturing where the profits have turned down. One can
see utilities and transportation, for example, as sectors where
profits have turned down. Within manufacturing it's a mixed bag, and
we only have figures through the third quarter of last year. Some of
the areas that stick out are in the machinery and equipment area and,
Chemicals seem to have peaked out.
obviously, motor vehicles.
Surprisingly, primary metals and fabricated metals held up fairly well
last year.
So, there are many industries in which profits have been
squeezed, but it's somewhat uneven.
MR. STERN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. One last point, just following up on what I
think Governor Angell was suggesting--I'm not sure if it's in the
[vein] of stirring things up again--on what might be the way to go
about this since everybody, I think, is frustrated with the price
numbers they keep seeing in your scenario. Why not take an improved
price scenario and tell us what kind of interest rates and economic
performance go with it? And then let us make a decision about whether
that's an acceptable risk or not.

-20-

3/27/90

MR. PRELL.

Well, we certainly have presented on several

occasions specific alternative scenarios that will do more [on
We had the lengthy presentation in December about longerprices].
range disinflation paths.
I think you-MR. JOHNSON.
[Unintelligible] that people want to see some
improvement in this period of '90, '91, and '92 and they don't see it.
And the fact is that they want to know what the cost is of achieving
it.
They basically are saying: "Look, this is what goes with no

progress.

What goes with the progress?"
MR. PRELL.

Frankly, what we try to do is listen and hit as

close to the middle of the Committee's expressed desires here in
shaping our scenarios. I certainly will listen to what I hear today
and we will adjust accordingly. As I said, my sense is that there are
varying degrees of aggressiveness around the table with regard to
going all out to bring down the inflation rate within the next year or
so. And I guess we felt that the highest priority was on establishing
a trend, and that's simply what we've done. But we can be more-MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BLACK.

I agree with that, but the problem is--

Well, it's in the wrong direction.

MR. KOHN. You were presented alternatives in February and
will be again in July.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. I'll ask Mike a timid question. We've had a
pretty big surprise in terms of increases in the inflation rate--a
full percentage point since the last meeting on the CPI as well as the
fixed-weight. If we were to look at a simple forecasting model, not
necessarily a judgmental one, wouldn't a surprise like that tend to be
built into longer-term inflation rates?
I'm just wondering--well, I'm
asking that question of you. But secondly, I'd like your judgment
about the issue that Wayne has raised. Even though you haven't done
an alternative forecast, there may be some expectational effects from
moving early and small as opposed to moving later and large. I think
that kind of gets at Wayne's question. I'd just like to hear your
observations on the latter and also your comments on what simple
forecast models would do, given a surprise with respect to long-term
inflation.
MR. PRELL. On the latter question, to the extent that you
surprise people with your aggressiveness in responding to what might
appear to be a stronger inflationary risk, then I think credibility is
enhanced and maybe it does not take a large move but merely one that
comes sooner than the market had expected. So, I would certainly
grant that point.
In terms of the surprise and what it would imply
for prospective inflation, one aspect of the models would be that to
the extent they have backward-looking expectations or lagged prices in
their wage equations, that would tend to build the momentum in
prospectively through markup models of prices. In effect, in our case
we didn't feed this through to wages. Partly, it's quite conceivable
that inflation expectations [unintelligible] a forward-looking
expectations model in wage formation and that they really will not
reflect the food and energy price bulges that presumably will unwind,

3/27/90

-21-

and we may not have as big a price expectation problem.
In terms of
errors and so on, it isn't necessarily inherent in the models as to
how one should translate that.
That's at the discretion of the model
operator to decide whether to have negative or positive adjustments in
future [unintelligible] to a surprise. But as I suggested, we have
taken a somewhat more optimistic view than models would of the recent
experience. And with [unintelligible] to prospects.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'd just like to compliment you on the
boldness of your answer to the previous question, which I think was
appropriate. That is, if you look at this Committee and try to deduce
what it's going to do, I don't find anything wrong with your Greenbook
projection.
MR. PRELL. You're not making my life easier!
[unintelligible] consensus here.

I badly feel

MR. BLACK. What does that say about your thoughts on the
evaluation of the Committee?
MR. ANGELL.

[Unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only want to say
that since Mike has said that he builds his forecast upon what he
thinks to be the center of the sentiment of the Committee, I'd like to
be counted on the side that has been set forth by Governors Angell and
Johnson, and perhaps Lee Hoskins, for the period ahead.
I think the
numbers we are looking at with respect to inflation are discouraging
over the horizon. As a result, if indeed it's going to take some
snugging up, the sooner we do it the better. That's a little into the
next part of the meeting, but I just wanted to be counted in the group
so that this center comes a little closer to what I'd like.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for either
gentleman?
If not, I think it's time for us to do our tour de table.
Who would like to start off?
Ed.
MR. BOEHNE.
I think our District is moving at odds with the
nation, because various sectors are weakening and weakening relative
to the nation as a whole. Manufacturing is quite weak and taking on
some of the characteristics of previous recessionary periods for
manufacturing. Housing is down and I don't see much happening there.
Nonresidential construction is still growing but I think that's more
of a pipeline effect of finishing the projects that already have been
started. Out beyond that I think one sees a fair amount of excess
capacity. Financial services, which have been leading the MidRetail
Atlantic region for some years, are characterized by layoffs.
sales are flat.
Job growth is essentially nil and unemployment is
rising; it now is about where the nation is as a whole and I would
guess 5 or 6 of our various cities and towns are seeing unemployment
rates of around 7 percent or exceeding 7 percent.
I think there is some basis to this bank lending phenomenon
I have talked with
that we were talking about; it's more than smoke.
just about every major bank in our District in recent weeks and
particularly in those that are examined by the Comptroller there is a

-22-

3/27/90

definite scaling back.

Part of it is that people who are running the

banks as well as the lending officers do not have that long a track
record. Most of their top-level experience is in times of expansion
and they're not quite sure how to react [now].
The other part is that
the Comptroller's examiners really haven't done a very good job of
examining banks lately. They are coming on like gangbusters.
I have

heard more than once the comment "They're scaring the heck out of us."
Some of that I think is useful and constructive, but the risk of
overreaction is there. I ask myself where some of these small and
medium-sized businesses are going to go for their money. We have had
about 40 or so new banks start up and many of them are state banks. I
suspect that in their eagerness we will see some of those loans shift
over there and they probably will not do as good a job in
distinguishing between the good and the bad.
So, I think the District is out of phase with the nation.
Inflation has begun to moderate and come down. As I look at the
nation, clearly the inflation outlook has worsened; it's
disappointing. We're not getting what we want; there's no question
about that. When I look at the risk of recession, I would have to say
that, yes, the risk is down. I think Mike did a nice job of
summarizing the various national sectors in the Greenbook. But even
taking his own analysis, except for personal consumption, one does not
see much of a forward thrust. You don't see it in housing; you don't
see it in [non]residential construction; you don't see it in exports.
The only area in which you see fairly modest growth is consumption.
While that is the biggest chunk of the economy by far, I would like to
see a little more support than that one sector for me to say that
we're out of the woods as far as the economy moving ahead. So, I
think we find ourselves in a bad box: The inflation situation is
worsening; and while I for one think the odds of a recession are down,
I'm not willing to say we're out of the woods. I think we need some
caution in making that assumption as far as policy goes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District is also out of
phase with the rest of the nation. The economy remains strong,
although the sources of strength have changed. The growth of
employment in the past year in the entire Twelfth District has been
3.4 percent, which is an extraordinarily large gain relative to the 2
percent for the rest of the nation. Economic growth in most parts of
the region remains very high. As an example, over that period there
are three states--Washington, Idaho, and Oregon--where growth rates of
employment were 6 to 10 percent in the past year. Looking at all 9
states, even Arizona, which had a very respectable 3.5 percent growth
rate, exceeded the average in the entire District. Construction
employment is very strong; it was up 8.1 percent in the past year.
And manufacturing [employment] rose .9 percent in the past year,
compared to a fall of 1.4 percent nationally. There has been some
shift, however, away from California to other parts of the District.
Employment growth in California is getting much closer to that of the
rest of the nation. Whereas in 1988 California accounted for 63
percent of all the employment growth in our District, last year it was
only 44 percent. Also, similar to Arizona, we have seen some
weakening of housing prices in some California markets.

3/27/90

-23-

If I may turn to the national economy: As we've all discussed
so far this morning, real growth, inflation, and interest pressures
certainly seem to be stronger than they were at the time of the last
meeting. Even with some restraint from higher interest rates, which
is in both the Greenbook forecast and in our own, we would expect real
GNP growth of at least 2 percent this year.
I think some of that
strength is going to come from consumption spending, reflecting the
past strength in disposable income. I would also anticipate that
stronger foreign GNP growth will lead to greater strength in net
exports than previously had seemed likely. We're expecting the GNP
fixed-weight index to average something very similar to that shown in
the Greenbook, around 4-1/2 percent both this year and next.
Admittedly, part of this worsening is due to firmer oil prices and the
effects of past weakness in the trade-weighted dollar. Of course, if
these factors were to reverse themselves, then we could get a break on
the inflation front. Moreover, the fact that wages have been
performing well probably does limit the size of the inflation problem.
However, it's our view that the best way to insure that inflation
begins to subside--and that certainly is not something that we see in
our forecast--is to maintain moderate economic growth. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] the advent of
spring weather, but within a District context I sense that the level
of economic activity has improved at least modestly both in tone and
in fact.
January and February were really very weak, of course,
mainly because of the auto business, and that has persisted. I think
there has been some improvement. For example, the steel business is
much better. Orders are coming in from a fairly broad spectrum of
industries, backlogs are up, and in some cases shipments are being
deferred. Those I talk to are continuing to forecast shipments this
year of, say, 81 to 82 million tons, and if there are any revisions,
they are more likely to be up rather than down. Construction activity
in the District continues to be strong, indeed above the national
numbers. There continue to be just an awful lot of commercial
projects coming along in Chicago. Vacancy rates are still in line but
I hope we're not beginning to replicate the New England experience.

Downtown Indianapolis, the different part of the District, apparently
is going through a very substantial commercial real estate growth

phase. Home sales are ahead of last year and permits continue to be
high, which is indicative of a continuing good level of housing.
Machinery business is quite good, with agricultural equipment for
example at very high levels. The outlook is good for that industry;
production schedules would suggest an 8 percent increase over last
year.
The big uncertainty continues to be the automobile sector.
Certainly, the incentives of January are lame. The first 20-day sales
of March were very much on the weak side. Unsold inventory is up a
bit but not out of line for this time of year. Second-quarter
production schedules look to be about 25 percent higher than the first
quarter but still would be lower than the second quarter of last year.
And in the case of one manufacturer, it's a substantial reduction from
last year. The industry continues to forecast [sales of] cars and
light trucks together of [14-1/2 million]. That number happens to be

-24-

3/27/90

a little higher than our number but they are anticipating a pretty
good second half to come up to that higher number.
In the agricultural sector, there has been a very significant
improvement over the last few weeks. At the last meeting I reported
that the moisture issue was a significant concern. We've had very
good rains over the last three or four weeks and at the meeting of our
agricultural advisory council last week we heard that the planting
For
conditions are the best they've seen in quite a number of years.
livestock, the outlook continues to be very good. Land values are
continuing to move up fairly slowly, which I think is constructive.
On the credit side, I've talked to a number of banks within
the last few weeks and, despite the numbers to the contrary, I think
I sense
there's a difference in opinion on commercial real estate.
some shutdown on that. Also, I will say that I've heard of one
project in Chicago in which a Japanese bank was going to participate
Our small business
and within the last few days it has backed out.
advisory council last week reported that they do sense some tightening
of credit conditions and attitudes on the part of lenders. More
paperwork is required, more detail, more this and that; therefore,
it's making it harder for the smaller companies to get credit.
On the inflation side, our outlook is perhaps a bit better
Competitive conditions continue to be pretty
than the staff forecast.
intense. Price increases just aren't sticking, at least in the full
sense. There has been enough new capacity in some industries--and I
think paper is a good example of that--that the [competitive] price
pressures will continue. Wage settlements seem favorable and are not
in any way getting out of line.
Offsetting that, though, just as a
couple of negative items, I keep hearing about huge percentage
increases in health care costs that are going through. Also, as a
different item, we're starting to hear from some companies about the
increase in transportation costs that they're beginning to experience.
We have had a somewhat more positive view on the economy than
the staff and, therefore, we think the upward revision that Mike has
gone through is appropriate. We continue to think that the outlook
for inflation is perhaps a bit better than the staff forecast, but I'd
have to admit that our worry level on the inflation side is certainly
higher at this meeting than was the case at the last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. In the Sixth District, Mr. Chairman, things
really have not changed appreciably since the last meeting, but I have
the sense that they're getting a little better.
Certainly, there's a
bit more optimism among people that I talk to. A lot of our contacts
are reporting that business is not only better in the early part of
1990 in actual terms, but much better than they had expected. But
having said that, there is still a continuing concern about recession,
and there's a lot of caution in the marketplace. The weak spots, of
course, continue to be autos and related products.
I think we also
would have weakness in textile manufacturing, aluminum, and timber
were it not for pretty strong export demand that is keeping them
going. If that export demand were to subside, given the state of the
housing market, I think those sectors also would be in trouble.
Energy continues to get better.
In fact, we have reports now that

-25-

3/27/90

some of the companies are finding it difficult to get skilled platform
workers.
I don't know where they've gone, but they've gone to other
places and to other industries and they're not coming back. We also
have had reports, which I found interesting, of some foreign interest
in buying U.S. refineries.
Retail sales seem to be fairly good--not
great, but not bad either. We're not detecting any particular wage
pressures or price pressures, although I put that in the context of
what the expectation is.
I think business people are building in a
4-1/2 to 5 percent inflation level in their contracts.
The big item, and it has been alluded to before in our
discussion, is this fear among business people and bankers of a credit
crunch. I find it a little difficult to evaluate whether there really
has been substantial credit rationing. On the one hand, the banks in
the Southeast that already have been examined are clearly increasing
their provisions for loan losses and there will be some pulling back
there. And I think the banks that are next on the list [to be
examined] are apprehensive and perhaps are taking some defensive
measures by pulling back. But the general sense I have is that the
good loans are being made and the marginal ones perhaps are not. The
good bankable loans still are going forward, as far as I can tell.
On the national economy, we agree with the Greenbook
forecast.
Our forecast had been stronger earlier on than the
Greenbook's, so we're in agreement with them. There is still the risk
of a downturn but I think the risk has shifted a little more toward
inflation. I'm really very disappointed, as I'm sure most of us are,
about the projection for inflation. Like some others, I find it very
hard in the forecast horizon to see much of a depreciation of the
dollar. We've talked about some of the economic factors involved in
But what is uppermost in my mind are the political activities
that.
that are going on around the world that I think are affecting the
dollar substantially. We not only have the situations in Japan and
Germany, but the situation in the United Kingdom is very uncertain at
the moment. And I must say that events in Eastern Europe are not
turning out the way people had expected. This Lithuanian development
With that kind of
could turn the whole situation around a great deal.
political uncertainty in the world, I think the dollar is still the
So, a depreciation of the
safe haven and the place for investment.
dollar is not in the cards as far as I can see--in the near term, in
any event.
With respect to inflation, not only are the people that I'm
talking to complacent about inflation but I think that complacency is
now turning into an antagonism toward Fed policy. More and more I'm
hearing: "Why are you guys so concerned about inflation? You're
So, while the risk of some
really doing a lot more harm than good."
recession may be there, as I said, the real danger is increasing
inflation. And I think we have a difficult job not only in containing
inflation and bringing it down but also in persuading the country that
this is the right road and the one we should be on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the changes in the staff
projections are clearly in the right direction. As a lot of people
have indicated, there is a great deal of uncertainty, but I do think
we have enough hard information now to know that the inventory swing

-26-

3/27/90

from the fourth quarter of last year to the first quarter of this year
was [more] than we thought. Consequently, it looks as if the rate of
growth in real GNP in the first quarter is going to be correspondingly
higher. One of the key points looking ahead, of course, is that the
staff has projected that there will be some rise in interest rates
over this period of time in order to get roughly the same rate of
growth in GNP and more or less the same sort of inflation figures. I
think that change in policy assumptions is quite correct. We've had a
sustained growth in M2 for about 9 months now and this may well
strengthen aggregate demand considerably. In addition, events in
Eastern Europe have moved much more rapidly than anybody felt they
probably would. So it seems to me that the transformation of these
economies is necessarily going to lead to higher real interest rates
throughout the industrial world. Given this assumed upward adjustment
in rates that the staff has incorporated in its forecast, I think the
risk is about evenly split between up and down. If they had not
raised these rates, I would have placed the risk on the up side in
their forecast. I don't think it will surprise anybody to know that
my chief concern is that which was voiced first by Governor Angell:
that there's no improvement in inflation over this projection period.
Someone mentioned an absence of trend, but actually if you look at the
fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter figures on the fixed-weight deflator
and the CPI, they both are higher for '90 and '91 than they were in
the last Greenbook. The CPI ends up in the fourth quarter of '91 at
about 4-1/2 percent, and I think we have to do a good deal better than
that. Someone--I guess that was Governor Angell too--used the term
"unacceptable." If we want to maintain our credibility, I think we
have to do better than that. I sense that despite our best efforts we
have lost some of that credibility recently; we ought to think about
that very carefully as we formulate our policy later on in this
meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard to the District economy, as been the
case for quite some time now, there is very little new to report.
It's pretty much the same as the national economy: that is, continued
modest expansion is under way. It seems likely to me to continue.
The major concerns of the District at the moment are the continuation
of drought in some areas and prospective problems in the commercial
real estate area. But the latter is probably at least a year or two
off just because of the level of activity that's currently under way.
With regard to the national economy, I largely agree with the
Greenbook forecast. And as many people have already commented, as far
as inflation is concerned that's unfortunate. It confirms my view
that we're simply stuck at around this 4-1/2 percent rate of inflation
that we've had for quite some time. With regard to the real economy,
I don't disagree much with the Greenbook forecast. I think we have to
be careful not to overreact to the latest month or two worth of
numbers. We might find ourselves whipsawing policy and markets and so
forth. On the other hand, as the Greenbook observes and as our own
exercise confirms, if one takes the January and February payroll
employment number seriously we can easily get 3 percent real growth in
the first quarter; and there is some possibility that those numbers
are right. If they are, and if that's telling us something not only
about the immediate status of the economy but about its prospects, we
might be looking at even more growth than the Greenbook suggests. I

-27-

3/27/90

would fear in those circumstances that there may be even more
inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. To deal with the District first, the New England
economy is not in phase with the rest of the nation. Just this
afternoon we were talking about regions and this perhaps is a good
precedent for it because we're seeing a lot of difference by region.
The New England economy is relatively sluggish and in my way of
thinking probably will be that way for the next year or so.
There had
been some thought, by myself and others, that expectations were worse
than reality; but unfortunately reality is doing a good job of coming
up to expectations.
MS. SEGER.

Coming up or going down?

MR. SYRON. Well, going down; that's right.
There's some
question about how much relevance it has to national policy because I
think a lot of this has to do with a sort of classic bubble,
particularly in the real estate area, and some problems that we had in
manufacturing. And the accompanying financial situation, with the
conversion of mutual savings banks to stock institutions, just put in
place [unintelligible] in credit over a short period of time.
We just had the data for regional employment benchmarked and,
unfortunately, they show that for the region as a whole employment
It declined dramatically
actually declined about 1 percent in 1989.
in some states such as New Hampshire where it dropped 3-1/2 percent.
Construction employment in that state dropped 25 percent. Now, that's
In
obviously a small state; but still, those are meaningful numbers.
the short run we expect a continuation of this rather negative trend
in the business outlook.
On this credit crunch issue, given the problems with
depository institutions that everyone knows about, just any super
regional in New England is very, very wary of extending further credit
for real estate loans.
I think that's going to be advantageous over
the long run because we did have a bubble, but it means that
construction, and to a lesser degree manufacturing, are going to act
as drags on the economy in the period immediately ahead.
In
manufacturing, the outlook tends to mirror more the national scene.
Firms tied to the aircraft industry account for a fair amount [of
Firms tied to the
manufacturing activity] and are doing quite well.
auto industry, which we also have, are doing quite poorly. We have a
sectoral problem in the [unintelligible] those in Bob Parry's District
are doing, and I think it's going to take a while for that to turn
around. Overseas sales by manufacturers have been stronger than
domestic sales and that has still held up despite what has happened
with the dollar; people are very optimistic there. Retail sales have
softened but people are beginning to think that they are seeing some
bottoming out in the softening, and there really aren't serious
It could be a degree of concern that kept
problems with inventories.
people from building up inventories too much. Overall, there's a
feeling of greater cautiousness among our manufacturers; I would
expect that to be reflected in less vigorous orders for durable goods
on their part in the coming year. One sees this particularly in the
paper industry where capacity [use] is actually still high but they

-28-

3/27/90

are just very cautious in going ahead. Price reports, as you might
expect in these circumstances, are quite good, with absolute declines
in prices in residential and commercial real estate. Labor markets
are much better behaved, with people being able to find work where
they couldn't before. You don't see many $6.25 an hour signs up in
the McDonalds' windows anymore, and you don't even find as many
crowded McDonalds' stores.
Nationally. we find our own forecast for the economy to be
very similar to that of the Greenbook, with some slight difference in
timing quarter to quarter. But as many people have pointed out, an
exactitude of this process in timing really doesn't mean that much.
We are concerned, though we don't disagree with it, about the outlook
for inflation. As has been pointed out by Governors Angell and
Johnson and others, this is really quite a cause for concern. I would
say that in the absence of concerns about the international scene or
in the absence of concerns about financial fragility and some of these
credit crunch stories that we're hearing--not two negligible factors,
though--I would be inclined to feel that it's time to be really
serious about progress on inflation and to move more vigorously.
Even
with these considerations, I think on balance the risks nationally are
for more inflation rather than the other way around. And I think that
our token [move] should be in that direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. The picture in the Eighth District is one of
continuing improvement.
In January, for example, we had very strong
employment in comparison to December. Even if you take away strong
growth in construction and in retail and wholesale trade sectors,
which I think benefitted from the mild weather, other sectors grew at
least modestly.
In manufacturing, for example, employment was up 5.2
percent and that included declines of almost 10,000 jobs in the
automobile industry. So, virtually all major industries had moderate
to strong employment growth.
In both residential and nonresidential
construction we continued to have strong growth in the most recent
three-month period ending in January.
In the area of anecdotal
evidence, we recently had a group of chief financial officers of major
corporations in the St. Louis area to lunch and the things that came
through from that discussion were: (1) scarcity of qualified labor;
(2) a sense of growing pressure on wages; (3) a margin squeeze--the
feeling that any easy productivity gains have long since been
realized; and (4) the feeling that the recent increases in the dollar
have not really presented a problem in terms of export activity.
Finally, and this is somewhat in contrast to what Bob [Forrestal]
mentioned but I don't think either one of the views would be
conclusive, I didn't pick up any sense of dissatisfaction with policy.
In fact, some people expressed a preference for a diligently slow,
stable situation in economic growth. So, nobody really is squealing
about monetary policy being on an inappropriate course.
I think it's
right to question, though, whether people really would support the
price of bringing down the rate of inflation significantly from
current levels.
A final thought in terms of the general picture nationally:
I have felt that policy has been erring on the side of ease for some
time and that we are in the process of giving up some ground in terms
of our progress toward long-term price stability, however defined.

-29-

3/27/90

So, I would agree with what the Greenbook says in terms of the need
for some additional tightening. I'm somewhat ambivalent about whether
that needs to be right away. I take some heart from the Bluebook
forecast of a slowing in M2 growth. I have some questions about what
the impact is going to be in terms of the profit margin squeeze, the
general pressures of leverage on the economy, and the credit crunch
we've heard about, and how that all may [affect] consumer confidence.
So, while I think we need to move, I could be persuaded that it
doesn't need to be right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, the economy in the Dallas
District continues to mend. Slowly but surely economic conditions are
showing mixed signs of improvement. Finally, we even see Louisiana
being able to reflect slightly better conditions. However, with
regard to the improvements that we're seeing, while they're pretty
much across the board, the extent of the gains is highly variable.
Energy and construction continue to show modest improvement. The rig
count in Texas has shown some significant gains. A lot of this is
attributable to the horizontal drilling that's going on. The
manufacturing picture has been somewhat mixed. On the construction
side, while we have seen gains, they are possibly a little tenuous as
construction values have fallen lately. On the other hand, this
appears to be a correction related to potential overexpansion in
petro-chemical capacity down along the Gulf Coast. The weakest sector
of our economy is agriculture; that continues to be hurt by drought
and other weather-related conditions. On the so-called credit crunch
issue, we also hear some anecdotal evidence; but it's not all that
different from what we have heard for quite some time with respect to
our small businesses. And given where we've been in our District,
we've been hearing this for quite some time. On a little broader
issue, if the rationing really is going on and it seems to be
primarily related to real estate concerns, I would question whether a
slight change in interest rates one way or the other really would
address that particular problem.
On the national picture, I feel pretty good about the staff's
current forecast. It seems a little more in line at least with what
we've been thinking and we would not take issue with it.
I would
associate myself with those who are expressing concern about the longterm prospects for inflation. I think that maybe something ought to
be done about that.
MR. BLACK.

Anybody you want to suggest to do it?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District
continues to improve [unintelligible], but nonetheless is showing
improvement with some mixed performance in the various sectors. For
example, in the agricultural sector there has been a turnaround in the
moisture; there has been good moisture across virtually all of the
Tenth District and particularly through the wheat region both from
rain as well as snow. That has a diverse impact, however, on wheat
prices. So in terms of net farm income it may wash out. But the
prospects for the wheat crop, which will start to be harvested in
about six weeks, look very good. On the other hand, there is some

-30-

3/27/90

weakness in cattle prices, as a result of a surge in the feed cattle
production. There are some projections that cattle prices will fall
about midyear. With the lower wheat price and lower cattle price, the
outlook for net farm income may not be quite as good as some might
expect. Nonetheless, the outlook is quite likely going to be very
good in the agricultural sector.
In the energy sector, the rig counts have fallen again most
recently. That is, in the Tenth District the rig count has actually
fallen in roughly three [unintelligible] from 298 to 255 in number,
although it is still higher than the count a year ago. So, there is
some year-over-year improvement; it's better than it was before. The
manufacturing sector is still fairly slow, particularly with respect
to automobile assemblies. There have been some cutbacks in production
in the plants in the District. In one in Kansas City they actually
have laid off 700 people and cut [production] from roughly 800 cars a
day down to 600 for the second-line adjustment. But the 700 layoff is
already significant. On the other hand, aircraft manufacturing in the
District continues to be strong and vigorous. As a matter of fact,
Beech just received a new contract for $1-1/2 billion to supply
business-type aircraft to the Air Force for training purposes. That,
of course, will stretch over time, but it is a new order of
significance for that area. There is some improvement and strength in
both residential and nonresidential construction in the District,
which continues to amaze me given some overhang in the commercial
[side] at least. But it may have been affected by the warm January
temperatures. Nonetheless, there are those contracts out there and
[work] will be performed in the period ahead. So overall, the
District continues to improve--slowly to be sure, with disparate
results depending upon what area of the economy you look at.
As for the Greenbook forecast, we really have no quarrel with
it. It's a bit stronger maybe than we originally had thought,
particularly in view of the fact that we ran these numbers and got
about the same result but without any interest rate increase. So by
building in an interest rate increase, maybe the Board staff's
forecast is a little stronger than ours. But given the timing--as I
understand it, maybe a 1/4 point late in the third quarter and maybe
another 1/4 point in the fourth--it won't have a lot of impact in
1990. As a result, we're fairly close together; I have no problem
[with the staff's forecast].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. In the Fourth District, the pace of economic
activity is continuing to improve in almost all sectors.
Manufacturing employment now is back at its highs of mid-1989. A lot
of that--about half of it--is auto-related, which had a pretty nice
bounceback. In terms of auto production, everybody who has been on
layoff has now been recalled, essentially.
MS. SEGER.

Did you say auto employment is at a high in your

District?
MR. HOSKINS. No, I said manufacturing. It has come back to
its 1989 highs and about half of the rebound that we got recently was
due to auto-related manufacturing.

3/27/90

-31-

MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

MR. HOSKINS. My infamous stainless strip measure, which has
predictive values slightly worse than the leading indicators--the
direction is right--also has slowed fairly sharply.
It had been
reported at 20 percent below its seasonally adjusted levels in terms
of new orders and now it's running about 5 percent above that.
Price
increases in that industry are likely to be forthcoming, given demand
and the potential for some backlog.
In terms of anecdotal
information, the only good news I could dig out was that [BP] and
Marathon think that inventories are going to be high and that going
into the second quarter we will see some price reductions in petroleum
products.
With respect to the Greenbook, as I said before, given the
implicit policy assumptions I wouldn't have much disagreement with it.
I have trouble with the policy assumptions that are in there.
My
concerns stem from the issues of inflation and inflation expectations.
If people do begin to build this kind of inflation expectation into
their decision-making, then we will pay a price in terms of lost
output when we finally have to bring the inflation rate down. So,
that's something that I certainly would want to consider in setting
policy this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the tone of the business
situation is better, judged at least by the decibel [level] currently
of people who in preceding months were concerned that the economy was
really going to go off the edge.
I think part of that simply is a
reflection of the view that, at least statistically, both the fourth
quarter and the first quarter are probably going to turn out better
If you recall, it wasn't that long ago
than a lot of people expected.
when it was quite possible to find a lot of people who were expecting
a negative real GNP number in either the fourth or the first quarter
or both. And that is no longer the case.

see the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's even a possibility that we will
.9 in the fourth quarter revised up.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS.

SEGER.

Yes,

I know.

You had a sneak preview?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
indications].

No, it's just that we have a lot

[of

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Looking at the components, I think
part of the improvement in the tone of the business situation that I
detect is rightly characterized as the collective breathing of a sigh
of relief. Now, how much better the situation is in underlying terms
is a little tougher to tell. But my sense is that it probably is
Some of the comments around the
better in underlying terms as well.
For example, Si Keehn talks about
table are consistent with that.
sales of 14-1/2 million trucks and cars, and that's not a bad year.
That's a lot.
Even before the meeting today I thought there were two
sectors of the economy that at the margin could make quite a
difference and those are agriculture and energy. I find it

3/27/90

-32-

interesting that Roger and Si and Bob Forrestal and Bob Boykin are
suggesting that conditions in those two industries, even outside of
the Southwest in the energy area, show a little snip of a pickup in
activity. And at the margin, those two sectors of the economy can
make a distinct difference.
So in terms of the business outlook, the
staff forecast is probably a reasonable depiction of the situation.
It's very similar to our forecast; the difference probably is that one
may have a little more confidence in it than was the case several
months ago.
Now, on this credit crunch issue, I think there is something
to it but I'm not sure it's as pervasive and fundamental as perhaps
some think.
I get a sense of it, for example, with banks in northern
New Jersey and Long Island where we've had some excesses in real
estate lending as well. On the other hand, I don't get much of a
sense of it at all from the money center banks; the money center banks
are simply complaining about a lack of business--period. There's
another thing that we have to keep in mind about this silent credit
crunch. During much of the second half of the 1980s we had a
situation in the country when private credit demands were growing
very, very rapidly and private credit growth was way out of line with
historical relationships relative to GNP. And now what we are seeing
is that a lot of that credit growth was bad credit. We're seeing it
in chargeoffs in the banking industry, in the thrift industry, and in
markdowns of prices of junk bonds.
So, I'm not so sure that some
margin of greater discipline in the credit origination process is
something we should be terribly concerned about.
It's probably a good
thing.
In terms of the small business side of it, again, I don't get
the sense from our small business advisory groups and others that
well-run small businesses are having any particular problem with
credit availability. That doesn't mean there aren't some who are
having trouble, but I don't think it's a general phenomenon.
On inflation, in underlying terms, I come out where Gary
Stern does.
We've been stuck at 4-1/2 percent or something like that
for a long time.
I think what is different right now is that if one
expected that we were going to do better than that, what the recent
information suggests, of course, is that that's not going to come
about very easily. But I myself don't think that the inflation
situation has deteriorated in any significant way; it just refuses to
get better, which is a problem in its own right.
The biggest area of uncertainty in my mind continues to be
the external side of the economy. Ted has one scenario built into the
forecast; he described another.
The fact of the matter is that you
probably could put together three or four external scenarios, each of
which would be strikingly different from the others and none of which
could automatically be ruled out of hand. There is a range of
uncertainties not just because of exchange rates but because of
political developments, economic developments--the whole spectrum.
So, I think the range of possible outcomes in the external sector out
over the next six to eight quarters is really very wide indeed.
The only other point I would make, Mr. Chairman--I don't have
to make it but maybe you do--is that the renewed discussion here about
the budgetary situation is possibly interesting. Rostenkowski's
pronouncement, of course, has gotten shot down, as I'm sure he thought
it would. Nevertheless, I still find it rather surprising, and maybe

3/27/90

-33-

even a bit encouraging, that somebody like Rostenkowski was willing to
I don't know whether
put his cards on the table in the budget arena.
that's just ceremonial or if there are some straws in the wind that
would suggest that something constructive might happen on the budget
front. As I said, I don't know if you want to comment on that later
or not.
I think that there is
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll comment now.
I think
The question is: How far will it get?
something going on.
that the failure of Rostenkowski to get shot down immediately, which
I
he did not, is suggestive of a willingness to take another look.
think that process is going on, but it's much too premature to argue
But you're quite right: there's
that anything is going to come of it.
something stirring that had not been stirring before. Anybody else?
MR. JOHNSON. I'll comment. Actually, I've been impressed
too that the economy hasn't shown signs of slowing to the degree that
It's still a little hard for me to tell
people had forecast earlier.
at this stage how much of that can be attributed to our luck with the
weather and how much is really a pickup after smoothing through those
kinds of seasonal--unseasonal I should say--developments.
Nevertheless, when you do smooth through it, you still have a picture
that looks like sustained growth at a lower rate that doesn't look
particularly scary.
I also hear these stories--as a matter of fact, I'm bombarded
by such stories--of a credit crunch. I have hosted at least three or
four different state bankers associations here over the last couple of
weeks and have been besieged by people saying that that is going on.
But it's very hard to find evidence in the data that that is in fact
the case. You hear a lot of anecdotes about it and that's what they
bring to the table, but you don't see any kind of general credit
crunch going on.
I agree with others that there is clearly a
commercial real estate overhang.
It's all over the country; a
I'm sure because of the S&Ls that
contraction is going on there.
there is a lack of availability of credit from the S&L industry to
But actually, that's healthy;
developers; you hear that everywhere.
that's not something to be afraid of. That consolidation really has
to take place. There still may be something in the pipeline on this
credit crunch; it's just not obvious in any data that we see.
Our
quality spreads surely don't show it on interest rates.
In fact, you
would expect, if there were some sort of pullback in banks'
If demand
willingness to lend, to see upward pressure on bank rates.
were still there and the supply was being restricted, why wouldn't
It certainly
short-term market rates come under upward pressure?
doesn't look like there's any dramatic upward pressure relative to the
funds rate. On the other hand, you don't see a tendency for demand to
be that weak either because you don't see these short-term rates
falling against the funds rate either. Things actually look fairly
stable around the short end and quality spreads actually look very
good--unless you're trying to find some junk bonds that aren't quoted
Compare those to AAA corporates and I'm sure they
in the market.
don't look good.
So, I think the economy is doing okay, at least in the period
that we can see ahead. I don't have any disagreement with the
Greenbook; I think it's about right, although I wouldn't want to
project anything beyond six or eight months from now just because it's

3/27/90

-34-

too uncertain.
On the inflation front, as I said, it's a little
disappointing that there hasn't been more progress, although I do
attribute most of the short-run pressure that we have had to seasonal
developments.
I think the effect that the cold weather had on food
and energy costs in the December period is the primary factor on the
total CPI and PPI numbers.
If you actually look at the producer price
index excluding food and energy, you do see some progress.
In fact,
the 12-month rate for the PPI excluding energy is now down to 3.7
percent, which is better than previous 12-month rates in the PPI.
What is disappointing is the consumer price index, which doesn't show
any signs of easing off; even excluding the food and energy components
that still seems to be strong. As a matter of fact the [increases for
You
the] last two months, at .6 and .7 percent, are very troubling.
can always find some special factor like apparel or something else
that has had a major impact, but there's always something.
I can live
with separating out the food and energy components because those are
volatile elements that are somewhat beyond our control in the shorter
run. But as for these other factors, you have to draw the line
somewhere. The fact is that the CPI doesn't look all that good.
It
makes me wonder, though, since the PPI seems to be improving, if there
is just a lag before it eventually shows up in the CPI; I don't know.
The economy looks stable, although there's this atmosphere of
concern about debt, a credit crunch, and things like that. But
international events are developing, it seems to me, in a positive
way. You can question how slowly or how fast [the changes in] Europe
will develop, but unless the political climate changes dramatically-say, the Soviet Union gets tremendously tougher--in the longer run and
maybe in the most immediate short run, that has to be positive. I
don't know. But I'm convinced that East Germany is going to boom
because West Germany is going to make it boom; they're going to throw
money at it.
So I think that is a positive in terms of external
sources of economic pressure.
Japan doesn't seem to be weak from a
productivity point of view and I think their major problems are that
they have been pushing the edge of capacity constraints and they have
had a speculative bubble and all that is sort of fermenting over there
along with the weak government.
But I don't see external evidence of
sources of depression coming from outside of the United States.
So
that should be positive. And the inflation picture seems to me to be
somewhat stable but not improving. I don't know what that says for
the immediate term for policy, but I think it does say that if we want
to make progress in the upcoming period, we're going to have to have a
tough look at that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm persuaded that the Greenbook
forecast is a very reasonable one, given the underlying assumptions;
the interest rate construct, which is part of that, is certainly
reasonable.
I'm dismayed at the lack of progress that it reflects
with regard to inflation. But my underlying concern at the moment-and this may sound like a disbeliever in the omnipotence of monetary
policy--is that we may have witnessed here a transfer of at least part
of the control of the growth of the economy as a result of this
extraordinarily stringent application of examination standards to the
banks.
I'm concerned that that will, in fact, cause a contraction of
credit that may deal a greater blow to inflation than our current
policy. I think that in that kind of environment the supplying of

-35-

3/27/90

reserves and reducing of rates will not necessarily encourage
expansion.
I guess I'd end by paraphrasing an old saw and say "You
can offer a banker wider spreads, but you can't make him lend."
MR. SYRON.

That's not true of the thrift industry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Try to top that, Governor Kelley!

MR. KELLEY. I would never, particularly coming from somebody
who [was a banker] for 35 years! Mr. Chairman, we always are looking
But I am struck
for one more piece of data; that goes on forever.

this time more than usual by the tentativeness of the data that we're
looking at and the tentativeness of the forecast that we're able to
make. I hear it from the staff and I hear it going around the table
here this morning in both the area of the real economy and in
inflation expectations. What's going on in the economy now is to some
degree--and we don't know to what degree--the snapback from strikes
and from storms and from the whipsawing in the auto industry. Some of
the industries that are showing some strength, like housing, have big
seasonals at this time of the year. And it's just really hard to tell
how much of what is going on is sustainable and is real underlying
strength. I also share John's and others' concerns about what we may
be in for in terms of the extent of the credit crunch and what the
results of that could be.
On the inflation front, the forecast is that what we have
seen in the last several months is going to unwind to some degree.
I've been very disappointed, as I think everybody else has, in the
numbers we've seen the last several months. The expectation is that
that's going to unwind to some degree, but by how much? We're going
to have to see about that. Meanwhile, as Governor Johnson pointed
out, the PPI really is not validating that bad result that we've seen
in the CPI and in the deflators. So, I go back to what Bob Parry said
a little earlier in the morning: that what we need to do is to
maintain moderate growth. I agree with that. I'm not sure what it's
going to take to do that, on balance, with the other objectives that
we have. And like Gary Stern, I'm a little concerned that we not
overreact to two or three months' worth of numbers and wind up
whipsawing the economy. I certainly share the disappointment that I
hear everyone expressing; I agree 100 percent about the last few
months and I share the impatience that goes along with that. But
given all that we cannot be sure of at this moment, I'm pretty
cautious about what policy ought to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Well, as I think I hinted with my questions
earlier, I feel uncertain about the outlook and I hope that what's on
these pages from the staff turns out to be right because I believe in
having moderate growth. I think it's important in many ways to have
that happen. But I would just like to tick off some concerns I have
that I think are going to put these possible outcomes at risk. I
mentioned the first concern I have: the dollar and the issue of
whether or not it actually will decline in value relative to the other
major currencies. If it doesn't, I'm old fashioned enough to believe
that that will have an impact on our trade situation on both sides of
the equation. And that, indeed, concerns me since we are counting on
trade to help us, particularly in 1991. Also, despite the fact that

3/27/90

-36-

Russian tanks rolled into Lithuania, I think that we are still going
to have some defense cutbacks and some actual cuts in the defense
budget. I personally don't know how that will play out; I don't know
which contracts will be cut back or which bases will be closed, etc.
But I suspect that when that happens it will show up in somebody's
District around the table here and also will impact the aggregates
eventually.
Also, there's the question of state and local government
finance. I hear more and more comments about the deterioration in
state budgets from the Northeast to the Southwest--all over. I met
with a legislator from Michigan very recently and they're having to
redo their estimates because they were too optimistic about the
revenue forecast. So, instead of having a comfortable situation, it
now doesn't look comfortable. I would think that ultimately that
would impact either on spending by state and local governments or on
their need to raise taxes, neither of which would be supportive of
economic activity. On the U.S. budget situation, I heard the
Rostenkowski name come up, but if we do get a tax hike I don't see
Is that the correct assumption: that you have
that [unintelligible].
not built in a tax hike in [your forecast]?
MR. PRELL.

We have only a few billion dollars of the--

MS. SEGER. Well, if by some miracle it happens, I would
assume it would have some sort of impact. Also, I'm extremely
concerned about the profit margin squeeze and what it will do; it's
already going on and I think it will get worse. In my judgment that
will have a significant impact on plant and equipment spending of all
sorts.
Finally, with regard to the credit crunch matter, which we've
heard about from a number of people, I think it is going on. As
Manley said, we talk to a lot of these banker groups that come through
and we hear those comments; I also hear them from many business
people. I've observed recently that banks were even tightening terms
on their home equity lines, which of course they have been practically
shoveling out the door. Now they're using a smaller shovel anyway.
Certainly, we are all hearing about the commercial lending tightness.
For auto loans, there's less enthusiasm for the [unintelligible]
6-year or the 5-year loan and the idea is surfacing that maybe you
shouldn't make a loan that's longer than the life of the car. So
there's some tendency, at least among some lenders, to cut that back.
In the small business arena--I have a lot of friends who are small
business people, including my brother--I'm not sure that what's going
on is going to show up in the numbers we're looking at because so far
a lot of the changes involve the terms or the fact that lenders expect
personal guarantees. If you have a small corporation they want your
personal backing on a loan; there's this desire for extra security to
protect the lender. It is certainly making business people feel a lot
more conservative and I would suggest in some cases rather nervous.
On the S&L side there's the FIRREA effect in the case of small and
medium-size homebuilders and developers--I'm not talking about
developers of big projects or major strip shopping centers but about
homebuilders. And I thought we had a housing shortage, at least in
some parts of the country. I think it's important to allow builders
who have an active market to build those homes. Yet these are the
ones who are feeling the impact of this single-borrower limit that has

-37-

3/27/90

been imposed on the S&Ls to match the limit on national banks.
Frankly, I don't think we have much of that built into our housing
forecast here. And finally, in the case of the captive auto finance
companies, they too have been tightening some of their terms and
standards; and some of these marginal auto buyers are not going to be
able to buy a car because they don't qualify under the new standards
whereas they might have under the old, more generous, ones.
Frankly, I don't know how all this will play out, but it's
just a long enough list of concerns and question marks that I am
uncertain and I wouldn't feel comfortable with a 90 degree swing in
policy from where we are now.
I might [not] even feel comfortable
with a 5 degree swing, even though I certainly am concerned about the
inflation situation. But I don't know how to pull out from these
reported numbers what is transitory and what is really a fundamental
change.
I'm really impressed with the degree of competitiveness out
there in the real world.
I just don't think we can sit here and
assume that every business can say: "Well, my costs are going up so
tomorrow I'll just mark up all the prices of everything I sell."
They
just don't think that the market conditions would [allow] that.
MR. PRELL. Governor Seger, a clarification: We have $8
billion of various tax [increases] in our '91 deficit reduction
package.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't have anything to say at
this time.
I'll listen carefully to your recommendation.
say!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't wait to hear what I have to
Do we have coffee out there? We're a little late for coffee,

but--

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Kohn.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Lee.

MR. HOSKINS.
Don, to link your story up with Mike's: We have
an increase in inflation even in terms of the Greenbook forecast, and
my question revolves around the issue of how much of that increase in
interest rates of 1/4 point or so over the last quarter you would
attribute to inflation expectations versus real. What I'm really
wondering is: If it is expectations about inflation, to keep policy
neutral wouldn't we have to raise interest rates 25 basis points?
My sense is that in terms of long-term
MR. KOHN. Yes.
rates, we have a couple of things working here. One is, of course,
that the fed funds rate hasn't moved since December 22 or whenever it
was we last changed policy. Long-term rates have moved substantially
higher. Inflation expectations may be an element there, but I would
put them as a fairly small element.
I think the response came

-38-

3/27/90

primarily in terms of a stronger economy here at home [plus] some of
the pull from the European situation. We never did have good data but
we have even less information on inflation expectations than we had
before now that Mr. Hoey is between jobs, but my guess is that they'll
do a survey in April.

failure!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter.]

That's the real damage from the

[Drexel]

MR. KOHN. My guess is that people probably are holding off
in revising upward their long-run inflation expections on the basis of
the last couple of months' data. Now, I'm sure there might be some
So, I think most of this is a sense that real
short-run [effect].
rates need to be higher just to keep inflation somewhat in check
rather than an increase in inflation expectations. But it's certainly
anyone's guess.
If you answered the question "Yes, it's all
MR. HOSKINS.
inflation expectations," then how would you answer the second part of
the question? To keep policy neutral, what do we need to do?
MR. KOHN. If you thought that most of the increase-particularly in long-term rates or even the short-term rates--was
inflation expectations, then indeed you would need to raise rates.
MR. PARRY. Just continuing along that line a little: If a
significant proportion of the increase is due to increases in real
rates, what would be the implication in moving the funds rate [up]?
How would you see the market responding?
MR. KOHN. Oh, I think the market would see that as a tighter
That's what we have in
policy and long-term rates would rise a bit.
the Bluebook. The response might be fairly damped but I really would
expect, if you surprised the market by tightening policy at this time,
that bond yields would rise at least initially.
MR. PARRY. But that's the only rate that hasn't had an
increase in real terms over this period-MR. KOHN. But it's not as if raising the funds rate would be
doing what the market expects you to be doing and, therefore, simply
moving out along a yield curve.
I think what happened before was that
the market expected policy to ease. Now they don't, and they're doing
So you would be surprising the market with
what the yield curve says.
an increase in the funds rate.
It may be appropriate, but it would be
a surprise.
MR. PARRY. Would you say the chance of such a move not
affecting long-term rates or having them decline slightly is very,
very remote?
MR. KOHN. Those odds are always there and, particularly if
it strengthened the dollar, I think you'd get a feedback through the
dollar.
If you tightened policy and the dollar went up quite strongly
--just ignoring what the reactions might be overseas for now--you
could have a very substantial feedback on bond yields and bond rates.
They might not rise very much at all and could even decline,
depending.

-39-

3/27/90

MR. PARRY.

Okay.

Could I ask Ted just what he expects the impact
MR. SYRON.
would be in the exchange market if the funds rate were to rise 25
basis points?
MR. TRUMAN.

Oh, I think you'd get

some considerable--

I'm not going to ask
MR. SYRON.
How much is considerable?
you for a point estimate, but what do you think [the effect would be]
on the yen and the DM generally?
MR. TRUMAN. It would depend a bit on the timeframe of all
this and what kind of music went along with it, if I may put it that
But
way, and as Don has already said on what the reaction was abroad.
if you take what policies are abroad [now], my feeling is that you
could get 3 or 4 percent, anyhow, on the dollar in the short run.
Then, as other things came into play that might be sustained or move
But I
It would be affected by what goes on later.
the other way.
think you could get quite a lot of movement at this juncture, if the
funds rate went up that much in the short run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think

[the yen is at]

157-1/2.

Today?

Since the market
Now, or just below it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
doesn't expect anything, if we were to do that, I think it probably
would go right through 160 or better.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes; that's why I was curious.

Any further
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
The market would be fooled.
There's no
If not, why don't I start the discussion.
questions?
question that the underlying business cycle numbers have improved.
Not only the current numbers coming in but the actual revisions of
recent history suggest that the current state of activity is better
than we would have expected, certainly at the last FOMC meeting,
though it's too soon to get a sense that this is anything more than a
modest rebound from the end of deterioration.
We're not sure at this
If we
stage exactly how to read all the various weather seasonals.
were getting a stronger order pattern in the manufacturing area, we
But from the
could presume that the pressure here was accelerating.
surveys we take and from looking at the various sets of order
patterns, orders seem to have stabilized at a relatively flat level,
which is consistent with very little change in manufacturing activity.
The continued deterioration of profit margins has not yet turned,
although I suspect that the improvement in raw materials prices that
has come in recent weeks and that Governor Angell has been following
may be suggestive of a first sign that the deterioration in margins
But as of now, from what anyone can see on the profits
may be ending.
side we are right at the bottom of this pattern and it has not turned.
What history does tell us is that the capital goods markets do respond
to margins.
And in that sense, to carry this thing forward in the
It may
usual business cycle recovery pattern I think is premature.
In fact, I suspect that the most likely forecast
turn out that way.
is precisely that.

3/27/90

-40-

But we do have in the context of what is unquestionably an
improving business cycle balance of forces--in a sense the cash flow
part of the economy with the exception of profit margins--a lack of
improvement in the balance sheets. That is, there is still the
deterioration and the [erosion] in the balance sheet; in the overall
balance sheet we're seeing leverage still growing. Don, I don't know
whether or not the improvement in the liquidation of equity that you
have in these flow of funds [projections] is going to occur that way.
I'm really sort of asking why you still have -60 or something like
that; I don't know why it's not going to zero myself. But the point
at issue is that the leverage is still increasing and we're still
dealing with a fragility in the balance sheet that is not improving.
And when that overhangs the business cycle pattern, I think we have to
be cautious in projecting any form of acceleration in the underlying
demand forces.
I, like everyone else, am not sure whether the credit crunch
is real. It has to be partly real unless human nature has been
repealed because there has to be a fundamental response to what has
occurred. I think the issue is how bad it is. As Jerry points out,
some of that is probably good, or not bad, especially if you look at
credit that has been extended inappropriately. The inflation issue is
obviously the most disturbing part of the outlook. I don't think it
has gotten any worse since the last time. The Social Security tax
increase and the minimum wage hike are coming at exactly the wrong
time. If one had to go back and look at this whole thing in
retrospect, that's not helping. Probably it does mean that if we get
past it without an acceleration, the compensation patterns will begin
to fall off. I don't know whether I'm encouraged or not, but whatever
data we see on the wage side do not appear to be accelerating. But
then again, it's not improving in any material way that I can see
either. I'm encouraged somewhat by this slowing down of M2; I was
getting concerned that it was going to break outside of our 3 to 7
percent range; it seems to be constrained. Part of that, obviously,
is the extraordinary pattern of the bill rate vis-a-vis the funds
rate. And in that sense one can argue that the markets have indeed
tightened--that there probably is some modest tightening in the
markets if you look at the bill rate, other short-term rates, and the
money supply. But it's probably a very modest amount because it makes
[no] significant difference one way or the other.
My own impression, having said all of this, is that it's
probably too soon for us to be moving rates up. The exchange rate
effect, I think, would really be quite a destabilizing force. Even at
this stage I suspect that it's probably premature to go asymmetric
toward tightness in the directive, although I must say that I suspect
the next move we're going to make is indeed going to be up, not down,
and probably should be. At the moment I frankly would prefer that we
stay symmetric but be very conscious of any evidence of inflationary
pressures picking up, specifically in the price area, importantly in
the money supply area, but most of all any evidence of acceleration in
the business outlook. While it is very early in this turn from the
weakness that we saw in the fourth quarter, and in my judgment far too
premature to assume that we're looking at any acceleration, we are
nonetheless at 5.3 percent unemployment. And that's a tight market.
If we get acceleration in demand at this point, I think the price
pressures will begin to move rather quickly. We have to be very
conscious of that threat. But my own judgment is that it's much too

-41-

3/27/90

early to assume that. The order structure and the profit structure
remain somewhat weak and at this point I would say that calling for
more than leaving the directive unchanged and symmetric probably is
premature. However, if it were the Committee's desire to move to
asymmetric language, I feel that's not altogether an inappropriate
move--certainly at the next meeting, if not sooner. Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your assessment. I
would just as soon have "B" symmetric, with our watching it very
carefully during the intermeeting period and being particularly tuned
to any developments in any of the leading indicators that would help
us to know [more] in regard to timing. It does seem to me that the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy is increasingly through the
foreign exchange rate and that having a somewhat higher foreign
exchange value of the dollar does get us somewhat closer to the
effects that we would have had with a somewhat lower dollar and with a
It just seems to me, Mr.
25 basis point increase in [interest rates].
Chairman, that foreign exchange markets at this point would be
destabilized by an unexpected move on our part; that would buy us more
problems rather than less.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, we're in a very difficult situation,
obviously, and when one is treading on eggs it's best to tread
lightly. In that regard, there is much to be said for your
recommendation in terms of it being premature to make any move in
terms of absolute [unintelligible].
But I am concerned that the
Greenbook shows what I think most of us consider an unacceptable
inflation performance with an implicit assumption--whether it's
significant or not you can debate--of a 100 basis point increase [in
the funds rate] over the year. So, I would say that on balance,
because I think this issue of maintaining our credibility is very
important, I would want to give the markets some signal that we were
worried about inflation and I would have a slight bias toward going
with an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, you might have detected from some
earlier comments that I made that with respect to this particular
meeting I started out leaning a bit toward "C" or something in the
neighborhood of a "B-C" directive simply because of the lack of
evidence that we have made any progress on inflation--nor will we in
the next two years. Nor indeed is there clear evidence that we have
capped inflation as some people would like to believe. As a result,
it seems to me that making some sort of preemptive strike, if you
will, by moving rates up at the the present time would have some
beneficial effect. But given a couple of things that will occur in
the future, it seems to me that that probably is inappropriate. Given
the closeness of the G-7 meeting, I think you might have some real
difficulty during that period of time. Also, there will be an
employment report that comes out April 6th, just before your G-7
meeting that will give some better information with respect to what
happened in January and February; it will either confirm or not
confirm those numbers, it seems to me. Therefore, I would like to
propose that we have "B" with an asymmetric directive so that if we do
get information in the intermeeting period that suggests that we have

-42-

3/27/90

a much stronger economy than we think we have, then we could move.
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, is that this would be a
leading bit of information to the market as they see this directive
following the next meeting. They would know which way the wind is
blowing and what the next move could be. It has informational
content, if you will, whether we move or not in the intermeeting
period; an asymmetric directive seems to me to have some advantage.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, if I were the all powerful czar
of monetary policy I would do exactly what you've prescribed. I'm
basically content with where we are. I share the frustration about
our lack of ability to move against inflation. But I think we have to
have patience; that's the key point in my mind. For the reasons that
you've mentioned, I think we have a potential for instability in the
market. We have fragility, we have this possibility of the credit
crunch, and [we have the possibility of a problem in the] foreign
exchange markets. All of those things suggest to me very strongly
that it is premature to move at this time. It's a natural reaction on
the part of human beings to want to take action when frustrated by
something like this inflation rate. But sometimes inaction is the
better course of action, and I think that's the situation that we're
in now. So for that reason I would heartily endorse your
prescription, and I feel that it should be a symmetric directive as
well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that there is some
uncertainty about both the strength of the economy and also the extent
of the inflation problems. However, I would prefer a small move in
the direction of tightness somewhere between Bluebook alternatives "B"
and "C."
It seems to me that if the Greenbook is correct--and
certainly our work would suggest that it is--there will be a need for
some fairly significant, or at least eyecatching, tightening in the
second half of the year. It might be easier to do some of that at the
present time and have to do a little less in the second half of the
year. If that's not in the cards, to me a fallback position is to
support asymmetric language in favor of a tighter policy. That
approach would ensure that policy could be tightened promptly if we
had indications that indeed the economy is strengthening and if
inflationary pressures look like they're even more of a concern in the
seven weeks until our next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would lean somewhere between "B"
and "C" but I'm certainly willing to accept the arguments of what the
possible effects might be on foreign exchange rates. That being the
case, though, I would feel pretty strongly about going asymmetric on
the directive. Roger pretty well made that speech. It does seem to
me that it positions us, if later events call for an actual upward
movement in the fed funds rate. If that became necessary, we could
move; or if that were delayed and had to come even after the next
meeting it seems to me that that would tend to minimize a bit the
surprise element that seems to be a matter of concern. If later
information indicates that the economy and other factors are not what

3/27/90

I at least anticipate--if policy doesn't actually change over the
intermeeting period--the markets would be able to read that; and
following the next meeting, if nothing happens, they could tell that
pretty quickly. So, I don't see any significant risk in going
asymmetric, but I think there are a lot of good arguments for going
that way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, at the least we obviously have a difficult
timing problem here. But I find that I come out where you do. We
have seen that inflation is at least as stubborn, and maybe more
stubborn, than many of us had expected; and that may require a
tightening move. But at the moment, at least, I don't have a sense of
urgency about it.
I think, as Tom Melzer said earlier, it's probably
low cost to wait until the next meeting; and indeed, if we get a lot
of confirming evidence earlier than that, we always do have the
opportunity to act if that would seem to be appropriate. I don't want
to whipsaw the economy or policy by moving now and then finding out
through a series of data revisions and incoming information and so on
and so forth that we overestimated some of the improvement. Looking
at inflation from a longer-run perspective, I don't know what it will
take to start to bring it down. Obviously, the scenario in the
Greenbook doesn't suggest any progress in the next year or two.
But I
think the best thing we can do under all these circumstances, as I've
said before, is probably to see to it that M2 growth remains modest.
And I am encouraged at least about the near-term prospects there
although unfortunately, as Don mentioned, it may be a little hard to
read M2 as the quarter unfolds just because of the tax payment issue.
Assuming we get something like [the staff estimate], then we're on a
rather sensible course and I prefer to wait a while longer and let
I have a mild preference for retaining
some more evidence accumulate.
a symmetric directive just because I think that maximizes flexibility.
But for now it's a mild
I'm almost always in favor of that.
preference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I think you summed the situation up
very well; I happen to agree with your conclusions. As I said
earlier, I think the risks on the inflation side may have shifted
upward a bit, but I'm really still hopeful that as we get further into
the year the numbers will show some improvement without our
necessarily having tightened policy. Therefore, at this point I'd be
in favor of maintaining our policy and would have a preference for
symmetric language. I would only add that I don't in any way view
symmetric language as limiting action on our part during the interim
period if something should develop that would call for that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS, Well, our long-term goal publicly stated is
price stability. For 1990 the nominal GNP we're looking at is about
6.2 percent, I think: we're looking at a monetary growth rate of 6-1/2
It seems to me that that implies no movement toward our
to 7 percent.
If you look
long-term goal, at least in terms of our policy position.
at P*, I find no pressure from the P* model for moving toward price
stability.

3/27/90

-44-

Moving toward more current kinds of considerations, it seems
to me that we can always find a risk in the economy; we have done that
consistently, at least over the last 2-1/2 years that I've been
sitting here.
If we're always going to weigh our decisions toward
risk to the economic expansion, then we're always going to bias
ourselves toward inflation. It seems to me we have a one-weighted
risk scheme in here. We weigh only toward the economy until inflation
is in some sense beyond our control [rather] than taking very
aggressive policy action. I think it's very important to maintain
credibility.
I think what we've learned from the last 20 years is
that the credibility of policymakers is probably the key element in
successful policy. Given the lack of movement toward our goal, much
less the increase in rates of inflation that we've seen, I don't think
I don't think we
that we're providing any kind of credibility at all.
need a major move at this time. We may need a major move if we follow
market interest rates up; if we are wrong and the economy is stronger,
we will have to move more aggressively.
So, I would favor a 25 basis
point move now and let the markets sort that one out.
I suppose as a
fallback I could go for an asymmetric directive toward tightening if
in it we expressed our concerns about the inflationary trends.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, when we've been faced with this
degree of uncertainty about the business outlook I don't think we've
ever tightened before. And yet when I look back through the history
of the System, I think this is where we've made most of our mistakes.
If we could take the Bluebook at face value and assume that we would
get a growth of M2 of 6 percent for April through June, I think that
would be an adequate slowing, given the rate at which the aggregates
have been growing. But I'm a little suspicious that it might be a
So, I favor a bit of a preemptive strike-little stronger than that.
somewhere between "B" and "C," a "B-" or "C+."
But that clearly isn't
going to happen.
So, I would be prepared, if I were voting, to vote
for a directive with asymmetry to the [tighter] side.
I think we
ought to do at least that much. If subsequent economic information
suggested that that was the wrong way to have leaned, I don't see that
we really would lose anything since that would not be released until
after the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. JOHNSON.

Governor LaWare.

Governor Johnson.

Well, my preference was for something along the

lines of "B" asymmetric for some of the same reasons that already have
been mentioned by Roger Guffey and others. But I can certainly go
along with the Chairman's suggestion for symmetry.
I don't feel that
strongly; I have a mild preference for asymmetry. There are a couple
of things on my mind along the lines of what Lee said.
If we didn't
have to worry [unintelligible] quite so much, then I think it would be
a great opportunity to gain some credibility by shocking the foreign
exchange markets. But in fact, I can see a lot of difficulties with
that; I can see that that would be a difficult problem that we need to
be more sensitive to. Along with what Don Kohn said earlier, I
interpret what has happened to long-term rates as mostly real rate

-45-

3/27/90

pressures from some pickup in the economy, although in my opinion it
could be because of some of the events that have taken place worldwide
and not just domestically. It could be improvement in potential
output and something like an increase in the net real return on
capital. And if that is the case, the current funds rate would be a
relative easing of policy. Although if it's an increase in potential,
that wouldn't necessarily create a long-run inflationary problem. But
it's impossible to sort all that out.
It's just theoretical
reasoning. We have to look for the data as they come in.
I wish we
did have a political setting in which to enjoy the advantage of having
a strengthening dollar here and be able to get more bang per buck at
this stage with some firmness. But I agree that it's not in the
cards. We do live in a political economy, not a simple abstract
situation. So, I can go along with "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.
symmetric.

President Melzer.

"B" asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I could live with "B"

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your
recommendation.
I think that it would be premature, based on the
tentativeness of the data, for us to move as yet.
The decision is
obviously between moving a bit in the direction of tightness or
staying where we are. And I would suggest that we're getting a little
tightening through whatever degree of credit crunch is going on out
there, and I think there's at least some. Also, unless the G-7 does
something to turn it around, my personal bet would be that for awhile
at least we're going to see a rising dollar. We certainly have it in
the yen and I would bet that on balance we're going to get it in the
trade-weighted calculation generally.
So, I would enthusiastically
support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
To move now on policy would be premature on
domestic grounds and counterproductive on international grounds, I
think. So I prefer a continuation of current policy. On the issue of
symmetrical or asymmetrical, I prefer symmetrical. It turns on the
question of what kind of burden of proof we want in order to make a
policy change.
I think a policy change over the next several weeks
would be a major move, and there ought to be some burden of proof to
make such a move; and that leads me in the direction of symmetrical.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I would support your position of keeping policy
at "B" with symmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I have no stomach at all for
changing policy right now either, but I came here with a very, very
mild preference for asymmetric language. My preference is probably a
bit stronger for asymmetric language, but operationally I don't think
it matters a lot.
We can react to incoming data as needed in either

3/27/90

-46-

case.
I think the only real argument that can be made for asymmetric
has been made; as I say, I can be reasonably comfortable with "B"
[symmetric].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I hear is that there is some
concentration for alternative B symmetric. The Secretary will read
the directive encompassing that and we'll put that to a vote.
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
Taking account of progress toward
price stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior
of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from March
through June at annual rates of about 6 and 4 percent respectively.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 6 to 10 percent."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We still have a large element of
our agenda in front of us, so why don't we break for lunch, come back
quickly, and get started as soon as we can.
[Lunch break]
SPEAKER(?).

[Unintelligible.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
and get started.
MR. TRUMAN.

With that information, let's go ahead

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I just can't let this pass.
First of all,
I think you are to be complimented for putting together in one place a
review of this complex issue. Even if not much change occurs, I think
the study is worthwhile and it is a well-done record.
I've never
approached this [issue] from a particularly ideological point of view.

3/27/90

-47-

I've always tended to be fairly pragmatic in terms of the politics as
well as the economics about whether we ought to [intervene] or not.
However, I must say that over the past year just the sheer amount of
the transactions has struck me as being well beyond what is a
I feel that we have just sort of slipped into this
reasonable number.
for good reason or bad reason. The number is something like $20
It goes well beyond a narrow, or even a moderate,
billion.
interpretation of disorderly markets; it goes well into trying to
And it's difficult to see what we have
manipulate exchange rates.
gotten out of it.
I personally don't think we can continue for
It might be helpful as the
another year with that kind of volume.
Committee looks at this to try to draw a distinction between
intervention to counter disorderly markets--as ambiguous as that is-and intervention aimed at manipulating the level of exchange rates.
I, for example, would think that intervening to counter disorderly
markets is a fairly routine, even technical, kind of thing over which
the Desk, the Chairman, and the Foreign Currency Subcommittee ought to
have fairly wide discretion. But when we get into the issue of
whether we're going to intervene to manipulate the level of exchange
rates and we commit the magnitude of dollars that we have, it seems to
me that that kind of decision ought to be laid on the table as
explicitly as when we change domestic policy rather than just come to
So, what I get out of this is
the point where we ratify transactions.
that we ought to try to draw this distinction.
If we're talking about
anything that comes close to what we've been through, we ought to have
a procedure in the Committee where that policy decision is aired and
discussed and we either ought to go on record as favoring it or not
favoring it.
MR. PARRY. Ed, are you saying that those are both valid
reasons for intervention?
I'm not prepared to make a decision for all time
MR. BOEHNE.
It seems to me
and in all circumstances that says what is or isn't.
that the case for this narrow definition of intervention to counter
disorderly markets is well within the bounds of what a central bank
I think it's fairly routine business [for a central
ought to do.
bank].
On the broader issue, I think one would have to look at the
It's more than
circumstances in which we were trying to do it.
economics involved here. When we start to commit billions and
billions of dollars, as we have this past year, for the clear purpose
of trying to manipulate exchange rates, I think that is a decision
that ought to be made consciously. Maybe we would do it and maybe we
wouldn't.
I would just have to wait and discuss whether I would be
for it or not for it depending on the circumstances. And I wouldn't
make any [prior] judgment.
MR. PARRY.
effective.

Implicit in your comment is that you think it's

I think in some circumstances it might make
MR. BOEHNE.
And those circumstances may go beyond
sense for us to do it.
I'm just not prepared to close the door on its potential
economics.
We ought to face up to
effectiveness for a broad range of reasons.
that head on when the time comes.
MR. PARRY. Is your concern about the $20 billion a foreign
exchange risk concern?

3/27/90

-48-

SPEAKER(?).

It's a political concern.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, first of all, $20 billion is a lot of
money to spend even for a central bank. Second, I think that there
are some political accountability issues here, one of which we're
going to run into on this currency [collateral] business, I would
think, some time this year. We at least ought to have thought through
what we're doing and why we're doing it before we commit to that kind
of money.
MR. HOSKINS.
Is the agenda here to go through Ted's four
policy questions, which I thought were quite good?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the first thing we [normally]
would do is to ask questions, but they didn't say anything to ask a
So, if you want to comment on the substance of the
question about.
issues, please go ahead.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, let me just start where I think Ed was
going. There are a number of points that could be raised around the
issues that Ted put down; we probably ought to discuss those because I
I suppose one response to Ed's
think they're fair and to the point.
statement is that we did approve those limits regularly, and there was
some protesting along the way occasionally. But sooner or later we
found ourselves in a situation of [spending] $20 billion. And I'm
uncomfortable with it, as Ed is, for some reasons that are political.
I think it attracts attention. And I think we ought to ask the
question: Does it allow influence by the Treasury on us because of
I don't know the answer to that but that seems to
that relationship?
me one question that we ought to deal with. Ted started off with the
[question as to whether] we should be doing it for our own account.
It's one thing to execute [transactions] as agent [for the Treasury];
it's another to give tacit [permission] to manipulating or trying to
maintain exchange rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say one thing now. To the
extent that we at the Board raised concerns to the Treasury, I think
we were more heard than not.
In effect, I would say that in this most
recent endeavor to suppress the decrease in the yen against the dollar
about which we raised very strong [objections] and had extended
discussions as to why that was desirable or appropriate, it actually
paid off.
In other words, the Treasury did pull back. As best I can
judge, that was largely the result of our reluctance to go along and
of the arguments we were making. So, even though in a legal sense we
have to interpret ourselves as junior partners, it has been my
impression that we do have a significant effect on the overall
Treasury decision. Were we to pull away and be strictly [the
Treasury's] agent, I think by that very nature we lose completely all
of our capability of influencing decisions that could affect our
monetary policies. My impression is that, if we were to poll this
Committee, the extent of belief that there is any really significant
benefit coming from [intervention] would be extremely mild to
nonexistent. The question that we have before us is not whether it
works in any substantial way; I don't think you'll find many people
around here who believe that. Therefore, leaving aside the issue of
intervention where it seems appropriate to curb disorderly markets and
raising the much broader issues of pegging-type intervention,
including G-7 coordinated intervention to drive the dollar down, for

3/27/90

-49-

example, the question is whether or not we lose our ability to
influence those decisions if we pull away. And I must tell you my
impression is that we do. Sam, is that your impression?
MR. CROSS. Well, there's no question that our discussions
with the Treasury at all levels are very much influential on their
views both because they do want to have the Federal Reserve involved
in there with them and also because we can bring to the discussions
some [insights regarding] the point of view of the markets and the
point of view of the issues that the Federal Reserve is interested in,
which have an influence on them. So, my assessment would be very
similar to yours. There are a lot of times, of course, when we start
off agreeing anyhow. But there are many, many occasions when we do
influence their views. I think this recent experience is a case in
point. But as in any arrangement of this sort, it's not going to
happen every time. Looking back over a longer period of time, I think
we have been very influential and quite helpful in influencing them in
the directions that we have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think we've succeeded in shutting
off some of the extreme elements of policy that they tried to
implement.
MR. CROSS. I think that's right. We mentioned in [the Task
Force report] that the Federal Reserve frequently seems to be somewhat
of a balancing wheel; sometimes Administrations tend to go off a
little in excess in one direction or another. I think over the years
that certainly has been the case.
MR. HOSKINS. I don't disagree with what you said, but the
balancing wheel this time seems to me to be in order of magnitude
completely out of proportion to what we've done in the past. It's
roughly four times the level relative to our portfolio that we've
experienced.
MR. CROSS. Well, certainly, the $20 billion we did last year
is the largest we've done in one year. But if you [compare it with]
periods in the latter 1970s [relative to] the size of the foreign
exchange markets at that time, for example, the $20 billion was not
big. If you look back at the size of the current account deficits in
that period, there were periods of intervention when relative to those
conditions the intervention figures were high, though they certainly
did not approach the $20 billion total.
MR. JOHNSON. [Unintelligible] the current account deficits
[Unintelligible] selling dollars
will make it work the other way?
with a large current account deficit.
I was trying to give a
MR. CROSS. Well, that's right.
comparison of the [conditions] within which-MR. HOSKINS. But you can only relate it to our portfolio
because if you're looking at channels of influence, it's true we can
influence the Treasury. But the other side of that coin, it seems to
me, is that Treasury can have some influence on us. One of those
influences might have been that it had to get very large before we got
our backs up.

3/27/90

-50-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there any question that we can't
totally sterilize our activities in exchange markets? Are you raising
the question of whether or not they can influence us because we can't
sterilize or what?
MR. HOSKINS. No, they can influence us in the size of our
foreign currency holdings.
SPEAKER(?).

That's a separate issue.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's a separate issue.

Sure.

MR. HOSKINS. It's not clear to me in what other ways, once
we have a position of that size. Could we be influenced by a
potential loss in that and would we adjust policy in order to avoid a
potential loss? It's just a number.
MR. JOHNSON. I think in fact it can complicate the
sterilization process. Technically, we can definitely do it, but we
already have found that we had some collateral pressures. Now, I know
we could suspend that and reinterpret our collateral, but that
complicates the process. Also, in my opinion, at times it can create
a significant amount of uncertainty about policy in the open market
because if the market doesn't know the degree to which we have
undertaken exchange rate intervention then it can confuse the market's
understanding of what the reserve need is on any given day. That can
add volatility in the market and it can confuse the market at least in
the very short run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You're referring to intra-week I assume?

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, absolutely; because it comes out
eventually in the reports. But I think it could have a substantive
effect if we ran into serious collateral problems. If we try to
change our definition of collateral and expand what we consider
collateral, we could open up a whole Pandora's box of questions about
the substance of our policy.
MR. TRUMAN. Just to come back to the collateral issue, since
it has been raised twice now: It was a self-denying ordinance that the
Board imposed on itself, given the circumstances as they existed in
the early 1980s. And I suspect that the proposition that you-MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'm saying we still have to change it
[even if] it was self-imposed.
MR. TRUMAN.
is whether you-MR. JOHNSON.

You'd have to change your policy.

The question

You could raise a lot of questions about that.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
that question.

But the issue shouldn't swing on

MR. JOHNSON. I couldn't agree more. All I'm saying is that
it can complicate the sterilization process. Tentatively, that's
true.

3/27/90

Has
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask a factual question?
there been a significant or meaningful political change since we
initiated that on the basis of the concern that we shouldn't back the
Is that spoken of politically as an
dollar with foreign currencies?
issue?
Does anybody have a sense of that?
MR. TRUMAN. It tends to be associated with one or two people
It
in Congress at least one of whom, Ron Paul, is not there anymore.
was also associated with concern and confusion in the outbreak of the
debt crisis and the misuse of that power to bail out Brazil, Mexico,
or any of your favorite or nonfavorite LDCs.
It is not currently an
issue. I'm not saying that it wouldn't be noted-MR. JOHNSON.
It could quickly become an issue if it looked
as if we were bailing out the currencies of other countries.
MR. TRUMAN. If the circumstances were such that the Congress
felt that the dollar should go up and we were excessively buying
foreign exchange--which I think is what you're talking about--it would
become an issue. That is correct. Generally the bias in Congress has
been the other way, however.
MR. SYRON.
It's very easily demagogued; that's the really
dangerous thing from our perspective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, the truth of the matter is the
reason we built up at least part of that $20 billion is that in the
early stages it just did not seem credible that the dollar would firm
as much as it has.
And the early accumulation of both yen and
deutschemark balances was considered to be a good speculative
investment that we would get rid of relatively quickly. Part of the
problem is that the markets have behaved in a way that turned out not
I think that has gone against us.
to have been expected.
MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, that raises a very important
point along the lines of what Ed Boehne was talking about initially.
It seems that there ought to be some understanding in the Committee
about where we cross over the line from just providing intervention to
resist disorderly conditions and at what point we decide that it has
gotten out of control and the fundamentals are really working against
us.
It seems to me that if we accumulate $20 billion in foreign
exchange reserves over a relatively short period of time, that's a
signal that we've crossed over the line.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I wouldn't disagree with that; in
fact, that's precisely the reason we increasingly fought the Treasury
as these sums began to rise.
In other words, as soon as they began to
get into double-digits it was a signal that we were doing precisely
that.
My own judgment is that if we were not there, the total, which
is now what--$45 billion?
MR. CROSS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
$60 billion at this stage.

I would bet you that the total would be

3/27/90

-52-

MR. JOHNSON. I guess the question is: What do we do, if they
What if
We have $20 billion of a $45 billion total.
keep doing this?
they keep wanting to sell dollars?
MR. ANGELL. There's no problem because they are out of money
in their Exchange Stabilization Fund.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, they could warehouse anywhere, if
However, the political exposure of the Treasury to
they wanted to.
losses in that fund go directly, dollar-for-dollar, into the budget
deficit, and I think there's sensitivity on that issue.
MR. BLACK.
there too.

Well, losses on our books could go directly in

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
both ways.

What I'm trying to say is it's an issue

MR. SYRON. In that regard, Mr. Chairman, how big is the
breadbox in the sense of the $20 billion that we're talking about now
relative to the position that we've had in the past vis-a-vis the
Sam started to talk
amount of trading that's going on in the market?
about that and that's what I wanted to ask him. Is this just an
extraordinary buildup?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, if you adjust for the size of the

market-MR. HOSKINS.
portfolio.
SPEAKER(?).

But it is extraordinary relative to our

To our portfolio.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right, that's where the
difference is; but it's not relative to the size of the market.
MR. CROSS.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the issues that we have to
confront is that there is a globalization going on; there is no
question that the amount of cross border transactions of every type is
rising secularly against the nominal GNPs of the countries. And this
So I think the issue is that were we to
is an irreversible process.
keep the proportion of intervention relative to the transactions
constant, I would suspect that consumer and commercial banks are not
going anywhere. But the ratio of our holdings relative to our total
assets also would be rising secularly, and that's the problem.
MR. HOSKINS.

If we continue to intervene, that's true.

MR. TRUMAN. May I come back to one point that Mr. Johnson
raised?
We did look at this question of volatility, which is related
to the sterilization; it's the very last three or four pages in the
book. In fact, much to my surprise, we did not find a correlation
between interest rate volatility and the scale of our intervention
whether we were in the market in a moderate way or a big way. The

volatility of interest rates, whether long or short, seems to be the
same.

I was surprised because in some sense it was a biased test.

I

-53-

3/27/90

would have suspected that [unintelligible] in the market because there
It's not a strong test, but there
were certain other things going on.
isn't [a correlation].
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. TRUMAN.
would have thought.

Okay.
There seems to have been less confusion than I

MR. JOHNSON. Well, that may be true as an empirical matter;
but the potential is certainly there for it to create mysterious
volatility problems, especially if we're intervening in large amounts.
I concede that empirically that may not have been the case so far, but
And that's something we should take
potentially it clearly could be.
But I think we ought to go back to what Bob Parry was
into account.
saying. I wouldn't worry so much about this whole thing if I thought
it was totally ineffective. I think generally sterilized intervention
is grossly ineffective. But there are times--and I think even this
research shows that--when it can be effective at least in the short to
intermediate term. The time that it is effective, at least
temporarily if not even into the intermediate term, is when there is
concerted multilateral intervention, which basically gives a signal to
the market that there's a coordinated effort by all the major
industrial countries to achieve some exchange rate level. Now,
whether they ultimately achieve it or not, it creates in my opinion
potential turmoil in the market in the short to intermediate term.
And it can even change the psychology of the fundamentals in my
opinion.
I
MR. PARRY. But it seems that we all agree with this.
think the issue is: How can we be effective in getting that viewpoint
across--by playing the game or by picking up our mitt and going home?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I can cite you an example that I have
I think there have
cited before. You can argue both sides of that.
been times when we have been effective playing the game and there have
been times when we have been totally ineffective. A good example is
I have mentioned this
from my experience when I was at the Treasury.
to Ted and others before. When I was at the Treasury, Beryl Sprinkel
was Undersecretary and there was a policy of non-intervention. Yes,
there was some modest intervention at times when the Treasury decided
The
that it was useful, but only when they decided it was useful.
From my
Fed's views during the whole period were completely shut out.
experience, I don't remember any cooperation or any plea by the Fed
during that period having any effect whatsoever.
MR. PARRY.
have an effect?
MR. JOHNSON.

But you agree that there are times when it does

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's a crucial difference.
Beryl Sprinkel is different from all others. I was going to use an
econometric term on how one can apply that but I decided not to.
MR. JOHNSON. Sure. What I'm saying, though, is that you
probably could cite other times in the past where playing the game has
not gotten us anywhere. And there are times where you have to draw

3/27/90

the line and say you're going to make a stand.
I would completely
agree that playing the game up to a point is a practical thing to do.
The question is: What are the guidelines as to where we draw the line
and when we decide to make a stand?
SPEAKER(?).

Can you know a priori?

MR. JOHNSON. I think we can have some guidelines to say in
general what kind of intervention we find acceptable. No, I wouldn't
tie anyone's hands.
It ought to come to this table and there ought to
be a discussion once we cross over some threshold we consider to be
outside the frontier of what we thought was reasonable.
We ought to
decide it, though.
MR. PARRY. Would you sketch out what the environment will be
In other words, what would be our role when
like after that point?
we've reached that point where we say we're not going to intervene?
How would that be preferable?
What influence would we have?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I'll be honest. My view is that we've
had considerable influence standing firm. The fear at the Treasury of
the Fed pulling out of this process in my opinion has been as strong a
disciplinary force as anything else.
MR. PARRY.
I don't disagree with that, but you say we will
pull out at some point. After we've pulled out what kind of
discipline can we exert?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, there are several things we can do.
I'm
One
not saying I would prescribe these, but we have a lot of tools.
is that we don't approve any further intervention limits or intervene
on our account. We say, okay, Treasury, you have independent
authority to intervene as a matter of Treasury policy and you can do
it for your account. But the other point is that we also have the
Now,
authority to approve their warehousing of foreign currencies.
they can warehouse, as the Chairman says, in other places possibly.
I'm not sure where.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

Where?
Other central banks?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

The BIS.

But I can't conceive of the BIS doing that.
Yes, that would be risky for them.

MR. JOHNSON. But the point is there are tools.
First of
all, we don't have to do it for our account and that becomes clear to
the market.
We don't have to warehouse their foreign exchange
reserves.
Those are basically the disciplinary tools we have. And I
think before the Treasury would risk confronting that, they would
listen to us. But we've got to be willing to use those tools or we're
not going to get them to listen. The Chairman has been very effective
in my opinion in getting them to listen at times, but I think you
would concede that they have been pretty stubborn.

3/27/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, Mr. Mulford has been.

Messrs. Mulford and Sprinkel fall in the same

category.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No they don't. We have to distinguish.
I happen to agree more with Mr. Sprinkel's view on how this should
work; I don't have any trouble with Mr. Sprinkel. But most Treasuries
have been heavy interventionists. The reason I want to say leave the
Regan/Sprinkel [period] out is that it's a real outlier; it's really
beside the point.
There have been occasions when we've butted our
heads to little avail, but I must tell you that the vast, vast
majority of occasions we not only argued but I think to a large extent
prevailed.
There have been two or three occasions when we objected to
heavy intervention largely directed at beating down the dollar. We
were bypassed for a few days.
But after they got the point that it
wasn't making any difference, they dropped it.
MR. JOHNSON. But I feel that it was the fear of our pulling
out of the process that scared them more than anything else.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so, Manley.
I don't think
we ever even remotely suggested that we would pull away. Basically
when Sam, for example, or some of us from here argue with the
Secretary, I think it does have an effect.
It has not been 100
percent effective in the sense that we are not fully in control.
Frankly, I would be quite fearful of what they might do if we weren't
there to harass them toward some degree of sensibleness.
MR. JOHNSON. But then I think it would become clear to the
market if we got to that point.
If I were a market participant and I
were sitting out there seeing the Federal Reserve talking about price
stability and yet selling massive amounts of dollars, I think
eventually I'd decide that was a joke as a policy.
It seems to me
that our policies have to be reasonably complementary and that we have
to make some stand ultimately if the amount gets beyond the point of
reason. I'm not saying that within a range we should not participate
and act in a practical way on disorderly markets, as Ed Boehne said.
But what do you do when you build up $50-$60 billion of foreign
exchange reserves?
MR. BLACK. There are at least two dangers. One is that we
can lose our credibility and the market will assume we're going to
ease policy in order not to take the losses. The other is that
members of Congress become concerned about the losses and try to exert
political pressure on us so that we don't have to take those losses,
which would mean pressure to ease policy.
MR. HOSKINS.

There's another issue here it seems--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Listen, I have this old piece of paper
that says on it Wayne Angell [wants to speak].
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me first of all that the very first
principle is that the Treasury, with its official foreign exchange
capability, and the Federal Reserve are inevitably linked in an
endeavor. Even if we did not engage in foreign exchange operations,
we could still have the possibility of a conflict between Treasury's

3/27/90

-56-

official foreign exchange position and basic monetary policy; and it
could become a conflict at the Congressional level if we decided that
monetary policy was going to be for a strong dollar and if the
Treasury said they wanted a weak dollar. So, I don't think we can
back away and say somehow or other let's wash our hands of it.
That
won't work.
I think it is important that the Federal Reserve continue
its educational process. Now, I'm very happy with what has happened.
I'm happy on two scores.
In the first place I'm happy because the
Federal Reserve is now, it seems to me, at a consensus position
regarding the dollar.
The problem that I had for so long was that we
had so many in the Federal Reserve who saw a foreign exchange
depreciation as a technique to resolve the foreign trade balance,
which was in conflict with our price level stability goals. And I'm
delighted, Mr. Chairman, that today this organization now seems to be
together for the first time, which says that depreciation is not going
to be used as a device to solve the trade balance problem. We're
So, it seems to me we've
going to solve that problem some other way.
made tremendous progress.
Now, when the Treasury wishes to engage in dollar
depreciation in order to satisfy a short-term political objective,
that's very dangerous and we ought not to participate in it.
We ought
to be willing to join in when we believe that the purposes are
reasonable and give them some allowance in that regard. But when it
comes to the point of having it appear to the nations and the capital
markets of the world that the Treasury and the Federal Reserve want a
depreciation of the dollar, that invites catastrophe and we can't be a
part of that.
Now, it seems to me we've made progress on that score.
We no longer have that high risk. Selling dollars to drive the dollar
down is a process that a central bank can engage in without a limit.
We can create all the dollars we want to create and there's no
Frankly, when it is published that the Federal Reserve
stopping it.
did not participate, I think that's going to give the Treasury a great
deal of pause; I think they're going to be more careful and are going
to listen to us more carefully than they did before. The fact of the
matter is, Mr. Chairman, that in 1989 they continued to the point of
building up balances that are unprecedented and those balances subject
them to foreign exchange speculative risk and they subject us to that
risk. And sooner or later, if you stake those kinds of positions,
you're going to have a Congressional inquiry and the whole operation
is going to be tarred.
I think it's very [unintelligible] that we're
setting out to do. When we first did the Plaza Accord that seemed to
be somewhat well understood. When we first did the Louvre Accord that
seemed to be somewhat well understood in regard to broad ranges. But
we've been asked to engage in the selling of dollars at a time in
which no one knew what the down side was in regard to the deutschemark
market as we were selling yen, and in this [untenable] position that
the Treasury was in I think we had no choice but to separate ourselves
from that risk. Mr. Chairman, I'm delighted we have.
But I will be
more delighted when we get some kind of reasonable plan to deal with
the large balances that we now have and some notion as to how they can
be worked back down. There are uncertainties that really are
impacting this market. No one understands what's happening to the yen
at this point. At one time we had some reasonable understanding as to
why [exchange rates] were moving. But we are now in a period of risk.
And I think it's just extraordinary that we've made this kind of
statement; it's going to be significant when it's announced.
I think
it is going to have an impact when it is published that the Federal

-57-

3/27/90

Reserve stepped back from it.

Now, I believe in doing this that we

ought to be careful not to do it and turn out to be wrong.
[Unintelligible] then, of course, we would lose credibility. But I
think we've protected ourselves. But I would like to see the next
What is to be done with the
plan, which is: Where do we go from here?

balances? When are we ever to sell currencies?
would be helpful to have your comments on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Chairman wanted to [speak].

Okay.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's what I think

Before I comment, the Vice

First of all, I very much agree with

I think we have to be pragmatic about these matters.
Ed Boehne.
quite clear that every central banker that is worth his salt,

It's

regardless of country of origin, is going to want a strong currency.
And that covers even [unintelligible].
But against that backdrop and
the immediately past history, I would go even a step further, Ed, in

the distinctions that you made. There are intervention activities
that are aimed at countering disorderly markets in the historical
context of that word. There are intervention activities that may aim
at trying to check what seems to be an unsustainable rise in currency
x. But then there are also intervention activities that are at least
perceived as seeking to beat down your own currency. I think in the
immediate past a lot of the tension, not just between the Federal
Reserve and the Treasury but between nations--including both central
banks and finance ministries--really has focused on that point.
Indeed, I think much of the dissatisfaction around this table has been
targeted at that point: i.e., intervention tactics or strategies that
seem to have as their sole purpose stomping on our own currency. So,
that is a third distinction that I think is useful in trying to put
these issues in perspective.
MR. HOSKINS. May I ask a question? You asked me before
about policy and how we could be impacted by this. When you read the
newspapers or listen to the discussion this morning, there is an
expectation that the Fed won't tighten because of dollar concerns-that is, that the dollar is getting too strong. We heard it at the
table to some extent just this morning. Suppose we have an increase
in the inflation rate like we've had and we continue to have
additional increases and we continue to say that we're supporting the
Treasury in terms of intervention? It seems to me that we'll have no
credibility at all. At what point do we decide to fight inflation
here? The yen may continue to fall even if our inflation rate rises,
even if they raise their interest rates 100 basis points. We don't
know what's going to happen there. And I think Wayne's point is right
about separating ourselves to some extent from the process because
then the expectation is that we run monetary policy--that the Treasury
may intervene, but the Fed will fight inflation when necessary.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I was going to get to that issue in

a minute.
MR. HOSKINS.

I'm sorry to interrupt.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Given the kind of institutional
background that we operate in, it seems to me that with respect to the
distinction I tried to draw as to the motivation for intervention in
the first place, the first kind of troublesome threshold we all come

3/27/90

-58-

up against is this debate as to whether intervention works.
Indeed,
there are very sharp differences of opinion even around this table.
Some people are against intervention because they say it doesn't work
and other people are against it because they say it does work. I
don't see quite how you square that circle. Then, you look at the
great body of empirical analysis, some of which was summarized in
Paper 11.
That paper seems to say that it's pretty hard to find
evidence that it does work. I have to say that I'm a little agnostic
on that point. And I want to try to make the point that my
agnosticism does not grow out of my place of origin, Liberty Street.
I've asked my people to look at this question for me in some detail
and I was very scrupulous: I asked some of the old timers like Dick
Davis to look at it knowing their institutional biases; but I asked
some people whose roots actually are here, like Bonnie Loopesko, to
look at it.
And they both tell me the same thing. What they say,
basically, is that while maybe you can't draw a clear conclusion that
intervention works, you can't draw one that it doesn't work.
Moreover, they make the point that there is also a non-empirical
foundation that tells us what determines exchange rates in the first
place--whether intervention does or doesn't [work] or whether anything
does or doesn't [work].
So, I think one has to have at least a
healthy element of skepticism or agnosticism in terms of drawing
sweeping conclusions on that threshold point.
My own view is not unlike Governor Johnson's in that
intuitively I think it can work at least in the short run. And
because it can work I think we should treat it as though it does work.
Now, in that setting, the questions about profits and losses,
opportunity costs, size of portfolio, and amount of balances in some
sense are secondary. We can find ways, I think, to deal with those.
But it does seem to me that the threshold questions are: What role
should this institution play in the process, if any?
And in
addressing that question, it's important to keep in mind that for most
of this decade we essentially have been operating with a currency that
has been strong rather than weak. But it wasn't that long ago--the
latter part of the previous decade--when things were distinctly the
other way around. And we went hat in hand to the rest of the world
asking them to help defend our currency. Now, whether that worked or
not, whether it was an expedient or not, or whether we were shortsighted or not as a nation, is beside the point.
That's what we did.
And there is no guarantee that we might not have to face those
circumstances again at some point in the future.
So, I think that in
itself is a reason not to throw the proverbial baby out with the bath
water.
As I see it, the biggest danger with intervention--whether
it's done by the Federal Reserve or the Treasury or both--is the
danger that it can ultimately co-opt monetary policy. That, I think,
is the ultimate risk. And that has a bearing on this question of
whether we should be a part of the process or not.
To me, the danger
of co-opting monetary policy in some underlying sense is greater when
we're out of the picture than when we're in the picture.
I think it
transcends the question of whether the Chairman with his considerable
persuasive powers, or Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman with their persuasive
powers, can browbeat the Undersecretary or the Secretary of the
Treasury into a more sensible position day-by-day.
It's much more
fundamental than that. And I think that alone is more than a
sufficient reason why the Federal Reserve should maintain a

-59-

3/27/90

continuing, active, involved posture and presence in these matters. I
also think that our international relationships lead to the same
conclusion. We may think we'll scare the heck out of the Treasury by
telling them we aren't going to play, but if the world at large-including our sister central banks--felt that that was our attitude,
it would scare the heck out of them too. That in itself might produce
precisely the problem that we're most interested in avoiding, and that
is a weak currency rather than a strong currency.
MR. HOSKINS.

I don't understand that, Jerry.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If the international community of
central banks thought that the Federal Reserve was throwing in the
towel and leaving this whole business to the Treasury, I don't think
they'd be very happy. As a matter of fact, I don't think the
international financial community would be very happy.
MR. JOHNSON.

The Bundesbank would be happy.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For now they might be, but I don't
think that the perception that the Federal Reserve was jumping ship on
the process would be well received.
MR. JOHNSON.

No, I agree with you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
disturbed.

[Unintelligible] he could be quite

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, I think he probably would.

MR. ANGELL. But by and large, Jerry, if the Federal Reserve
had pursued a rigorously tight monetary policy in 1978 we would not
have had to go out with our hat in our hand.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Well, I concede that we--

MR. ANGELL. If we pursue a rigorous monetary policy toward
price level stability, the fear of a weak dollar is gone.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I concede that, especially in the
case of 1978 policies in general, we probably were short-sighted. But
I don't think things are quite that one dimensional. Again, in the
immediate circumstance, would it be a good thing, unambiguously good,
if the yen [fell] from 157 to 200? It's not at all clear to me that
that is unambiguously good.
MR. ANGELL.

Oh, I agree with you.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. And with those circumstances, it
seems to me that we have a constructive role to play in terms of-MR. ANGELL. But that's why we shouldn't add to our stock of
yen at 138 and 142, because then we lose the ability to do it when we
need to do it to stop an overshoot.
MR. JOHNSON. But, Jerry, there is still the question: Say
that that was the trend, that the dollar was rising toward 200--

3/27/90

-60-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me just finish here.
I'll
come back to that. The point I was making was on the threshold
question of whether we as an institution should maintain a meaningful
presence in this arena.
I'm suggesting that we should. And the last
reason I cited as to why I thought we should was not just for fear of
loss of monetary policy autonomy in a domestic context, but that it
would not be well received by the world at large if they literally
Indeed, I for one could
felt that we had jumped ship on the process.
not [imagine] asking the Chairman of the Federal Reserve to go off to
a G-7 meeting next Saturday with his hands tied squarely behind his
back.
I don't think that's in the interest of the Federal Reserve; I
don't think it's in the interest of the United States of America; and
I don't think it's in the interest of the well being of the world
So, the threshold question I'm trying to address is: Are we
economy.
in or are we out? And in my judgment we're far better off in.
MR. JOHNSON. Let me pose this question to you. Look, I
don't disagree with that, but I think the question is: What are we in
for?
Let's say that the yen was weak for whatever reason--I could
name half a dozen reasons why the Japanese may have continuing
problems--and the dollar does continue to strengthen against the yen.
It could turn around tomorrow. But say it [weakens] and we already
have $8 billion of yen reserves.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The threshold question is: Are we in
Then we get to the
You know where I come out on that.
or out?
question of procedures, the question of tactics, the question of
Now, as far as I'm concerned, I have some
portfolios and so on.
sympathy with what Ed Boehne said: that there probably is room for
some more systematic procedures at the Committee level to try and help
members' comfort levels with what we're doing. But even there, at the
end of the day I think the Chairman in particular has to have an
appropriate degree of flexibility. And I'm not quite sure, Ed, how
you square the circle in terms of what I interpreted your suggestion
to be. Now, whether it means there should be a more systematic review
or reports after the fact of G-7 meetings and other things like that
or whether--and I personally hope not--we have to go so far as having
But if
a directive that mirrors the domestic directive, I'm not sure.
you're saying, Manley, that we ought to have some better mousetraps
within a context along the broad lines that I think we're all talking
about, I don't have any problem with that.
MR. JOHNSON. All I'm saying is that the Chairman should be
able to go into a meeting like that with some demonstration to the
Treasury and the G-7 of where we [unintelligible] acceptable path.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The problem with that is none of us
can anticipate what the Chairman is going to run into at one of those
meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's right.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

You cannot anticipate that.

MR. JOHNSON.
I still want to finish this example just as an
illustration of what we might be faced with. Let's just assume that
the yen continues to weaken against the dollar and we already have $8
billion or more of yen reserves.
And let's just say that the reasons

-61-

3/27/90

the yen is weak are internal to the Japanese market: they're not
confronting inflationary pressures; they have a weak government,
I could
without much credibility; their stock market is overvalued.
name off a few others. Let's just say they have all those problems
They want us to
and yet they don't want to confront those problems.
help them on the foreign exchange markets. What do we say if, let's
say, the Treasury wants to go along with that?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
In those circumstances, you're
painting a picture not unlike what was true in the United States here
in the late 1970s. We were unable or unwilling to face up to our
problems. Now, that's going to break at some point. But in those
precise circumstances that you described, if you asked me whether I
would be willing to support modest intervention in the context in
which the dollar is rising in a major way, I'd say "Sure."
I wouldn't
I would have no illusions about what it
have any trouble with that.
was doing but if it was doing nothing more than keeping us in the
ballgame in terms of having some influence on the fundamental ways
that these problems ultimately were to kick out, I'd say that's a
small price to pay.
But what if
MR. JOHNSON. All right, you've answered that.
the G-7 wants a multilateral concerted effort to drive the dollar to
lower levels?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
you draw the lines.

I would not support that.

You've answered my questions.

There's where

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The G-7 in this respect is not the
In other
relevant vehicle. The relevant vehicle is the Treasury.
words, to the extent that we get confronted with that issue it's not
the Federal Reserve in the G-7 fighting this issue. We ought to be
able to turn the Treasury on this because if we can't, then it's
dubious what it is that we have, basically. As far as I'm concerned,
our crucial issue is to try to affect what the Treasury's position is.
The question that was raised before about what it is they are doing I
But I do have two names, which
think we ought to discuss in a minute.
have been sitting on this piece of paper, who deserve to get called
upon: Dick Syron and Tom Melzer.
So, after you gentlemen--and
Governor LaWare. After the three of you-MR. LAWARE.

I withdraw.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, after the two of you get through,
I would like to call on our colleagues to define as best they can what
the Treasury's position is, and then let's confront that specific
question because I think that's where the real issue lies.
MR. SYRON. Following my esteemed colleague from
Massachusetts, I withdraw.
MR. MELZER.

I don't have a colleague from Missouri.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. GUFFEY.

You have Roger

You can withdraw now, Tom!

[Guffey].

3/27/90

-62-

MR. MELZER. Before I make some comments, I had a question
for you, Jerry. Could you explain what you meant by the Treasury coopting monetary policy if we weren't involved?
How would that work?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I think the danger of the
Treasury getting us into entangling alliances through G-7 type
mechanisms escalates in a circumstance in which the rest of the world
thinks we're on the sidelines. So, there's that danger first of all.
Second, I do agree with the Chairman that any form of intervention can
be sterilized. But I think Governor Johnson's problem and Lee
Hoskins' problem--about the markets interpreting what the policy of
the United States government is--gets greatly heightened in those
Even now, quite apart from the dollar situation,
circumstances.
there's this drift in newspapers and elsewhere about the
Administration wanting the Fed to ease.
Now, that's enough of a
problem in and of itself. But if that same problem surfaced in a
context in which the markets knew that we had gone on vacation insofar
as exchange rate policy is concerned and in effect had abdicated to
the Treasury, I think those concerns would be amplified in a very
significant way both internationally and domestically. So, while I
agree that even the Treasury's intervention can be sterilized by us, I
think the psychology of the marketplace changes in a way that is very
detrimental to the interest of good monetary policy in a context in
which we simply decide we're going on vacation.
MR. MELZER.
I see it as an uncertainty risk, but we still
have all the cards, I think. But they're-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no.
Remember that the people who
own the decks, the Congress of the United States-MR. MELZER.

No, I understand.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

--will

[use them]

if we don't use them.

You're talking about monetary policy cards,

though.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
holds the deck.
MR. MELZER.

But even there the Congress still

Yes, I think that's a good point.

MR. JOHNSON. The historical work shows that it wasn't until
1962 that we even got involved in intervention.
MR. CROSS.

Neither one of us was involved

[before 1962].

MR. MELZER. [Unintelligible] for us to ease or tighten if we
don't want to in the short run, but the uncertainty would be damaging.
Let me just make my point.
I don't disagree with the general idea
that we ought to be involved in this and we can bring a constructive
influence to the table. But I think we have to recognize that we have
a finite institution here in terms of the resources and that there is
a responsibility for these resources in a sense that goes beyond this
room in terms of [Reserve Bank] boards of directors and--I don't want

3/27/90

to make this a government [unintelligible]--but there's a basic
institutional question in terms of how we commit our assets and what
Clearly, I hope we never
the risks are associated with those assets.
But
get to the point where we have to draw that line in the sand.
there is, I think, a line in terms of what is reasonable with respect
to an ultimate commitment of the Federal Reserve and its resources to
foreign assets.
Now, I think there's another area where we ought to have a
better understanding of some of the rationale for this and that is:
What is a prudent war chest to have on hand if we need some foreign
currencies on hand?
But that's a much smaller issue, in my mind. And
finally, I don't know what the implications would be if the Treasury
went elsewhere to finance [their currency holdings] and how it would
be handled in a government accounting sense. But I'm a little
troubled about the issue that some other people have mentioned--that
if there is a large exchange loss and all of a sudden Congress and
other people wake up to it then they will look to see how it happened.
And if it happened not only because we intervened for our own account
but--under this somewhat questionable authority on the theory that
it's an open market purchase--we also warehoused roughly an equal
amount for the Treasury in what could be painted as sort of a secret
transaction, I think there's a-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They set the exchange rate.

MR. TRUMAN.

That's their loss.

MR. MELZER.

No,

MR. CROSS.

I understand that, but--

It's the Treasury's loss.

MR. MELZER. If somebody wanted to do a job on the Fed they
would say that we really, through some sort of a subterfuge, financed
this behind the back of the Congress and the taxpayers.
SPEAKER(?).

Absolutely.

MR. MELZER. And that puts us in a position now where the
American people [could] have this huge exchange loss.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, I think you're reaching.
I doubt
that very much. Should there be a major problem with respect to loss
in the budget from the exchange rate operations, the Treasury will get
it all.
I don't think we'll get anything on that because it's very
clear where we have stood on this question. In fact, I think the best
chance that we have to cap de facto some of this is to really raise
this specter.
I raised it early on when the numbers were $10 billion
and didn't make very much progress because essentially we were making
money. And so long as we're making money it's very difficult for us
to get anybody's attention. I tell you: At these levels a 10 percent
move in favor of the dollar is $4-1/2 billion and that's direct budget
money. That is a program, a child care program or something like
I know [unintelligible] and I said the only tool that I think
that.
we have at this stage that effectively could operate at this point is
It
I don't think that existed back at $10 billion.
this issue.
exists now and, frankly, I think that's an issue that we should get
re-surfaced as soon as we can.

3/27/90

-64-

MR. ANGELL. But, Alan, you don't think the Treasury wants to
be out there floating in the wind by themselves on this issue.
They
really want us in, don't you think?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
in because of this.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

They want us in, but they don't want us

All right.
Why do they want us in?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I was about to ask my two
colleagues down at the end [of the table] about the motives of the
Treasury Department.
MR. MELZER. Could I just get in one final thought, which is
simply that I don't view it as either we're in or we're out at this
point.
I don't think it's reasonable to say: "That's it; we're not
going to warehouse anymore."
But I think we really have to try to
draw some ultimate line in the sand and then work very hard to get a
different understanding with the Treasury. I know you've been trying
to do that but I think with that ultimate [unintelligible] power that
Manley and Wayne were referring to.
To me it's not a theological
issue. We're charged with running this institution prudently.
I know
volumes in the foreign exchange markets have gone up.
But the fact of
the matter is there are not enough resources in this central bank or
all of them combined to stand in the way of those markets for very
long, whether you think [intervention] works or doesn't work. And we
have to understand what those limits are.
In my opinion that's a very
defensible position and one we have to take.
In order to leave
ourselves enough room and time to get it done, [we need] to get a
better understanding with the Treasury on how this can be used and how
it can't be used because I could very easily, on the course we've been
on, see this going to $60 billion, $80 billion. Who knows?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, unfortunately, we are missing
Treasury representatives.
So, I think we'll use the two proxies.
MR. CROSS. Well, let me say one thing. Obviously, we have
had difficulties from time to time with the Treasury, which have been
referred to, and we have been absolutely unable to reach agreement in
a particular situation. But in my view that has been an occasional
thing and certainly not a continuous thing. It would not be right for
us to think that the Treasury is totally unreasonable in their
approach to these matters.
In the circumstances that we were talking
about here a few minutes ago, I don't think that they would have an
interest in pouring billions into a yen operation when it was totally
a Japanese domestic problem.
I don't think they have any reason to do
it and I don't think they would argue it.
That's quite apart from all
of the points that we would be making on it.
In fact, if you look
back over these past several weeks, Japanese intervention as I
mentioned earlier was about
which is a very substantial
amount for that period. Our intervention was $1-1/2 billion, about
half when we were involved and about half when the [Desk] had
suspended [its participation for the Federal Reserve].
But even with
regard to the Treasury's own views it seems to me that they have
become much more diffident in terms of the quickness with which they

-65-

3/27/90

want to jump in and participate in an intervention operation in the
yen when they are beginning to wonder themselves about some of these
questions that you've mentioned--and which are becoming more apparent
It's just a
as time goes by--that there is a big domestic element.
question about the political structure of the country and the problems
that they're running into. We've had in the past two or three weeks
two meetings with the Japanese--one by the President with Mr. Kaifu
They didn't come back
and one by Secretary Brady with Mr. Hashimoto.
Quite
after those meetings and say "Let's go in and bash the market."
the contrary. We did a modest amount after the Kaifu meetings, and I
can understand the need to show some cooperation, given everything
that had happened. But it was certainly not a major push or anything.
After the Hashimoto meetings, we did none. We did zero, absolute
zero.
And so-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And this I might add was [at the
initiation] of the Treasury because Mr. Brady asked me basically: What
should we do?
I said the ideal thing to do is zero; however, if you
feel for political reasons that some token amounts are required, we
will be supportive of that but we would prefer zero. And he came off
with zero.
MR. HOSKINS.
[reluctant]--

But maybe the evidence is that by our being

MR. ANGELL.

Made a difference.

MR. HOSKINS.

--that Treasury won't do it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think so;

I disagree with that.

MR. CROSS.
I don't think it was based on a feeling of our
being in or out.
I don't think that he had an interest in doing it
for some other reasons.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me raise one thing. Before Mr.
Brady went off to see Mr. Hashimoto, I spent about 20 minutes with him
here on the way to the airport. And I went through what I thought was
weakening the yen: namely, the effect of the stock market and the
portfolio adjustment process that was pouring yen into the
international financial markets--an activity we could scarcely stop no
matter how hard we tried.
I said that the problem was essentially a
Japanese problem, that we would in a sense be [spitting into] the wind
trying to stop any of this and that we would be perceived as
ineffectual in endeavoring to stop any really major move. As best I
can judge, he went off to Los Angeles and took that position because
when he came back everything he told me was perfectly consistent with
that. While it may well be that the lower echelon technical people
are aware of what we're doing with respect to participating or not,
during that 20 minute or half-hour meeting Brady didn't mention it
once. And he has not mentioned it to me since then.
I will tell you
that he is not disinclined to scream and yell at us when he doesn't
like what we're doing. So what I will tell you is that it's not in
his consciousness. And unless I'm mistaken, unless Sam tells me I'm
wrong on this issue, I'd say that essentially Sam's views and my views
did penetrate--or maybe more importantly the real world penetrated-because they got the message. And that's--

3/27/90

-66-

MR. TRUMAN. Just to give my answer to your question, I think
one thing that needs to be recognized is--and I don't think the
situation in 1989 was any different, quite frankly, from the situation
in 1978 in this regard--that there is a desire if you're sitting where
the Treasury is to think that you have another instrument, a very
strong instrument. And in the more recent period that has been
complemented by the sense that they have an additional dimension of
that instrument that's associated with something called the G-7
process.
They see that as an instrument of dealing with a trade
problem, which could be viewed either in terms of short-run policy or
in protectionist terms or a longer-run build up of liabilities
[unintelligible] of the United States that will bankrupt our children
or grandchildren.
MR. ANGELL.

You believe that?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what they say.

MR. TRUMAN. In fact, the Chairman recently asked Charles
[Dallara] why he was concerned and that was the answer he gave.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

No.

That's what scares me.

Yes.

MR. TRUMAN. They see it as a device, I would argue, that
gives them another degree of freedom. I don't want to get into a
debate with President Corrigan about what the technical literature
says on this matter, but the Treasury officials certainly are on the
side that says that intervention is and has been and can be and should
be--certainly should be--effective. And if it is over the longer
term, then they have a tool to deal with the problem that they see,
I don't think it's any more complicated than
the perceived problem.
that.
We were in exactly the same situation in the 1978-79 period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me finish.
I'll follow up on
In all fairness, early on in the process when we
what Ted is saying.
had a current account deficit we also were concerned about the
accumulation of assets, which ultimately would kill the value of the
dollar.
It turned out that the willingness on the part of the world
to absorb claims against the United States without disgorging them was
much larger than we had anticipated, which meant that we did not have
to view the trade imbalance as the indispensable number one adjustment
process that a number of us thought--not that we chose to but we would
have thought that a couple of years ago.
MR. ANGELL. But proper monetary policy is behind the world's
willingness to take our claims.
If the Federal Reserve had not
tightened and grown our money stock at a 4 percent rate for two years,
the world would not have taken those claims.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that may be true; we don't know
that for sure.
But what we do know is that the original view that a
lot of us, in fact almost all of us, had early on was not
[unintelligible] to the most recent view of the Treasury. Now, we may
say that the Treasury is behind the times in understanding the facts,
and frankly I think they are; but they probably are changing at this
stage. And our recognizing that, while the current account deficit is

-67-

3/27/90

not something particularly desirable, we do have a little more time to
adjust it and hopefully adjust it in nonexchange rate terms is a new
view. It's a view that I don't think we have any reasonable
expectation to be able to hold. We've all misjudged the propensity-MR. ANGELL.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. ANGELL.

Not all.
No, there were some-Right.

Some of us said that was not to be--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I alter my statement to "most." I would
say the most general view was that that was something we had no
alternative to and, therefore, that the Treasury held that view up
until recently is not something that's utterly bizarre. Now, we may
think they are wrong; we may think they are late in adjusting that-MR. JOHNSON. It's one thing to hold that view, which I think
is an acceptable view in terms of the theory, but it's another thing
to try and force it to happen with exchange rate intervention. If you
believe in theory that it's going to happen, not-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no. If you believe it's going to
happen, you try to cut it off at $500 billion net debt exposure before
it gets to a trillion and a half; that's the theory. The theory may
be right or it may be wrong, but the [presumption] is what the
argument essentially is all about.
MR. JOHNSON. But if you believe that that equilibrium
adjustment has to take place, you wouldn't believe that intervention
can change that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, no.
a lot of reputable economists who do--

If you believe--and there are

MR. JOHNSON. I agree that there are. But reconcile for me
this notion of the belief that the current account deficit requires
some equilibrium adjustment and that intervention matters.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, suppose the equilibrium adjustment
comes into exchange rates--and that's a debatable question--and the
intervention works?
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And intervention drives the dollar down,
closes the current account deficit, and chokes off the growth in net
claims against the United States. It may be right and it may be
wrong; I think it's wrong, but it's not a crazy idea.
MR. JOHNSON. But I'm saying: If you believe it's got to
happen why would you intervene? Why don't-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You'd intervene because if you believe
it's going to happen and you want it to, you believe that if there's
less net debt out there, the adjustment process is less disruptive.

3/27/90

-68-

MR. JOHNSON. Maybe I'm missing something. Is there some
simple mathematics on the size of the debt that you're talking about?
MR. TRUMAN. If it's a problem, it's a smaller problem.
think that's all the Chairman is saying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I

That's right.

MR. TRUMAN. If it's going to be a problem, it's either a
$500 billion problem or a trillion dollar problem.
MR. ANGELL. But the foreign exchange intervention works
because it has monetary policy behind it.
MR. HOSKINS.

It's not sterilized.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's the other question.

MR. ANGELL. The possibility that you're gaining time by the
Treasury [intervening] without us is a paper floating in the wind.
They can accomplish nothing.
MR. JOHNSON. But, Ted, I still want my question answered
about why the Treasury wants us involved.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
want us involved?

That's a different question.
Well, but that's the question.

Why do they

MR. TRUMAN.
I would agree with what I think Sam said here
implicitly and what President Corrigan said earlier. The Treasury
recognizes--all Treasuries, if I may put it that way, have recognized
--that they need the stature of the Federal Reserve or the central
bank behind them and that it is not in their interest to go to
international meetings, whether it's G-7 or G-10 or G-22, at
loggerheads with the central bank.
The Japanese are proving that
today.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's right.

MR. TRUMAN. So, therefore, they feel that they're better off
keeping peace in the family; it's not any more complicated than that.
MR. JOHNSON. But that just tells me that that's the reason
we should be worried. They want us involved because they want us to
be partners in this crime.
MR. TRUMAN. Was it a crime, to use your word, in the 1960s
when we were partners with the Treasury in protecting our gold stock
by getting back into this business and creating the swap network?
Now, some people will read history and will say that it was a mistake
of policy to-MR. JOHNSON.

Protect the gold stock.

MR. ANGELL. The mistake was that they did not use monetary
policy consistent with that.

-69-

3/27/90

MR. TRUMAN.

MR. BLACK.

The world was very different.

We didn't do that.

MR. TRUMAN. But I don't think that the motivations of the
Treasury and ourselves [yesterday] in terms of working together to

deal with what was perceived as a common problem or common threat are
any different than their motivations to work with us today. I don't
think they have any ulterior motives.

It's not in their interest to

do so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I try something? I think we have
the sense of where everyone stands. Let me make a specific proposal
I think that we're all in
and let's discuss that particular proposal.
agreement that we should stay involved. Well, let's say that's the

sentiment of the vast majority; I don't want to speak for everybody.
The vast majority think it's probably better that we stay involved
than not. There is considerable discomfort on the part of this group
about the policies and the policy orientations of the Treasury. We
all are concerned about the accumulation of the System's [foreign
currency balances].
I would suggest that in order to limit the size

that the Treasury continuously endeavors to get involved in, in large
part because they are driven by our counterparties on the other side-in Japan to a much lesser extent than Germany--that we endeavor to
resurface in some detail the potential risks that are involved in

holding this much in the way of foreign currency assets. I will take
a position and try to [unintelligible]: First, the extent that it
affects our balance sheet and our technical capabilities of
functioning, including the issues that Ed was raising; second, and I
think far more conclusively, the risks that both we and the Treasury
are taking with respect to potential backlashes should significant
I don't know with
losses occur as a consequence of the holdings.
absolute certainty that those arguments will prevail. I think they
are already beginning to prevail but I cannot know for certain.
Ultimately, the Treasury has the constitutional authority to run
international exchange rate policy. If we endeavor to confront them
on that issue in an immediate confrontational way, we will lose in the
Congress. We almost have to lose in the Congress because any bill
that the Treasury offers that moves to the Hill almost has to pass. I
don't see how that can be avoided even amongst those on the Hill who
So, we cannot win that battle in any way
are very sympathetic to us.
with which I am familiar. All I can suggest to you is that I will put
my best efforts forward, including communication of the not
unimportant content of the discussion of this group today, which I
will convey in some detail to them. Having said that, I would like
for us to agree in principle: (1) to respond favorably to a request
for an expansion, say, up to $15 billion, in the warehousing facility;
and (2) to raise the limit on the System's overall [open] position to
$25 billion and agree that the System's participation with the
Treasury is discretionary, but with the strong presumption that the
System will join the Treasury as long as there is reasonable two-way
communication about U.S. policy objectives and tactics in this area.
If we can agree on that, I think we will find ourselves in the best
position that the System can be in. So, I'd like to put that on the
table as a recommendation.
MR. JOHNSON.

May I ask one question, though?

3/27/90

-70-

[CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.]

Sure.

MR. JOHNSON.
I would feel a lot more comfortable with that
proposal if it had one extra provision, which would be related to what
Jerry was saying about where we draw the [line].
What do we say if
there were an effort for concerted intervention to put the dollar at
lower levels?
I'm not saying that would happen, but what do we say?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'd say we say "no."

MR. JOHNSON.

I'm for it.

Okay.

What does
MR. MELZER. Could I just ask another question?
Do they think we
the Treasury think we're doing at this meeting?
withdrew for technical reasons or do they know at this stage how
fundamental these concerns are?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nothing has been communicated to me from
So as far as I'm concerned we have gotten no response.
Treasury.
Sam, do you know?
MR. CROSS. Well, they know that we are having this meeting.
They know, obviously, that we suspended our participation as of March
2nd and they know that we are looking at these issues because of some
of the concerns we have.
MR. TRUMAN. But I think it's fair to say that the Treasury
does not know--and no one else, I think, outside this room essentially
knows--that we have gone through this exercise and that the timing was
We did not
of a nature that these two practically came together.
think it was in the System's interest to communicate with the Treasury
that we have planned all along to have a big pow-wow on all this and,
therefore, we're holding up [our participation].
So, in that sense it
was technical; it seemed appropriate under the circumstances,
including the uncomfortableness that has been building over the last
six months, to say that we would pull out and re-examine this and
would come back and tell them where we [stand] after the meeting. At
least that's my-MR. CROSS. Yes, they certainly don't think that there's any
consideration being given to a drastic change in the-MR. MELZER.
In view of that and of the fact that these are
fairly substantial increases in the limits, it might help us--and I
don't know whether you'd be prepared to do this or not--if you were to
indicate that though we never say never this is pretty much an outside
limit at this stage and that to go beyond this really would require
some very careful consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN(?).
Tom, I think it would be
[unintelligible] because the one thing we don't want to do, if we want
to maintain continued presence, is to threaten them. And that could
be perceived as an ultimatum or a threat.
MR. MELZER.

My point--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember, that if push comes to shove,
we will never prevail on this.

-71-

3/27/90

MR. MELZER. Well, I didn't mean it to come across as a
threat. But on the other hand, they may well view this as just that
we had these limits and an FOMC meeting was coming up, so as a
technical matter we approved new limits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.

Oh no, no.

I think that's what the Chairman--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what I'm going to communicate.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

There's no danger of that happening.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [I'm going to communicate that] the
absolute size of what we're beginning to deal with is now getting to
very dangerous levels.
It's beginning to have potential systemic
effects in the Federal Reserve balance sheet; it's beginning to have
potential political effects in the-MR. MELZER. Yes.
And I'm not saying that you should say
that's an outside limit. But to the extent you were comfortable with
it, you could say something to the effect that you're really not sure
what kind of a reaction you would get going back to [the Committee for
That's-more].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

Oh, I can say that.

That might be helpful.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I can raise it in a somewhat uncertain

way.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, could we vote on these separately?
The Exchange Stabilization Fund, it seems to me, is a somewhat
different question than the $25 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We have to vote on these separately.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of Tom Melzer's question,
just based on discussions that I know you've had and one that I've
had, the Treasury--or at least the Secretary of the Treasury--knows
full well about both the policy and philosophical views that are at
this table. Now, they may not know that we have this big fat book in
front of us.
There's no danger--zero--that they would misconstrue
what the Chairman would be saying to them; no danger of that at all.
MR. MELZER.
It might be very helpful in influencing their
behavior if they thought in terms of having this much left and of
operating within that limit. Having managed traders, I know how that
works.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but you were managing them. And
the question is that some part of the law reads [unintelligible] you
have a problem. Are there any other comments?
MR. BOEHNE. Well, just to comment on your overall proposal:
I think it's a reasonable proposal, given the realities of the world

3/27/90

-72-

that we live in.
It may not be as easy for everybody around the table
to digest as they would like, but I think it's reasonable and I'm
supportive of it.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman?
I too would support your
proposal. When I look at the alternatives, it's the only way to go.
But a point of clarification: Governor Johnson posed a question about
our response to concerted intervention and you said you would say "no"
at some point.
I didn't quite understand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No concerted intervention to drive the
dollar down.
In other words-MR. HOSKINS.

As opposed to holding it down?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's getting too subtle.
say that; they just say drive it down.

They don't

MR. FORRESTAL. What I'm really looking for, Mr. Chairman, is
what are the consequences of saying "no"?
What does the Treasury do
then?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would say at that particular
stage I think we would have a confrontation.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Well, I would just make the point that--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I don't think they'd push it at

that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

That's probably right.

I don't see why that needs confrontation.

MR. FORRESTAL. They probably wouldn't push it, but before we
get to that point I think it's very important to think through the
implications for this institution. I think you were implicitly
saying, Mr. Chairman, what a confrontation can mean in terms of what
they do on the Hill. We have enough trouble with people-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On that particular issue they would not
bring it to the Hill because trashing your own currency is something
you never want to go up to the Hill to get-MR. JOHNSON.

Well, I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

That happens to be the one--

We could win that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
bother me.

Exactly.

That's the one issue that would not

MR. FORRESTAL. But in the broader context, what I'm getting
at is that I think for the good of this institution we need to avoid a
confrontation, as you said, that we probably can't win. There are
people who want to put the Secretary of the Treasury on this Board, or
did. You're going to have that throughout. And if we have that kind

-73-

3/27/90

of problem with domestic policy, I think we can throw the foreign
exchange thing in as well if we're in a no-win situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, when I say we'll have a

confrontation I don't mean a big one. We'll have a big dispute and I
think the highly likely occurrence is that they would be unhappy but
they would back down.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Could I make just one other comment?

This is

more of a suggestion. We have been participants in these discussions
about intervention but I don't remember that we've ever had any
discussion like we've had today, which takes into account the
Treasury's feelings about intervention or what's going on at the G-7.
I raise the question: W6uld it be possible for us to have some
systematic discussion at our meetings about the attitude of the
Treasury and maybe some debriefings about G-7 [discussions] to the
extent that that's appropriate?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.

I don't see why not.

I think it would be helpful to get the

flavor--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The debriefing about the G-7 [meetings]
I can promise you; the systematic [unintelligible] sensible list from
the Treasury-MR. JOHNSON. But I can tell you we'll have hearings. There
were hearings over this G-7 exercise last September when the foreign
exchange reserves had built up after that. I had to testify right
after David Mulford and Mulford was roasted in both houses of Congress
over that very issue. So I can tell you on the political front, the
Chairman is right: Taking the position of [not] debauching our
currency is something that we can win every time.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I certainly don't want to put you
in a position of in a sense not having the authority you need to go to
the G-7 or to the Treasury to work [unintelligible].
From the very
beginning on this I've wanted to take actions that strengthen your
hand, not those that cause you to be disempowered. I think that's
very important.

I do believe there's another alternative.

I believe

the first question we need to face is the Exchange Stabilization Fund.
That was created by an act of Congress. Is that true, Virgil?
[MR. MATTINGLY(?)].

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's true, in 1934.

MR. ANGELL. All right. And in a sense there was an
appropriation of money, maybe out of another fund?
MR. TRUMAN.

No, they used the profits from gold sales.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
something?
MR. TRUMAN.

Yes.

[Unintelligible] $4 billion or

3/27/90

-74-

MR. ANGELL. Nevertheless, it was an act of Congress that
made the funds available.
But it's also true is it not, Virgil, that
there is some question in regard [to the warehousing]?
That is, our
engaging in foreign exchange operations is, we believe, something that
we have sound grounds on. As our attorney you can say we can go with
that one.
But you don't know whether we have sound grounds in regard
to the warehousing, do you?
You don't know in a court that we could
win on that one, do you?
MR. MATTINGLY.

Hopefully, it'll never get to a court.

But--

MR. ANGELL. But I want to understand what the constitutional
principles involved here are, or the law.
MR. MATTINGLY. As you know, Governor Angell, the Board's
General Counsel in 1962 issued an opinion with respect to the System's
authority to resume foreign exchange operations.
MR. ANGELL.

No,

SPEAKER(?).

All three.

I'm not talking about operations.

MR. MATTINGLY. It was all three. Warehousing was part of
that opinion; there's no question about that.
That opinion justifies
the warehousing of open market purchases of foreign exchange from the
Treasury. For that purpose the Treasury is in the-I'm
MR. ANGELL. No, I wasn't asking about the history.
I don't know the answer to this
asking you as our General Counsel.
question.
I'm asking you as General Counsel: Is there a reasonable
prospect that if it came to court, that we would win in court?
Or is
there some doubt on the warehousing?
MR. MATTINGLY.
I don't think so.
Again, that's been the
Board's position for 28 years and the Congress has passed a statute
which, in effect--I don't want to put too much emphasis on this-sanctions the System's practice. The statute authorizes the Federal
Reserve to invest the proceeds of its foreign exchange operations in
foreign government bonds and obligations.
It specifically enacted
[this legislation at the] request the Federal Reserve for that
purpose. And it seems to me that that act by the Congress very much
[strengthens] the System's position on this-MR. ANGELL.

But it has never been tested before?

MR. MATTINGLY.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. TRUMAN.
tested before.

It has never been tested, no.

Well,-A lot of things that we do have never been

MR. ANGELL. But my view goes beyond that to say that I
believe the Constitution gives the Congress of the United States the
power to appropriate. I believe for us to do warehousing, which in a
sense removes from Congress this appropriation power, is at best a
[legally] risky proposition.
I know that I've voted in the past for
increasing the warehousing authority, but I didn't know what I was

3/27/90

-75-

doing in voting for such a proposition. But now that I know that in
doing that it eliminates the necessity for the Treasury to go to the
Congress to get an appropriation, I can't do that as a matter of
principle until the courts tell me that we can. Now, the courts told
me on another issue that I thought was an issue but-MR. TRUMAN. I don't want to play lawyer here but it does
strike me that there was one act of Congress that created the Exchange
And [that was] 50
Stabilization Fund and gave it some capital. Okay?
In
some years ago and since then there have been no appropriations.
fact, the appropriations in the meantime have taken some of that
It was used to pay for our IMF
capital away and given it to the IMF.
subscription. Subsequently, [Congress] did give it capital in the
sense that they assigned the holdings of SDRs to the Exchange
Stabilization Fund and at the same time, after a big tussle with the
Federal Reserve, authorized the Exchange Stabilization Fund to be able
to sell us SDR certificates.
So, they already created one area in
which they can expand the balance sheet of the Exchange Stabilization
Fund.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. CROSS.
MR. TRUMAN.

On the SDR certificates?
And gold certificates.
And the gold certificates.

MR. ANGELL. But, you see, I'm worried that the Shadow Open
Market Committee and others are waiting to pounce because when you
hold currencies in the size that we hold them, at some point in time
you're going to have some losses.
MR. TRUMAN.

Yes, but that seems to me--

MR. ANGELL. And I believe that in that atmosphere at some
point in time this is apt to become a political issue. And if it
becomes a political issue, I believe it is incumbent upon us to
protect the Federal Reserve's position, which is not to go around the
Congressional appropriation that other warehousing would tend to do.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but the warehousing is public, the Shadow
Open Market Committee notwithstanding.
It was public at the time that
they passed the Monetary Control Act.
Just because the Shadow Open
Market Committee can't look up in the policy record and see when the
[amounts] have been changed, they have been changed.
It's part of the
policy actions of the Committee.
In fact, it dates back 28 years.
It
strikes me that the notion that the warehousing is a flimsy legal reed
just doesn't [wash].
A different question, which I think the Chairman
has addressed, is the risk to the United States of these large
balances; that is a separate issue.
It certainly is one that the
Treasury Secretary as the chief financial officer of the United States
ought to address in that capacity. And indeed, the Chairman has said
that he plans to raise that even more forcefully than he has in the
past.
MR. ANGELL. But I do not believe that members of the
I do not think that
Appropriations Committee understand this issue.
they know their appropriations power is being subverted by our
warehousing arrangement. And I for one choose to stand in the more

3/27/90

-76-

pure position which is to say if in doubt, let's ask the Treasury to
go to the Congress. And when the Treasury goes to Congress and the
Congress appropriates the funds or if the Congress passes a law saying
[it is appropriate] for us to be warehousing them, then the Federal
Reserve's risk is gone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know what the law will state:
[unintelligible] the Treasury has full unquestioned authority to
execute exchange rate decisions period.
MR. ANGELL. Well, but I don't see that the present
arrangement really has proved superior to that. We either make some
gain here, Mr. Chairman--because if that's what we wish to accomplish,
we would never have ended up with a $45 billion fund if our view had
been very persuasive.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Is your concern about the $45
billion the risk of loss or is it something other than that?
MR. ANGELL. Well, it goes beyond that. The fund has become
so large that it does have a risk; in a sense it puts us in a position
of what I would call speculating in foreign currencies because it goes
beyond what it seems to me is the demonstrated need as a reserve
currency country for us to have this facility [to conduct] our
operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There's a chart or table--I forget
which--in one of the many studies here that indicates, for what it's
worth, that our foreign currency balances relative to our sister
central banks are really quite small.
MR. ANGELL. But, Jerry, we are the reserve currency of the
world and that's quite different than other countries who
[unintelligible] have to look to a dollar exchange standard and
historically held-MR. TRUMAN. The current system really is not that. We were
the reserve currency; the dollar is regarded as that in a certain
sense, but the current monetary system is not built on the Bretton
Woods system where the rest of the world is obligated to defend the
dollar. That's not true anymore.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, I prefer to take the cautious view.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. My views on this issue won't come as any
surprise to you or to the Committee. I was concerned about the level
of both our warehousing and also the Exchange Stabilization Fund when
we hit $10 billion. It may come as a surprise to you that I do have a
pragmatic bone in my body. I am willing to suggest that there is some
level at which we should cooperate with Treasury and be involved.
However, the level has gone beyond the bounds that I'm comfortable
with in either case. I voiced the concerns when we went from $10 to
$12 billion and from $12 to $15 billion and then from $15 to $20
billion or wherever it went along the way. And now we're going to $25
billion. And much the same arguments were made [each] time as to why
we were going up and the necessity of going up. My concerns are that

-77-

3/27/90

we'll be here for the October G-7 meeting and we'll be talking about a
$45 billion Exchange Stabilization Fund limit. And it seems to me
that where this [discussion] started, at least the way I interpreted
Ed Boehne, it's the size of our involvement that attracts the
attention and that we could probably get away with cooperating with
the Treasury at a much lower dollar figure. So, my concerns are in a
sense political concerns [unintelligible] surrounding the sheer size
of what we're getting into and the likelihood of that unless we get
lucky and the dollar goes the other way. I suppose that's not lucky
for some people--sorry, Wayne--that we can wind it down and use that
"stuff," to use Gary's word.
I just think it's a matter of facing up
to it either now or later in terms of the crunch with Treasury.
I
prefer a Treasury/Fed Accord II now rather than down the road when in
some sense we're already implicated in this process of, to use Wayne's
words, appropriations around the Congress. And as Tom Melzer said,
[we are charged with] responsible management of our assets and
accountability to our directors.
So, I am not in favor of increasing
either one at all.
I don't want to tie your hands unnecessarily. I
suppose a way around it would be for some indication that we will wind
this thing down over the course of the next year. But, given what
you've said, I think the Treasury would find that totally unacceptable
and threatening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Lee, all I can tell you is that as
best I can judge the ultimate legal authority is theirs and should
they choose to implement it through the Congress they would probably
effectively put us out of the operation. You may find that
attractive; I frankly don't.
MR. HOSKINS.
I don't find that attractive but what I'm
saying is that we did the $45 or $50 billion and at what point do we
draw the line?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me say this.
All I can do is
employ my best efforts.
I hope we don't get to that position. If we
do, I think we reopen the issue. We'd have to rethink this whole
thing. I think it's premature to do that.
I hope at this particular
stage that we will be able to implement the principles I suggested
here to resolve this issue. But it's not wholly in our hands.
It is
conceivable that this may not resolve the issue; in that case we then
will have to revisit it with different conclusions.
MR. JOHNSON. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask Ted Truman a
technical question on warehousing?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

MR. JOHNSON. In the past has there normally been some sort
of maturity associated with a warehousing instrument, similar to a
swap agreement?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I can only speak for the last 15 years.
When you first did this operation in the late '70s, in 1976-77 in
connection with sterling balances, in the second and third sterling
balances agreement there was a maturity on the arrangement. When we
came to the point where the Carter bonds had been issued and the issue
was how the Treasury was going to hold those proceeds, which initially
were being held pending intervention and later were held pending

3/27/90

-78-

repayment since the Carter bonds were 3 or 3-1/2 year notes, the
Committee eliminated that restriction. So at the moment there is not
that kind of restriction. Speaking only from what I've heard in this
discussion one component of resuming the discussions with the Treasury
would be the question of dealing with the warehousing sooner rather
than later.
And presumably if that were the desire of the Committee,
warehousing of foreign currencies would be dealt with before other
foreign currencies would be dealt with. So, if you used foreign
exchange--as has been done in the past--to pay our next increase of
IMF quotas, it would come out of the warehouse if that were the choice
of the Treasury. And we would certainly have the grounds on which to
insist on it.
We even have the grounds to insist that they redeem SDR
certificates; that's written into the legislation. We can't force
them but we do have the grounds because there is the legislative
history on that point.
So, it's the same type of issue.
But at the
moment there is no maturity. I'm not even sure it makes any sense to
have any maturity unless you wanted to approach the Treasury and say
"Okay, $45 billion is too much and we want to get rid of $10 billion
over the next 10 months."
We could no doubt work out a program in
which we did that.
I'm not sure it would make much sense, but we
could do that.
MR. JOHNSON.

I was just asking what the history was.

MR. TRUMAN. It was taken away when it didn't make sense in
the context of the Carter bonds.
MR. HOSKINS.

Just one more technical question, I guess to

Peter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead.

MR. HOSKINS.
If we increase the warehousing limit to $25
billion and we use it, what do you see in terms of collateral
problems?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that would pretty clearly put us
beyond our ability to collateralize except by looking to the foreign
currency, if we were up by that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Except by what?

We'd collateralize with foreign currency.

MR. STERNLIGHT. By looking to the foreign currency for use
in the collateralization because even at present levels we see-MR. HOSKINS.

The risk.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
--the risk later this year of coming down
to, say, the $3 to $5 billion area of margin.
MR. TRUMAN. So you could argue, if you wanted to raise this
general question with Congress in a nonconfrontational way, that that
in one sense does give you the basis to raise this question.
The
Chairman of the Board made this promise in 19--whatever it was-SPEAKER(?).

1982.

-79-

3/27/90

--in 1982 in connection with [unintelligible].
MR. TRUMAN.
The circumstances have changed; these are why the circumstances have
changed; and this is what we're now going to do. That invites the
Congress to decide whether they're serious about the collateral issue,
which was not a matter of law but rather a matter of procedure,
including Governor Angell's warehousing.
MR. ANGELL.

And yet we would know--

MR. HOSKINS.
We could also use it to argue that we know
right now that we're going to exceed our collateral in terms of the
securities, and we will be going ahead and using collateral in the
near future and that may or may not be acceptable to Congress, so
perhaps we should not do that.
MR. JOHNSON.

How far would the $25

billion put us over,

Peter?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Right now as we look ahead for the rest of
this year, if we don't make use of the foreign currency holdings for
collateralization of the currency, as I said, we would come down to a
margin of $3 to $5 billion.
MR. JOHNSON.

By when would you say?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a couple of low points. We
[project] one low point in late May, another in July, and another in
October; it depends on the ups and downs of the Treasury balances and
reserve requirements.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if we are required to go up and
essentially reverse the Board's official position, it will surface
some of these issues, which would not be all bad.
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes, there's a lot of good to say about it,

MR. ANGELL. Well, yes. But if we're going to surface them,
why don't we surface them before we do it? Why are we waiting until
it's a fait accompli before we surface them?
MR. SYRON. Why wouldn't we want to wait until we reach the
point where there's a reasonable chance that we're going to have--?
MR. HOSKINS.
Because Congress may tell us that it was
completely inappropriate to do that. At this point we're asking for
counsel and advice.
MR. ANGELL. If we have a reasonable chance, it's going to be
on the Exchange Stabilization Fund in the immediate future. If we're
going to ask about it, we better ask them now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it's quite possible that we will
have agreed on raising these limits and that this may be close to the
peak. I just don't rule that out; that is a possibility. And I'd
feel more comfortable up on the Hill if we were up against some real
problems with respect to foreign currency and they asked how this was

happening rather than raise a contingent type of thing.

3/27/90

-80-

MR. MELZER. How are warehoused currencies treated?
a Treasury obligation or is it a foreign currency?
MR. TRUMAN.

MR. CROSS.
MR. TRUMAN.

Is that

Well, it's on our balance sheets.

It's on our balance sheet as foreign currency.
Right.

MR. MELZER. Well, in answering that question on the $25
billion did you presume that it jumped to $15 billion as well or is
that--?
MR. TRUMAN.

It doesn't matter which way it's done the way we

do it.
MR. ANGELL. Now we're claiming that is an open market
operation, as I understand it.
Is that correct?
SPEAKER(?).

Collateralized

[RP].

MR. ANGELL. Is that what we're claiming? So what we're
claiming is that the Exchange Stabilization Fund is a foreign exchange
operation. Now, do we do that on Treasuries? When we buy do we buy
new Treasury issues from the Treasury or do we buy them from--?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Only in exchange for maturing issues.

MR. ANGELL. In exchange for maturing issues. But we never
buy new Treasury issues directly because we're not sure we have the
power to do that kind of an open market operation, is that correct?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. HOSKINS.

We definitely don't have that power.

We don't have the power.

MR. ANGELL. Okay. So, we don't have the power to do that
open market operation and now everyone tells me we do have the power
to do this operation because we've done it in the past and nobody's
caught us on it?
MR. CROSS.
MR. HOSKINS.
Treasuries!
MR. ANGELL.
MR. HOSKINS.
you're right.

It's not a Treasury issue.
See, that's the answer: they're not called
But it's not open market operations.
Yes, but the principle is the same, so I think

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Unintelligible.]

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think all of this business with the
collateral is really rather fortuitous because we agreed that if there
were a confrontation between the Treasury and the Fed that the
Treasury would win. In fact, we promised the Congress in the '70s
that we would be supporting it.

-81-

3/27/90

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE.
[We] also promised the Congress that before we
use foreign exchange as collateral, we'll let them know. And at the
right moment we'll let them know and it seems to me that we will air
the whole issue. We've kept our word on both and now we can air it
If we get turned
and it's aired in a way that's not confrontational.
down, that's not all bad.
MR. ANGELL. Well, Ed, I'm not seeking a confrontation with
the Treasury.
I simply want the Treasury to go to the Congress and
get the appropriation power.
I don't agree with the rest of you who
have opinions about the political outcome as to what the political
outcome will be.
MR. BOEHNE. My concern about that, Wayne, would be that the
Treasury won't do that.
MR. ANGELL.

Of course they won't do that.

MR. BOEHNE. They won't do that and, in effect, that gets us
to the same point. And we don't have to try to get them to do
something they're not going to do anyway.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You may not seek confrontation with
that, but it will create confrontation. That's very unfortunate since
we--

MR. ANGELL. Well, the Treasury is not going to go to
Congress over this issue.
I feel certain they will not.
MR. JOHNSON. The thought of holding Argentine australs as
collateral against the dollar--well, who can say?
Eventually, one day
it might be-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

We can

[unintelligible]

it now.

But who knows in 10 years.

MR. TRUMAN. The Committee has to take a separate vote to
warehouse Argentine australs.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I now ask that Sam consider
[formulating] two appropriate motions that effectively would read in
principle: (1) that should a question occur we would expand the
warehousing limit up to $15 billion; and (2) that we would raise the
System's open position to fund that. The third issue, which is
basically best efforts on my part, I assume does not require a vote.
Is that correct?
MR. BOEHNE.
important part.
MR. JOHNSON.

It does not require a vote, but it's the most

It's the most important part of--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
favor, right?

What I meant by that is: Everyone is in

3/27/90

-82-

MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, to go ahead with the
unimportant parts of the resolution, I would recommend that the
authorization for the System's [overall open position in foreign
currency] balances be increased from the present level of $21 billion
to $25 billion effective immediately, because we do have interest
earnings that come in all the time on these balances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that motion, please?

Would a member of the Committee make

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

I will make the motion.

All in favor say "aye."

Aye.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. ANGELL.

Opposed?

Nay.
No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We have two nays?

SPEAKER(?).

That's all I counted.

SPEAKER(?).

Three.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.

Three.

Do we want a roll call on this?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think so.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Let's take a roll call.

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Would you now formulate--

MR. CROSS.
Similarly, Mr. Chairman, I would request that the
Committee express an agreement in principle to accept a further
request from the Treasury for additional warehousing authority and to
raise the present limit on that from $10 billion to $15 billion.

-83-

3/27/90

MR. TRUMAN.

It's up to them; they may ask for less.

Yes.
That's the upper limit, which would be
MR. CROSS.
raised from the present $10 billion, of which $9 billion has been
drawn, to $15 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Will a member--

An extension of that limit--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
motion, please?

Will a Committee member make that

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

I'll move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Seger
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Three [dissents]

on each.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I can't believe this, but this brings us
to the end of this meeting! However,--

MR. HOSKINS.

I have a question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You do?

MR. HOSKINS. We did the first one; there are three other
[questions] on the [the list].
MR. CROSS.

Four of them; you didn't read page 2.

MR. HOSKINS. There are a number of issues that Ted raised
that I didn't think we addressed. Are we going to come back to them
at some other date or--?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I guess we could. There's no reason we
can't do it at luncheon. Would the Committee want to continue that at
the luncheon of the next meeting?

3/27/90

-84-

MR. BOEHNE. With all due respect, I think we've milked this
one for a while. I think we have [addressed] those other questions
implicitly. We talked about what the implications are for domestic
policy; you've already agreed to keep us informed about G-7 meetings;
and there's the other one-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest this. I will at the
luncheon of the next meeting report on the G-7 meeting. And if you
wish to bring up those collateral issues at that time-MR. BOYKIN.

I don't think we have a luncheon.

MR. TRUMAN. If I may
Chairman: I would suggest that
held very shortly, on April 7,
substantive, you might want to
report on the G-7 meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

be allowed to advise you in public, Mr.
since the [G-7] meeting is going to be
if there is anything even remotely
have a telephone conference at least to

Well, no.

Suppose it's nonsubstantive?

MR. TRUMAN. We'll have Norm call everybody up and say there
is nothing [substantive to report].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we leave that issue open? If
there's a substantive question, we'll have a telephone conference; if
not, I will try to review it at the next luncheon. We can come in and
have lunch first.
END OF MEETING

