October 24-25, 2006

1 of 203

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 24-25, 2006
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 2:00 p.m. on Tuesday,
October 24, 2006, and continuing at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, October 25, 2006. Those present
were the following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Bies
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Lacker
Mr. Mishkin
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Yellen
Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Minehan, Messrs. Moskow and Poole, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Eisenbeis, Judd, Kamin, Madigan, Sniderman, Struckmeyer, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. English and Slifman, Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and
Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors
Messrs. Gagnon and Wascher, Deputy Associate Directors, Divisions of International
Finance and Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors

October 24-25, 2006

2 of 203

Messrs. Dale and Oliner, Senior Advisers, Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research
and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors.
Ms. Weinbach, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Kumasaka¹ and Luecke,² Senior Financial Analysts, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston and Dallas, respectively
Mr. Evans, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rasche and Sellon, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Chicago, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Kansas City, respectively
Ms. Mucciolo and Mr. Todd, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
Minneapolis, respectively
Ms. McConnell, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.
² Attended Wednesday’s session only.

October 24-25, 2006

3 of 203

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
October 24-25, 2006
October 24, 2006—Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon. Let me start by welcoming Pat Barron,
First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, who will be here in Jack Guynn’s
seat for today.
MR. BARRON. Thanks. It’s good to be here.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Welcome. I have a bit of business to start with before we
go to Dino. Last month the Congress passed, and the President signed, the Financial Services
Regulatory Relief Act, which had a number of measures in it. Included among them were
provisions that allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserves and to reduce reserve
requirements at our discretion. The act potentially has a lot of very important implications for
the conduct of monetary policy, for payment systems, for contractual clearing balances, for data
collection, and so on. Because of budget-scoring rules, the provisions of this act will not take
place until October 2011. So I feel that, if we hurry, we can possibly be prepared in time.
[Laughter] So if the group is amenable, I’d like to ask Vincent Reinhart to form a committee of
senior staff around the System to begin talking about these issues. I assume at various intervals
we’ll have reports and some discussions at the FOMC meeting about these issues. Do I hear any
second?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Dino Kos.
MR. KOS. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to the charts that were
distributed, and I will divide my comments into two parts. First, a slimmed-down
report on market developments in the intermeeting period, and then I’ll touch on the
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

October 24-25, 2006

4 of 203

highlights of the memo I circulated last week regarding management of the System
Open Market Account.
The short intermeeting period was relatively calm. Hence, volatility remains low
and credit spreads tight, while some equity indexes rose to multiyear highs.
Occasional rumors that a large hedge fund lost significant amounts of money betting
that yields would rise did not dent the underlying sense of confidence or relative
tranquility. On the first page of the handout, the top panel graphs the three-month
deposit rate and the same rate three, nine, and fifteen months forward. The
longer-dated forwards—as reflected by the solid red line—have declined more than
75 basis points from early summer to early October as market participants priced in
an easing of policy for early 2007. Those expectations were heightened as GDP
forecasts for the third quarter were consistently trimmed downward. But having
pushed forward rates too far, market participants were poorly positioned for the
reversal in past few weeks after a surprising Philadelphia Fed survey and comments
by Governor Kohn and other Committee members were interpreted as suggesting that
policy would not likely be eased on the trajectory that markets had built in.
Longer-dated forward rates still anticipate an ease late next year, but the magnitude of
that easing has been scaled back. Longer-term Treasury yields show a similar
pattern, as indicated in the middle panel. The yield curve remains inverted, though
less than it was a month ago. With credit spreads remaining tight and credit quality
favorable, there has been less agitation in markets that the inverted curve is sending a
recessionary signal. Meanwhile, breakeven inflation rates from TIPS paint a
favorable picture, especially at short maturities given the fall in energy prices. As
shown in the bottom panel, the five-year breakeven continued to narrow, to about
2.10 percent, and has now contracted more than 50 basis points in less than three
months. Longer-term maturities, which are less affected by short-run energy price
moves, had less of a decline, as shown by the ten-year maturity. Meanwhile the
five-year rate five years forward—the red line—is little changed from the last FOMC
meeting.
The prospect that policy rates may have peaked plus falling oil prices supported
equity prices and trumped adverse factors such as evidence that economic growth had
slowed. As shown in the top left panel on page 2, the Dow Jones Industrial Average
finally pierced the 12,000 level to a new record high. Other major indexes, such as
the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq—as shown in the top right panel—also rose, though
they remain some distance from their record highs. One feature of the equity markets
since the tightening cycle began has been the outperformance of so-called value
stocks, as shown in the middle left panel. When economic growth is strong, value
stocks—represented by the larger cyclical companies—tend to do better because their
earnings are stimulated by the strong economy. But since early August, coincident
with the pause in policy tightening, the growth stocks have begun to outperform. One
interpretation is that, with economic growth slowing, the effect is biggest on cyclical
companies, whose margins compress, whereas growth stocks are better able to
maintain margins. Another interpretation is that the equity markets are also pricing in

October 24-25, 2006

5 of 203

a peak in the tightening cycle on the theory that the Committee will not tighten into a
slowing economy.
Finally, this generally benign picture is also reflected in the foreign exchange
market. The bottom panel graphs the dollar against a range of currencies since the
last FOMC meeting. None of these currencies moved more than 2 percent in either
direction, and most are clustered within a band of 1 percent. For what it’s worth, the
currencies that appreciated tended to be higher-yielding currencies. This pattern
tends to support anecdotal reports that, in the absence of directional opportunities,
carry trades continue to attract speculative flows.
Switching gears somewhat, I want to summarize the main points of the memo that
I sent to the Committee last week about the domestic portfolio guidelines. The last
time that we systematically looked at the portfolio was in 1996. We looked at it again
in 2000 and 2001 in the context of considering alternative assets given that the
Treasury market was shrinking and the Committee was faced with the prospect of
acquiring private-sector assets. The table on the right side of page 3 provides a recent
snapshot of the System Open Market Account. Given the amount of time that has
elapsed and the changed environment, we thought it would be timely to refresh our
analysis and assess whether the principles we had been using to manage the SOMA
portfolio still made sense. Indeed, we concluded that the four principles identified
previously—safety, liquidity, market neutrality, and return—remain appropriate given
the objectives for SOMA.
Safety is the bedrock of a central bank balance sheet, and its importance is
uncontroversial. The Committee has achieved the goals embedded in this principle
by maintaining a portfolio of Treasury securities with no credit risk. For years
SOMA also held smaller amounts of agency and GSE (government-sponsored
enterprise) securities, but these were allowed to roll off. The last GSE security in
SOMA matured in 2003.
Somewhat more complicated is liquidity. The Committee has discussed liquidity
at various times in the past two decades. In practical terms, the issue is how fast the
Desk can offset a reserve-adding event, such as a large discount window loan or a
large foreign exchange intervention. Our view is that the critical period for such
operations is the short run. Longer-term sterilizations will likely be slow and can be
managed in the normal course of reserve management operations. As the memo
describes—so I will not go into detail—our conclusion is that it is prudent to add a
second limit or guideline of $80 billion of liquid assets over a three-month period
while keeping the current $208 billion limit over a twelve-month period. In practice,
as shown in the bottom chart on page 3, SOMA maintains liquidity from maturing
bills, coupons, and repos far beyond these minimums—a feature we will continue.
Additionally, the Desk has other tools if needed in extremis, as shown on the left side.
These include the ability to conduct reverse repos and, as a last resort, outright sales.

October 24-25, 2006

6 of 203

The third principle is market neutrality, if you would turn to the next page. This
is also somewhat complicated. This issue is, in many ways, simpler now than it was
six years ago, when the stock of Treasuries was declining. At that time, we adopted a
per issue limit structure, which is summarized in the top right panel of page 4. In
short, per issue limits of 35 percent were adopted for bills, which gradually declined
to 15 percent for bonds. The blue bars represent SOMA’s holdings for each specific
security. This response was reasonable given the environment in 2000. However, the
limit structure has, in recent years, created situations in which we have had forced
redemptions to stay within these limits, which in turn forces us to make additional
outright purchases to offset those maturing assets. We are therefore proposing to
revert to an informal flat limit structure of 35 percent for all maturities. I should note
that this change would, in reality, have a very limited effect on the portfolio given
other restrictions that we have, and which I’ll get to later. At the margin it might
allow us to reduce our huge reliance on holdings at the short end of the curve. We are
somewhat underrepresented in the middle of the curve.
An associated issue I wanted to raise is SOMA’s auction participation. Our
participation can be highly variable. There are two factors that we cannot control.
First, the Treasury’s auction calendar is itself variable and dependent on fiscal needs.
Second, the Desk cannot participate in auctions unless it has securities maturing that
very day. The middle right panel shows this variability. The yellow box highlights
SOMA’s anticipated participation for the three-year note in the next three refundings.
We anticipate taking down $6.1 billion in November, $1.5 billion in February, and
then $6.0 billion in May. Why is this important given that we are an add-on in the
auctions? The Fed’s holdings are part of the floating supply, which can influence the
way an issue trades in the repo market. This can, I hope, be seen in the bottom panel.
Our participation in the five-year note went from quarterly participation to monthly
when the Treasury shifted from a mid-month settlement to a month-end settlement.
SOMA’s participation is the green bar. The change allowed us to smooth out our
participation because we had large amounts of two-year notes maturing at month end.
The black line represents the specialness spread in the repo market for each issue.
Note that this spread has been much smaller in recent months, when SOMA’s
holdings have been both steady and available to be lent. Our preference for steady
and consistent auction participation is, however, constrained by restrictions on how
we invest maturing proceeds and, of course, by changes the Treasury makes to the
auction calendar. In short, we are likely to continue to wrestle with this principle for
some time.
The last principle very briefly is return. In our view, this principle should not
drive the way SOMA is managed, given that our profits are derived from interest on
our Treasury holdings and in turn flow back to the Treasury.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations during this period, and I will need
a vote to approve domestic operations. Helen and I would be happy to answer any
questions.

October 24-25, 2006

7 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there questions? I see none. Do I have a motion?
GOVERNOR KOHN. So moved.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The motion is passed without objection. Thank you very
much. We’ll turn now to the economic situation. Dave Stockton.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. About a week ago, as we were
closing the forecast, I was marveling at how little it had changed over the
intermeeting period—both the broad strokes and the details. But the warm glow of
accomplishment had barely been kindled when a glance at my desk calendar revealed
the source of our success. The last FOMC meeting had been only five weeks ago, so
we simply had not had time to accumulate our usual backlog of forecasting errors.
[Laughter]
I recognize that even this assertion is open to some challenge. Because of the
incoming data, we have revised down our estimate of third-quarter growth of real
GDP about ¾ percentage point, to an annual pace of just 1 percent. However, we
don’t think this downward revision carries with it much, if any, macroeconomic
signal about greater weakness going forward. Importantly, consumption, housing,
and business fixed investment all came in very close to our September forecast. The
downside surprises that we experienced last quarter were concentrated in motor
vehicle production, defense spending, and net exports. In each case, we believe some
good reasons exist for anticipating that these sources of restraint will abate or reverse
in the fourth quarter. With regard to motor vehicles, the production cuts needed to
deal with the inventory overhang that developed last spring have been larger and have
come more quickly than we had expected. As a consequence, the drop in motor
vehicle output took a bigger bite out of growth in the third quarter and is now
expected to be a roughly neutral factor for growth in the current quarter, rather than
being a small drag on growth in both quarters. Defense spending also fell far short of
our expectations last quarter, but we expect these outlays to rebound in the fourth
quarter to a level more in line with defense appropriations. Finally, imports are
estimated to have surged in the third quarter more than seems warranted by the
fundamentals and, as best we can tell, without a full offset in other components of
spending. Karen and her team expect some of that import surprise to be unwound in
the fourth quarter, providing a small plus to estimated growth. All told, we are
projecting the growth of real GDP to rebound to a pace of 2¼ percent in the fourth
quarter. For the second half, output is anticipated to grow at an annual rate of 1½
percent, a forecast not much different from the one in September.
We also have made only minor adjustments to our longer-term GDP forecast. By
our assessment, lower oil prices and a stronger stock market more than offset the
effects of a slightly higher dollar and a bit weaker trajectory for house prices. All

October 24-25, 2006

8 of 203

told, we revised up our forecast for the growth of real GDP 0.1 percent in both 2007
and 2008, to 2.2 and 2.5 percent respectively. Basically, the general contour of the
forecast is the same as in September. As before, the very subdued pace of the
expansion that is projected for the second half of this year results principally from a
sharp contraction in residential investment that directly subtracts more than 1¼
percentage points from the growth of real GDP. Residential investment continues to
contract next year, though that contraction gradually diminishes. In addition, the drag
on spending and activity from the run-up in energy prices that has occurred, on net,
over the past three years is expected to lessen considerably from this year to the next.
The attenuation of the drags from housing and energy alone would result in a
prompter return of growth to potential. However, we expect the housing slump to
restrain the growth of real output this year and next through wealth effects and
multiplier-accelerator influences. Most notably, house prices are projected to about
flatten out; and as the impetus from past house appreciation wanes, consumption
growth should slow, and the saving rate should begin to edge up. With its usual lag,
the overall deceleration in output, income, and sales further damps consumption and
business investment. As a consequence, growth remains slightly below potential in
2007, and the output gap edges up to roughly ½ percent of GDP by the end of the
year. With the bulk of the direct and indirect effects of the housing slump expected to
have largely played out by then, real GDP growth is expected to expand in line with
its potential in 2008. Meanwhile, core PCE price inflation, which is currently running
a bit less than 2½ percent, edges down to about 2 percent in 2008. The opening up of
a small output gap helps to head off an intensification of inflation pressures. But by
far the most potent influences are the diminishing upward pressures from prices for
energy, non-energy imports, and other commodities.
Because this basic story is virtually unchanged from the September Greenbook
and because we had relatively few surprises to deal with in the forecast, I thought that
I would dispense with a further explication of the contours of the forecast. Instead,
I=ll offer you a scorecard of sorts to help you audit the plausibility of the forecast
story in light of data that we will be receiving in coming months.
Let me start with housing, because as I noted a moment ago, the recent and
projected contraction in residential investment is the principal source of the
below-trend growth that we are projecting over the next year. For that story to be on
track, housing starts will need to drop sharply further by the end of the year.
Single-family starts averaged about 1.4 million units in the third quarter, and in our
forecast, we are anticipating a further 12 percent decline, to a pace of 1¼ million units
this quarter. We read the incoming data as being consistent with that outlook.
Although starts bounced up in September, permits—a less noisy indicator of housing
activity—continued to plunge. Moreover, inventories of unsold homes remain at a
very high level, and sales cancellations have continued to increase. But after a long
period of what seemed to be unrelentingly bad news, the housing data received over
the intermeeting period could be fairly characterized as more mixed. Sales of new
and existing homes firmed a bit in late summer, the index of pending home sales
moved up in August, and homebuying attitudes as measured in the Michigan survey

October 24-25, 2006

9 of 203

jumped up in September and October. Although it is far too early to conclude that
these indicators are pointing to stabilization in housing markets, they provide at least
some encouragement to the view that the bottom may now be closer than the top. We
will also be scrutinizing the information on house prices. Another reading on the
OFHEO (Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight) price index will become
available in early December before the next meeting. Here we will be looking for
another noticeable step-down in the rate of house-price appreciation, from the
5 percent pace posted in the second quarter to a projected 1¾ percent pace in the
third. That forecast is roughly consistent with our near-term forecasting models that
make use of the information in the Case-Shiller price indexes and other
high-frequency measures of home prices. As you know, we are not forecasting the
national average of house prices to drop, but our very low projected rate of
house-price appreciation implies that a substantial fraction of households will be
experiencing outright declines.
Consumption will be the second major area that should be monitored, in part
because we are expecting the slowing in house prices to show through here. In brief,
we will be looking for a continuation in coming months of the moderate increases in
consumer spending that we have observed since the spring. Over the past half year,
consumer spending excluding motor vehicles has been increasing at a pace of roughly
2¾ to 3 percent, and we are expecting more of the same in coming months. That
relatively steady expected growth reflects some crosscurrents that seem likely to be at
work. Real income gains should be bolstered by the recent fall in energy prices and
continuing, albeit modest, gains in employment. But the lagged effects of higher
borrowing costs and an ebbing of positive wealth effects from housing are expected
to hold spending below the gains in income and result in a slight upward tilt to the
saving rate. Obviously, given the importance of consumption in overall aggregate
demand, developments here will have a critical bearing on the probability of
achieving our projected soft landing. A snap-back in consumer spending in coming
months—an outcome that seems to underlie some of the outside forecasts that are
stronger than ours—might lead to no landing rather than a soft landing. In contrast,
any serious faltering of consumer spending is “buckle the seat belts and assume the
crash position.”
The third major development that we will be looking for is another sustained stepdown in the pace of employment growth. Slower employment growth is a key link in
the multiplier mechanism through which the housing-induced slowdown in aggregate
output and spending propagates forward into below-trend growth next year. We
correctly anticipated the first leg of that slowing earlier this year, when average gains
in nonfarm payrolls dropped from the 200,000 per month pace of the preceding
several years to the roughly 120,000 per month pace observed since the spring. But
our projection anticipates a further slowing in the fourth quarter to an average pace of
about 75,000 per month. To be sure, the increase in September was just 51,000, but
that came on the heels of a gain in August of 188,000, so we wouldn’t want to lean
too heavily on the September observation for support. Moreover, if asked to present
just one piece of evidence that casts the greatest doubt on the staff projection at

October 24-25, 2006

10 of 203

present, I would point to initial claims for unemployment insurance. Claims have
basically been moving sideways in recent months and provide no indication that a
further softening in labor markets is under way. Given the looseness of the
relationship, our forecast of payroll employment is not inconsistent with the current
level of initial claims, but right now this important piece of our forecast seems to have
more upside risk than downside risk.
The fourth element of our forecast that we will be looking for in coming months
is some signs of slowing in business fixed investment. Of course, the accelerator
consequences for equipment spending of the slowing we now think is under way in
aggregate demand is really a story for 2007, and given the volatility in the data, it will
take some time to detect that slowing when, or if, it occurs. But more immediately,
we are expecting to see some slowing in nonresidential construction from the
20 percent pace that we’ve experienced over the past half year to something closer to
a 10 percent pace in coming quarters, thus providing less offset to the weakness in
residential construction than has been the case thus far this year. With energy prices
leveling out, the upward impetus from drilling and mining activity seems likely to
gradually abate. Outside drilling and mining, smaller employment gains, slower
growth of manufacturing output, and still-high vacancy rates suggest to us that this
sector will cool somewhat going forward.
The final item on the scorecard is inflation. We are going to be looking for core
PCE prices to continue to increase an average of about 0.2 percent per month for the
remainder of the year, with core CPI running between 0.2 and 0.3 percent per month.
Those increases would be higher than in most recent years but lower than the pace
observed last spring. Moreover, some of the key factors that underlie our projection
of a gradual slowing of core inflation over the projection period now seem to be
falling into place. After nearly three years of persistent upside surprise, oil and other
energy prices have dropped noticeably from the levels of late summer. If these recent
developments hold, the cost pressures from rising energy prices should ease over
time. Moreover, the sharp increases in residential rent that occurred in the spring
appear to have simmered down of late, and we are expecting that pattern to continue
in coming months. Meanwhile, most of the major measures of inflation expectations
that we monitor have continued to fluctuate in a reasonably narrow range, and we
expect that to remain the case going forward.
I am tempted to say that, armed with this scorecard, you will arrive at the
December meeting with a clear idea of how the staff forecast has stood up to the
incoming data. But of course, we all know how the story goes. Much like the
cliffhanger serial movies of the 1930s, the promise appears to be that, if you come
back next time, all the current problems will be resolved. However, given rational
expectations, you know that, to the extent any problems are resolved over the
intermeeting period, they will simply be replaced by a new set of puzzles and perils.
Karen will continue our presentation.

October 24-25, 2006

11 of 203

MS. JOHNSON. Once again I find myself reporting to you that movements in
global oil prices are among the developments during the intermeeting period that
were factors in our deliberations about the external sector. Global crude oil spot and
futures prices fell further following our September projection but by differing
amounts over the maturity spectrum. When we finalized the current baseline forecast,
spot prices and very near term futures prices had moved down more than $4 per
barrel; futures contracts that mature at the end of 2007 had recorded price declines of
about $2; those maturing at the end of 2008 had price declines of about 50 cents.
Indeed, for contracts maturing beyond 2009, prices actually rose such that the
far-dated contract for December 2012 had moved up about $1 per barrel in price. We
adjusted our projection for U.S. oil import prices by amounts similar to these changes
in futures prices. The differential movement in prices implies that, even though
prices have moved down all along the path through the forecast period, this path now
slopes up more steeply than it previously did. So our outlook is for oil prices to rise
rather sharply over the forecast period, although from a lower starting point than in
the September Greenbook. The reasons for the additional decline in prices during
September and October include the return of production to near previous rates at
Prudhoe Bay, the absence of any sign of late-season hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico,
and awareness of current high inventory levels. These inventories are by their very
nature transitory; hence, market participants seem to believe that some of the current
abundant supply will diminish over time, leaving limited spare production capacity
and chronic risks to production in Nigeria, Iran, Iraq, and elsewhere. Late last week,
OPEC announced production cuts of 1.2 million barrels per day as of November 1.
Although the size of actual cuts by individual OPEC suppliers remains to be seen, we
judge that significant cuts, albeit not as large as those announced, are needed for
prospective demand to be consistent with prices in the futures curve. Those prices
remain elevated—around the levels expected at the start of this year.
We again asked ourselves how the substantial drop in oil prices since their August
peak matters for the U.S. economy. As Dave mentioned, some of the near-term
variance in U.S. real GDP growth reflects the path of real imports, including oil
imports. The nominal trade deficit is clearly narrowed as a consequence of lower oil
prices. We expect that the average oil bill in the fourth quarter will show an
improvement from the third quarter of $60 billion at an annual rate. The net trade
balance on nominal goods and services will improve by just about the same amount
as other trade components experience small, offsetting changes. As oil prices rise
going forward, the nominal value of oil imports should move back up; but for 2007 as
a whole, we expect that the total figure will be about the same as the total for this
year, followed by a moderate increase in 2008.
With respect to our forecast for exports, we again expect that real exports of
goods and services will expand at an annual rate of about 4½ percent through early
2008 and then will accelerate slightly, to about 5 percent, over the second half of
2008. We see this pace of export growth as reflecting moderately strong growth of
trade in both services and merchandise. These components in turn reflect solid
average growth of around 3¼ percent in foreign real GDP. The projected

October 24-25, 2006

12 of 203

acceleration in real exports in 2008 reflects a boost from relative prices as U.S. export
price inflation moderates. This projected pace of export growth is somewhat below
that observed in recent years, particularly in the first half of this year. To some
extent, the double-digit growth of U.S. real exports early this year reflected rapid real
GDP growth abroad at that time. But our models cannot explain all the strong
growth, and a sizable positive residual has emerged in our model. During the first
quarter, exceptionally rapid growth of real GDP was widespread abroad as most
industrial countries and many emerging-market economies in both Asia and Latin
America recorded particularly robust real expansion.
The rapid growth moved many foreign economies closer to potential and was not
sustainable over the long run. We read recent indicators of activity abroad as
generally confirming our expectation that slowing from those very rapid rates would
occur through the year. According to the data, among the industrial countries,
Canada and Japan have GDP already decelerating in the second quarter. In contrast,
the pace of expansion strengthened in the euro area; but with further tightening of
monetary policy and an increase in the value-added tax in Germany to take effect at
the start of next year, our outlook calls for a slowdown in growth there as well. For
the emerging-market economies, the most important news is Chinese third-quarter
real GDP growth, announced just after the Greenbook was distributed. Based on the
data and our best estimate of a seasonally adjusted series for the level of Chinese
GDP, real growth in China was at an annual rate of about 5½ percent in the third
quarter from the second quarter, following two quarters of growth above 12 percent.
These data are only approximate as they are inferred from the annual growth rates
published by the Chinese authorities. However, it does seem clear that the measures
implemented by Chinese officials to cool the economy have had some effect. We are
projecting that growth going forward will return to rates between 8 and 8½ percent.
Of course, the band of uncertainty around this forecast is significant. We judge
growth at that pace to be consistent with Chinese potential and acceptable to Chinese
officials. This picture of real output growth abroad is a benign soft landing. We are
projecting slowing that does not overshoot in many foreign economies, including
importantly the euro area, Japan, and China. We believe that domestic demand
growth in Canada, Japan, the euro area, and Mexico will continue to sustain their
domestic expansions and growth in the global economy and will underlie ongoing
moderate strength in U.S. exports.
With respect to the current quarter, trade data for August surprised us with the
strength of exports and led us to revise up by more than 2½ percentage points our
estimate of the annual rate of growth of real exports in the third quarter. The surprise
was widespread across categories of merchandise trade other than computers and
semiconductors and included strong exports to most of our trading partners, with the
important exceptions of Canada and Mexico. With no special stories or specific
components of interest, we have projected that real export growth will revert to its
historical relationship with foreign output and relative prices. However, the positive
surprise in August reminds us that there is upside risk to our forecast for real exports
as well as downside risk should foreign growth slow more than expected. Real

October 24-25, 2006

13 of 203

merchandise imports in August came in above our expectation as well. We have
accommodated that surprise in part by reducing real imports projected for the fourth
quarter, particularly real oil imports.
All in all, our baseline forecast for the combined contribution of imports and
exports to U.S. GDP growth over the forecast period is for a small negative effect
during the second half of this year that becomes slightly more negative through the
second half of 2008, reaching about 0.4 percentage point as strengthening U.S. real
GDP growth boosts import growth above that for exports. David and I will be happy
to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. Are there questions? President
Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question for David, and it concerns
the Greenbook alternative scenarios and the morals we should draw from them concerning the
Committee’s ability to affect inflation. The Greenbook this time had two scenarios showing how
the forecast would be affected by shocks to aggregate demand. One was a stronger demand
scenario; the other a housing correction with spillovers. Demand, of course, is much weaker in
that second scenario. In both of them, unemployment by the end of 2008 deviates markedly
from baseline, but even so there is virtually no effect on core inflation. It falls just 0.1 percent by
the end of 2008 in the negative housing shock scenario, even though unemployment rises to
6 percent. When I actually took a magnifying glass to the panel on page I-21 to look at the core
inflation paths, the shocks appeared actually to have a perverse effect on core inflation. The
housing correction shock has a perverse effect on core inflation in mid-2007, with inflation
actually up in the weak demand scenario and down a bit in the case where demand strengthens.
Now, I scratched my head and asked myself if I could I invent a reason that this might
occur. My thoughts went to possible repercussions on the exchange rate that might have an
inflationary effect. But my trusty staff told me that it might be something else entirely—namely,
the way inflation expectations are modeled in FRB/US. They told me that inflation expectations

October 24-25, 2006

14 of 203

in these simulations aren’t much affected by any movement in unemployment with shocks like
this because implicitly those forming inflation expectations take the shock to be transitory. But
expectations are perturbed, and perversely so, by the reaction of the Fed to the shocks. In other
words, the Taylor rule type response that’s embodied in the scenarios has the Fed lowering the
fed funds rate to address economic weakness following a downside housing shock. My staff tells
me that the Fed’s cut to address the weakness then raises expected inflation, which passes
through into inflation in these scenarios, and that’s why we get a stronger housing correction
perversely raising inflation.
Would you comment generally on this? Do I have the correct understanding of how it
works? If I do, do these simulations give an unduly pessimistic assessment of the effect of
aggregate demand shocks both on inflation and on our Committee’s ability to affect inflation
through policy? Is it plausible to assume in your view that easier monetary policy has this direct
effect on inflation expectations, even when all it’s doing is offsetting a demand shock?
MR. STOCKTON. I think, actually, your first story was the more potent one in
offsetting these effects—that we’d have an exchange rate response to the monetary policy effect.
Now, there is a small change in inflation expectations in response to your doing something the
markets don’t expect you to do given the macroeconomic outcomes. The markets lean in a
direction in terms of inflation expectations, and if they see you easing significantly, they’re
confused as to whether that might say something about your inflation objective being higher.
MS. YELLEN. Even when there are negative demand shocks and even though
unemployment is rising?
MR. STOCKTON. That is part of it—yes. Obviously, the question is whether they see
those shocks as well.

October 24-25, 2006

15 of 203

MS. YELLEN. They would see unemployment rising.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, they don’t see that. The unemployment effects do take a while
to begin to develop. All these things happen very slowly. If something is perverse here, it is that
we’re showing too short a time frame for the effects to actually play out. With an output gap
opening up, we would obviously expect in this model that eventually there would be downward
pressure on inflation in the housing scenario and upward pressure in the stronger demand
scenario. So there’s nothing unstable about the model or something that works in the wrong
direction over the longer haul.
But as you know, inflation is so inertial in the basic structure of the model that those
effects don’t really show through and, because these shocks typically are relatively slow, they
tend to get offset in the near term by exchange rate movements in particular but by some
movement in inflation expectations as well. So I don’t think that’s necessarily a flaw of the
model, but I do think it’s probably a flaw in the short time frame that we show for these
alternative scenarios, where most of the interesting effects on inflation, if you think it takes as
long as the model does, are typically happening beyond the horizon that we’re showing here.
That gets back to an issue that Governor Mishkin raised last time about wanting to look a little
further down the road to actually see the response of inflation. Now, that doesn’t mean that the
model has got it right in terms of how persistent or inertial inflation is. I think reasonable men
and women could come to different views about that. But I don’t think there’s something
perverse in the underlying structure of the model.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dave, I want to ask you a question about
residential housing markets and the effect of this slowdown that we’ve seen on the prices of

October 24-25, 2006

16 of 203

housing. As you mentioned in your comments, we’ve seen the rate of increase slow. In one of
the alternative simulations, you actually plugged in a major reduction in housing prices. Are you
aware of any empirical work that has been done, or have you done any work to show us what the
time lags would be here that we could expect to see from the drop in housing to some effect on
housing prices going forward?
MR. STOCKTON. A little work has been done in this area, but it’s a bit like modeling
the stock market. You wouldn’t take it very seriously in the sense that these are asset markets
and they’re sometimes moving in ways that are very difficult to model on the basis of, for
example, fundamentals—especially in a period when, by our assessment, prices have moved up
significantly above what we think can be justified in terms of interest rates and rents. So now we
have a situation in which that asset price misalignment is projected in our forecast to just barely
begin to unwind but we’re really uncertain about what the timing of that process is going to be.
One of the reasons we wanted to show the alternative simulation is that we’ve taken a fairly
conservative approach here. Our slowdown in the growth rate of house prices, to roughly 1½ to
1¾ percentage points over the next two years, doesn’t make a big dent—if you remember from
the briefing that we did one and a half years ago—in the price-to-rent ratio, which we plotted
there and showed that that had increased very significantly.
So our best guess is that, as in the past, those nominal prices will flatten out rather than
actually decline. But the run-up was so large that we couldn’t rule out this time around that the
adjustment of house prices could be more significant and more rapid than in the past. But I don’t
know of any reliable empirical model or evidence. We’ve certainly done our share of work in
modeling those house prices, and I know our colleagues at the New York Fed have as well.
There’s a lot of controversy about whether there even is an asset price misalignment, much less,

October 24-25, 2006

17 of 203

if there is, how it will unwind. So I don’t have a lot to offer you there, except that we’re going to
try to present you with the range of possible outcomes in the sensitivity of our forecast to the
baseline assumption that we’ve made. In that regard, I still see more downside risk there than
upside risk to our house-price forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. I have just an informational question, David and Karen. If my memory is
correct, the September CPI numbers excluding food and energy were not substantially different
from those in August. What I’m curious about, if you could just quickly comment, are the
dynamics of owners’ equivalent rent (OER). That was you, Dave.
MR. STOCKTON. As you know, those increases were very substantial in the spring.
We had projected them to slow some. They have slowed some. Whether that is noise in the data
or an actual response to developments on the ground in housing such as—as I think Governor
Bies has mentioned—the possibility that some of this flow of excess housing may turn back into
the rental market, and that could help put a lid on rents. We’re expecting a little further slowing
going forward. As I noted in my remarks, I see some upside risk, so we’re taking comfort from
the fact that those 0.4 and 0.5 percent increases that we saw in the spring have now been running
more like 0.3 and 0.4 percent increases. But it’s too soon to conclude that that whole process is
over—that it’s all worked out and that things are going to slow down. There’s enough volatility
in those rents that we could experience a return to the increases that we saw in the spring. We’re
not forecasting that, but I don’t think that outcome should be out of your probability distribution.
Obviously, our reason for expecting some slowdown is that, in fact, there will be some
adjustments in the housing market and especially that people’s expectations for price
appreciation on owner-occupied dwellings have shifted down significantly. That downshift is

October 24-25, 2006

18 of 203

going to make homeownership look less attractive and the rental market look stronger. That’s
why we get some slowing but not so much as to go back to the rates that we had a year or two
ago, when they were increasing more like 2 and 2½ percent.
MR. FISHER. So, in summary, we are looking at high threes, upward.
MR. STOCKTON. High threes in the near term on rents, going down, we think, to more
like threes by next year.
MR. FISHER. Karen, the most arresting figure, as you pointed out, is reported Chinese
growth in the third quarter. What does that stem from? Is it their faux monetary policy or moral
suasion or what we call, negotiating with the Chinese, “immoral suasion?” Or do you sense that
some capacity constraints are at work here?
MS. JOHNSON. Well, I don’t know that we have enough detailed information to speak
definitively to the question of whether some capacity constraints were reached. We do see the
slowdown occurring, importantly, in the sector of fixed investment. That is, the GDP numbers
themselves do not give us real component information, but other measures of investment did turn
down in the third quarter in a way that’s consistent with seeing GDP slow. The timing of the
latest round of administrative measures suggests to us that we are seeing some effect from those.
I don’t know that I would call it monetary policy exactly, but I think the bundle of moral suasion
and, to some degree, real actions that, in and of themselves, have some bite contributed to this.
After two quarters of what we infer from manipulating the numbers as very strong growth, is it
possible that in some particular places capacity constraints are reached? It certainly could have
been the case.
From our attempt to turn the series into quarter-to-quarter changes rather than the data
that are announced, we certainly had higher numbers for the first half of this year than were

October 24-25, 2006

19 of 203

generally talked about. The released numbers were tens and so forth, and we had twelves.
Similarly, as a consequence we had a much greater slowdown than the released numbers, and we
could be exaggerating both. Possibly it wasn’t really quite as strong as we thought in the first
half, and it may not have slowed quite as much as we saw in the third quarter. But it would be a
real gamble on our part to conclude that it wasn’t, at least in some important sense, due to the
administrative measures that they took. I don’t think the officials are so unable to have a
consequence with their policy tools, such as they are, if they are really determined—and they
certainly seemed to be determined. Thus I would attribute much of the figure to the
administrative measures, but we can’t rule out some capacity constraints here and there.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. As you suggested, labor force participation plays an important
role going forward in how you think about your forecast of the longer-term growth rate and how it
evolves. So I have two questions about labor force participation in trying to understand where it
comes from and what’s going on. One is the distinction between what’s going on cyclically versus
what’s going on in your trend demographics of the labor force participation rate. That distinction is
part of it, as is whether the way you estimate the cyclical component of employment and so forth
affects the forecast and whether it adjusts very quickly or very slowly in shaping the picture going
forward, particularly into 2007 and 2008.
The second question has to do with the secular decline in general that you’re predicting from
demographics. Is there any mechanism in the way you come up with those forecasts that has
feedback from the economy? For example, through a certain period, labor participation rates for the
60-year-old cohort were falling rapidly. From more-recent data, that cohort appears to be back in

October 24-25, 2006

20 of 203

the labor force more aggressively than it was. I’m not exactly sure why that is. Maybe it’s
uncertainties about pensions, Social Security, and what have you and whether real wages and
adjustments in the labor market affect the secular decline. So I’d like a little discussion about
what’s going on in the model that might help me understand where those pieces fit.
MR. STOCKTON. I’ll turn your question around and address the trend aspect first and then
discuss a bit how the cycle gets overlaid on this. Our forecast is based on some research that we’ve
been doing in the past several years that was recently presented at the Brookings Panel on Economic
Activity. It’s based on a very detailed decomposition of the labor force by cohort, gender, and age.
The downward tilt in our projected trend in labor force participation is driven principally by two
factors. One is the end of the large uptilt in the participation of women in the labor force. For a
long time, women’s participation had been driving the upward trend; that continued rise offset the
downward trend in the men’s participation in the labor force, which actually has been a long,
ongoing trend that we expect to continue. Now the labor force participation of the entering cohort
of women looks a lot like women exiting. We’re not getting any further upward press there, but we
are seeing some continued downward press from men. Second, the labor force is aging, and it’s
aging within this forecast frame. In 2008, we’re at the front edge of the baby boomers who are
eligible at age 62 to collect Social Security payments. Bill Wascher is here if you want him to add
anything about the details of his research—but when we run that model, it projects a pretty steep
trend in labor force participation.
Now I will get to your question about all the dynamic feedbacks. I think we would admit
that this work does not have all the general equilibrium effects, the potential ways in which
employers and employees might respond going forward over the longer haul to the big demographic
changes that are at hand. So, any substantial changes in the incentives that employers are providing

October 24-25, 2006

21 of 203

for older workers to stay in the labor force longer, if they occur, are really not built in here in any
significant way. I feel pretty darn comfortable with this forecast over the time frame for which
we’re doing it, which is through 2008. I think that these demographic factors will, in fact, be felt
and that the labor market institutions will probably not adjust quickly enough to overwhelm the
downward demographic tilt. But if we go out a lot further, we have more thinking to do about how
those adjustments might occur and whether the steep downward trend that we are currently
projecting would continue. As you are probably aware, in trying to model labor force participation,
real wages and various other things that make a lot of sense to economists don’t always show up
strongly in those models. So in this forecast we’re letting the demographics drive the trend in labor
force participation.
On top of the demographics is the cyclical behavior of labor force participation. We now
think the labor force participation rate is probably a bit above its trend. Given the cyclical behavior
of participation, we think that is not unreasonable to think that labor force participation has probably
already overshot its trend—admittedly, just a bit—when the unemployment rate is below the
NAIRU. So the employment dynamics and the labor force dynamics that we have going forward
are driven both by the labor force participation rate returning to its trend and that trend continuing to
decline. As we discussed at the last meeting, those things together produce a very small increase in
overall employment growth. Also, as I think we mentioned last time, we recognize that we’re out of
the consensus on this piece of the forecast. Again, I haven’t seen anything over the past year or two
to make me more uncomfortable. If anything, I’ve become more comfortable with that view, given
the behavior of the labor force participation rate and the unemployment rate in this period as labor
markets have tightened up.

October 24-25, 2006

22 of 203

As I said last time, however, if we changed this aspect of our forecast going forward and
went back to a forecast of just a flat labor force participation rate, we’d obviously raise employment
growth and the growth of potential output. But we’d also raise the growth of projected actual
output, and thus this change wouldn’t affect our forecast of the output gap much at all going
forward. So this has a big effect on the top-line GDP but not on the GDP gap. Thus if we make a
mistake here, it will not have significant policy consequences because with demand and supply
revised up by similar amounts, you don’t have to have a higher interest rate to choke off that
demand.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you. Dave, I have a question on the less-persistent inflation
scenario. The description indicates that the scenario allows for inflation to be less persistent in the
baseline perhaps for structural reasons. Could you give me a couple of examples of how the
structure might change and what the data might tell us or what data would be telling us that such a
change is occurring?
MR. STOCKTON. Clearly, if you have managed to achieve a significant degree of
credibility and that credibility has anchored inflation expectations at a rate of 1½ percent going
forward and if, therefore, agents expect whatever inflation shock you’ve had to be temporary and
for inflation to revert to its average over the past ten years relatively quickly, then inflation could
quickly fall back to 1½ percent as suggested by the scenario. We would be looking for evidence
that the level of inflation expectations had remained exactly where it was previously and had
remained unchanged, at a range of roughly 1½ to 1¾ percent. Now, we don’t think that’s the case,
so that scenario does not underlie our baseline forecast. In fact, we think inflation expectations are
probably higher than that, more like the 2 percent level that I think implicitly underlies this forecast.

October 24-25, 2006

23 of 203

But work by our colleague John Williams at the San Francisco Fed, estimating over a very short
time span, does produce an estimate that suggests that it might be reasonable to expect—as a good
forecast—that inflation reverts reasonably quickly to its recent average. We’re not persuaded by
that, but we don’t think it’s entirely unreasonable.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions? Dave and Karen, thank you, as
always, for a very good report. We’re ready now for the economic go-round. We haven’t made
much use of the two-handed intervention lately, but it’s an option. If you want to make a
comment or ask a question, please raise two hands instead of one. We’ll start with President
Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Conditions in the Seventh District appear
to be quite similar to what I reported last time. Except for housing and autos, activity remains on
a solid footing, and most of our contacts are relatively optimistic about the outlook. For
instance, the two large temp firms we talk to regularly both reported that, although billable hours
were roughly flat, their clients were upbeat about the outlook. Furthermore, demand for workers
in light industry—the segment most closely tied to the national business cycle—continued to
grow. In terms of wages, both temp firms noted that compensation increases have been running
much higher than last year at this time. The difficulties of the Big Three automakers continue to
be a problem for our region and are showing through in the national numbers for the third
quarter. These difficulties don’t stem from an overall lack of demand. Light vehicle sales
continue to run at a pretty healthy pace, as the Greenbook notes. To some extent, the Big
Three’s difficulties are a consequence of the energy price shock. Demand has shifted away from
pickups and big SUVs, which have been their bread and butter. Despite the recent gas price

October 24-25, 2006

24 of 203

declines, Ford and GM told us that they do not expect a reversal of this shift anytime soon.
Otherwise, the District is doing reasonably well. I heard a lot of optimism. Indeed, a few
contacts explicitly described the current slowdown as similar to the brief pause in the mid-1990s,
which was followed by sustained expansion.
Turning to the national outlook, clearly economic activity was soft during the third
quarter, but the fairly solid growth in consumption and business fixed investment indicates that
at least to date we have not seen a spillover of the weakness in housing to other sectors of the
economy. This is consistent with the anecdotes that I’m hearing. Looking ahead, we expect
several quarters of weak residential investment, but activity in other sectors should increase
roughly in line with longer-run sustainable rates. Assuming market expectations for interest
rates, we see GDP growth averaging modestly below potential over the next year and a half. We
think growth will be a bit above potential in ’08. In our view, the underlying fundamentals—
wealth, income, interest rates, and the current level of liquidity in the economy—should support
a higher level of spending than what’s in the Greenbook baseline.
Of course, a major risk for our outlook is that there could be more-substantial spillovers
from the housing sector. As has been noted around this table, it could take some time for the
weakness in housing demand to show through to house prices. I was hoping we could get more
information, but it sounds as though the research isn’t there yet. If prices do fall substantially, a
reduction in wealth could have serious ramifications for consumption and spending overall. It’s
hard to say when we’ll have a clearer picture as to how events are unfolding. At some point,
probably before the decline in the broad measures of housing prices, we’ll likely see early
evidence in either anecdotes or risk spreads. Or if the risk is overstated, we may hear of
improvements from our contacts.

October 24-25, 2006

25 of 203

Turning to inflation, the projections from our models have not changed much with the
incoming data. They still show core PCE inflation in ’08 coming in between 2.3 and 2.6 percent,
depending on the period used to estimate the models. So I continue to have the same questions I
had last time regarding the interplay between such inflation rates, inflation expectations, and Fed
credibility: Will continued high levels of core inflation eventually make the public doubt our
resolve to maintain low and stable inflation? Even if inflation is less persistent, as some have
suggested, will it settle out at rates like those in the past few years—namely, 2 percent—rather
than the 1.6 percent in the Greenbook’s less-persistent inflation scenario? Are the current
long-run core PCE inflation expectations, which are likely above 2 percent, just simply too high?
I’m quite concerned that the answers to these questions might be “yes.” If so, and the housing
spillover risks fade, then we may have to act more forcefully than the Greenbook baseline policy
assumption in order to ensure that inflation is more clearly headed into the range consistent with
price stability.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I wondered, President Moskow, if you had a sense of whether Ford was in
a kind of death spiral—I might be influenced by the headlines of today and yesterday—at risk of
losing the confidence of customers, so it won’t be able to sell cars, and of creditors. I’m
wondering whether that would have any effect on the macroeconomy, or whether we just take
down the Ford signs, put up Toyota signs, and continue to produce.
MR. MOSKOW. My general assessment has been that this is a market share story. It’s
not a story of aggregate demand for automobiles or light vehicles in that it is a shift from the
domestic, what we used to call the Big Three, to foreign manufacturers, whether they’re
producing here in the United States or exporting more to the United States. Obviously, we know

October 24-25, 2006

26 of 203

there has been a big ramp-up in transplants here, but the import share of light vehicles is going
up, too. So I generally think it’s a market share story and, as you said, there will be a lot of
dislocations if, God forbid, Ford goes out of business. But I think it would just be a shift.
Now, in terms of whether what’s happening at Ford is, as you said, a death spiral, I really
wouldn’t know. A new CEO is coming in, and there is the old adage, “When a new CEO comes
in, he’s going to write off as much as he possibly can and get it behind him.” So some of that
may be occurring as well. But the problem with the U.S. firms is both the product they have and
the perception of that product. I think their product has gotten better. I don’t, personally, think
it’s as good as the foreign firms’ product, but I think the perception of it is much worse than the
perception of the foreign firms’ product.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow, didn’t you say that you saw output
growing below potential in ’07? Did I hear correctly?
MR. MOSKOW. Slightly.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So with energy prices down and so forth, why do you see
core inflation rising from near-term levels?
MR. MOSKOW. No, I saw it coming down—oh, you mean in the outer years. Well, I
think several things are going on. There is still the spillover of energy price increases flowing
through the economy, but also there are more resource constraints than are built into the baseline
forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The New England District economy
continues to grow at a moderate pace, pretty much as it was growing the last time we met, with
job counts slowly increasing and business and consumer confidence relatively good about both

October 24-25, 2006

27 of 203

current and future conditions. As I’ve noted before, income growth has been robust in the
District, with regional income growing better than 7 percent from second quarter ’05 to second
quarter ’06. Indeed, incomes in Massachusetts and Connecticut both rose about 9 percent.
Reflecting this rise, the fiscal condition of the states in the region, while varied, remains positive.
Regional corporate health is solid, and readings of regional stock indexes follow the positive
pace of the nation’s financial markets. Contacts from a wide range of manufacturing industries
reported positive trends; fewer cost pressures from commodity, energy, and interest rates; and a
continuation of competitive pressures to restrain costs and keep prices stable. We regard this
pressure as a return to business as usual.
On the negative side, the slowdown in the housing sector becomes more apparent with
each passing month. According to the overall OFHEO house-price indexes, year-over-year
appreciation in the second quarter of ’06 for New England was about half of that for the nation.
The change from the first to the second quarter in ’06 was virtually zero. The region now has the
lowest rate of annual housing appreciation of any area of the country except the Midwest. This
situation is not entirely unwelcome, as housing price levels in the region remain quite high
relative to the nation, and there has been much hand-wringing locally about the effect high
housing costs have on attracting skilled labor to the region. Of course, the cyclical effect of a
sharp residential investment slowdown is of concern. Existing home sales volumes are down
12 percent from their 2005 peaks. New home construction is weakening significantly, and
construction employment has declined in both Connecticut and Massachusetts since year-end
2005. Indeed, negative commentary from area business contacts revolved mostly around
markets for products aimed at the residential housing industry. While there may be some light at
the end of this tunnel, with recent lower mortgage interest rates and some sense of bottoming out,

October 24-25, 2006

28 of 203

the usual seasonal slowdown in the real estate industry as winter approaches may make this
improvement difficult to appreciate for some time.
The effect of slowing residential investment remains one of the key uncertainties on the
national scene as well. Combined with the negative effect of trade, housing trends have caused
us to mark down our estimate of third-quarter GDP growth to about the level of the Greenbook.
However, positive incoming data on employment, consumer spending, and corporate profits,
spurred as they have been by favorable trends in energy prices, financial markets, and worldwide
growth, support a modest rebound in overall activity in the fourth quarter and a forecast for 2007
and 2008 of just slightly less than potential. Indeed, I was pleased to see the upward revision to
the Greenbook forecast for the fourth quarter of this year, as I had worried whether the earlier
trajectory had increased the risk of a spiral downward into a recession. I don’t think that’s likely,
and I realize that overall the second-half GDP projection remains about the same. But the
upward revision to the fourth quarter in the Greenbook, which brings it closer to our Boston
forecast, makes me somewhat more comfortable about the underlying trajectory of economic
activity.
We, like the Greenbook authors, have revised down slightly our estimate of potential, so
our sense of any gap in resource usage remains about the same as it was at the last meeting.
Thus, unemployment rises very slowly, to just about 5 percent in 2008, and inflation falls slowly
as well, along the lines of the forecast at the last meeting. All in all, that is not a lot of change. I
must admit, however, to some small amount of hope that we may be seeing the bottoming out of
the housing market decline because of the mixture of the data that Dave referred to earlier.
Moreover, other aspects of the current situation seem quite positive as well—in particular, the
very accommodative nature of financial markets and the continuing profitability of the nation’s

October 24-25, 2006

29 of 203

corporations. Thus, the risks to what continues to be in many ways a rather benign forecast seem
to me to be a bit less on the downside than they seemed at our last meeting. Energy-driven
inflation may be lower as well, but I remain concerned about the underlying pressures on
resource utilization if the economy does not slow as much as we now expect. Corporate-driven
productivity growth, though we haven’t seen it escalate recently, could come to the rescue here,
but I think it’s hard to bet on that. Thus, I do see some continuing uncertainty as to whether
inflation will be as well behaved as in either the Boston or the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our regional economic story is similar to
that of the national economy. Regional activity has slowed in the third quarter, mainly because
of the housing sector. In general, our business contacts expect the regional economy to continue
to expand, albeit at a modest pace. Price pressures remain elevated in the Third District but have
not strengthened over the intermeeting period.
Turning to the individual sectors, manufacturing activity in our region has softened over
the past two months. The index of general economic activity in our business outlook survey,
which turned slightly negative last month, remains slightly negative this month, indicating
basically not much change since September. However, there were some positives in the October
survey that were not in the September report. In particular, there was a rebound in the indexes of
new orders and shipments, suggesting slightly positive growth in our respondents’ firms. Also,
manufacturing executives were much more optimistic this month about future activity, with most
indicators rebounding from their September low readings. This optimism is consistent with
President Moskow’s comment about the optimism of some executives that he has observed.
Now, consistent with the slowdown in activity, payroll employment growth in our three states

October 24-25, 2006

30 of 203

slowed in the third quarter to an annual rate of about 0.7 percent, compared with 1.1 percent in
the nation. The unemployment rate, which had been running under the national rate for the past
three years, has now moved up to that rate. Still, our business contacts as well as respondents to
our manufacturing survey continue to cite difficulty in finding qualified workers as one of their
major business concerns.
As in the nation, the housing sector in our region continues to decline. We’ve seen some
slowing in the value of nonresidential contracts as well over the past three months. But these
data are quite noisy, and I think it’s too early to read much of a turning point into the
nonresidential construction sector for our region at this point. Office vacancy rates continue to
edge down, and the net absorption of office space continues to be positive.
Consumer spending continues to hold up well in our region. We saw a pickup in retail
sales in September, except for autos. Area retailers told us that their sales had increased in recent
weeks, and their back-to-school sales exceeded their expectations. Their view is that continued
growth at that pace depended on consumer confidence, which for the mid-Atlantic region
increased in September, no doubt because of the decline in oil prices.
The Fed’s current economic activity indexes indicate a slowing in activity in our region
over the past three months, especially in New Jersey, which has shown the sharpest deceleration.
As of August, year-to-date average growth in these indexes (weighted by gross state product) for
our three states has been about 1.8 percent, compared with 3 percent for the United States. Over
the past three months, regional growth has slowed to about 0.6 percent. The leading indicators
for our three states also have moved down this year, suggesting only modest growth over the
coming six to nine months.

October 24-25, 2006

31 of 203

On the inflation front, consumer prices in the Philadelphia region continue to rise at a
pace faster than that of the nation. The faster pace is due mainly to the larger increases in shelter
prices in the Philadelphia metro area compared with those in the United States. On a more
positive note, while area manufacturers continue to report higher production costs, these cost
increases have been less widespread in recent surveys than earlier in the year. The index of
prices paid in our manufacturing survey has declined for the past three months, and the index of
prices received was down significantly in October. So while the levels of these indexes remain
high, indicating continued inflationary pressures, some solace may be found in the less elevated
levels of these indicators, at least in recent months.
For the national economy, my outlook is not much different from what it was at the last
meeting. Real GDP growth in the second quarter was revised down to 2.6 percent, as has been
noted, and the data received to date suggest that growth in the third quarter was even weaker,
perhaps 1 to 1½ percent. I expect some rebound in the fourth quarter and, like President
Minehan, was pleased to see the upward revision in the fourth-quarter forecast in the Greenbook.
The main source of the slowdown, of course, is the fall in the demand for housing.
Manufacturing also softened in the third quarter compared with its robust pace earlier in the year.
About half of that slowdown was due to autos, and I expect some rebound there, too, in the
fourth quarter. Trade subtracted from growth in the third quarter relative to the second quarter,
but again, as has been pointed out, I expect that to be less of a drag in the fourth quarter than it
was in the third.
So aside from housing, most other sectors of the economy, including consumer spending
and business investment, are holding up, even in the Philadelphia region in the Third District.
They aren’t growing as rapidly as they were in the first part of this year, but they are growing

October 24-25, 2006

32 of 203

somewhat below trend, and they continue to expand. If the slowdown in housing continues to be
an orderly one, without large spillovers as has been frequently mentioned, I would not
characterize that correction as unwelcome. Housing activity has been at an unsustainably high
pace in recent years. Of course, at this point we cannot rule out the possibility that the correction
in housing from the unsustainably high pace of activity that we’ve seen over the past few years
will derail the expansion. But so far, we have not seen spillovers of housing into other sectors.
In particular, we have not seen any retrenchment by the consumer for the most part. The
moderation we’ve seen in consumer spending after the strong first quarter is largely in line with
expectations. Real disposable income growth remains healthy, and we have been lucky with two
positives—the decline in gasoline prices and the rise in the stock market.
We’ve had some hopeful news on the inflation front over the intermeeting period, but the
level of inflation continues to concern me. As we anticipated at the time of our last meeting, the
drop in energy prices led to a significant deceleration in headline inflation for September.
Although the twelve-month change in core CPI actually edged up to 2.9 percent, a rate that I
consider well above price stability, it may be beginning to stabilize. But, frankly, a lot of
uncertainty remains, and it is dangerous, to my mind, to rely too heavily on one month’s
numbers. Some of the acceleration of core inflation over the past year was likely due to the
pass-through from energy prices, as we discussed before. So if oil prices fall or continue to
stabilize, then acceleration of core inflation from this source will likely dissipate. However,
we’ve seen energy prices retreat only to move back up again, so I don’t think we should become
too sanguine. Indeed, the inflation picture remains uncertain. I’ll be more comfortable when we
begin to see twelve-month core inflation begin to decelerate. To the extent that some of the
acceleration in inflation was fueled by very accommodative monetary policy over the past five

October 24-25, 2006

33 of 203

years, we still need to consider whether monetary policy has firmed enough to remove the
cumulative effects of the past policy accommodation to get inflation back down to a level
consistent with price stability in a reasonable time so that our credibility is not at risk. The
longer we allow that deviation from price stability to persist, the higher the risk to our credibility
and the higher the risk that recent high inflation readings will raise longer-term inflationary
expectations. So far, long-run expectations have been stable, and shorter-run expectations have
fallen with oil prices. Nevertheless, I think the Fed’s commitment to price stability deserves our
protection. One thing to note going forward, though, is that if economic growth remains below
trend for a while, then there’s an implicit firming of monetary policy, even without changing the
nominal interest rate. Given our economic outlook and the risks to that outlook, at this point that
may be actually the most desirable path. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For a while now, I’ve been somewhat
more pessimistic than most of the Committee about the downside risk to the real economy. I was
beginning to get worried that this might be the perpetual disposition of someone from Ohio.
[Laughter] As a prominent member of our business community said to me not too long ago, it’s
not the weather, it’s the climate. [Laughter]
Since our last meeting, I’ve become more comfortable with the idea that substantially
weaker-than-forecast growth is less probable—partly because we’re now a little further down the
road without any signs that the worst-case scenarios are materializing and partly because my
directors and my business contacts seem more positive about the economic outlook.
Specifically, as I listened to some of my business contacts in construction, retail, and even real

October 24-25, 2006

34 of 203

estate, the expectations that things will get substantially worse just aren’t there. Also, the
demand for labor seems to be growing at a moderate pace.
On the price side, my contacts are not indicating much of an impetus for higher final
goods prices. Although projected compensation growth seems to be firming just a bit, my
contacts are telling me that they think productivity gains will keep costs in check. With the
declining energy and material costs, I don’t hear much about the potential for accelerating
pressures on prices.
When I combine what I’m hearing from my District contacts with the aggregate data that
have come in since our last meeting, I sense that we have weathered the worst in softness on the
real side for now. In September I noted that my biggest concern was the possibility that the
inflation trend would worsen. It does not appear that this is happening at this point. However,
we have yet to see lower rates of core inflation, and I’m sensitive to the fact that core measures
of inflation are being held up by the contribution to owners’ equivalent rent from the rising rents
and falling utility bills. Although more-stable energy prices will make the latter effect go away,
it’s not clear that the rent part of the picture will quickly fade, as rents continue to converge
toward still high housing prices. When we look at the distribution of prices in the CPI, excluding
energy, food, and owners’ equivalent rent, prices seem to be either rising rapidly or falling.
There isn’t much in the middle, and that makes the underlying movements in the inflation trend
hard to interpret.
It seems to me that the key risk on the real side of the economy has been that the housing
market would decline much faster and more deeply than we had forecast and that the effect on
consumption spending would be greater than we anticipated. So far, as others have commented,
the collateral effect on consumption appears to have been contained. Furthermore, we expected

October 24-25, 2006

35 of 203

that other forms of spending would hold up as the housing sector slumped, and those
expectations appear to be on track for now. I recognize that we’re not out of the woods yet, but
the downside risks to the real economy appear somewhat more benign than they did at both the
August and the September meetings. In regard to the inflation risks, the probability of
accelerating inflation has decreased, in my opinion, but the risk that inflation will remain higher
than I personally desire hasn’t really changed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I’ll start with the District this time, and I will tell you that
conditions in the District remain generally good. Energy activity remains strong, both in the
traditional sectors, such as gas, oil, and coal, and in our new sector called ethanol. [Laughter]
They are booming, I’m afraid. Despite the recent decline in energy prices, we are not yet
hearing, in talking to different producers in the region, about any significant pullback in energy
production. In part, this situation reflects a prevailing view right now among those producers
that the weakness in energy prices is likely to be temporary. However, if energy prices remain at
current levels or move lower at a sustained rate, I think we will then see some pullback in retail
activity and so forth—more than we’ve seen so far.
In other areas of the District economy, we saw some softening in manufacturing activity
in the third quarter, but our manufacturing survey shows that businesses remain mostly
optimistic about future hiring and capital expenditure plans. Housing activity has certainly
slowed across the District. However, we have received few reports of unusual weakness in our
recent meetings with directors and economic advisory council members. So it is slowing but
shows no sign of collapse, at this point anyway. We have also seen, with the decline in energy
prices, strengthening in District retail sales activity and a sharp rebound in expectations for retail

October 24-25, 2006

36 of 203

activity in the fourth quarter—except for domestic auto sales. Labor markets remain firm across
the District. Unemployment rates are low, and our directors and other contacts continue to report
shortages of skilled labor across the District. District agricultural conditions remain rather
mixed. Drought continues to affect much of the western part of our region. However, livestock
and crop prices have been supported by strong world demand and lower supply, so those farmers
who are able to bring in a crop are doing quite well.
Turning to the national economy, I think that the recent decline in energy prices will
provide important support to the near-term outlook. Currently, I see second-half growth of
around 2 percent, rebounding to between 2½ and 3 percent as we get into next year. Generally
speaking, I am more optimistic than the Greenbook, both in the near term and for the next year.
Indeed, with the current financial conditions that others have talked about, I don’t envision the
pullback in consumer spending and business investment spending that the Greenbook has
projected at this point.
One area that is worth discussion—and Dave talked about it a bit in responding to a
question—is the employment outlook, an area for which the Greenbook continues to have, as
Dave said, a different perspective. Although demographic forces will clearly work in the
direction of slower labor force growth in the coming years, I’m not as convinced that the
slowdown will be as sharp or as sudden as the Greenbook suggests right now. I say that because
I want to be cautious about viewing the recent slowing in monthly employment growth as being
driven by these demographic factors. I believe the recent slowing in employment largely reflects
some employer caution about the economic outlook, combined with the effects of weakness in
housing and retail sales. Support for this view can be found in the recent slowing of growth in
temporary help that has been reported to us. Should the economic growth pick up, as I

October 24-25, 2006

37 of 203

anticipate, we should begin to see some stronger employment numbers as we get into next year.
As to the effects of demographics—again, I think they are going to play a very important part,
but another significant factor to keep in mind is the educational composition of the labor force
and the skills composition as we move forward in terms of labor demand, because that’s the
shortage we’re always hearing about.
Now, returning to the near-term outlook, the recent decline in energy prices has helped to
counter the effects of housing weaknesses. Consequently, the downside risk to the outlook has
diminished somewhat. However, because we have not necessarily seen the bottom of the
housing market, I do believe that that is an important downside risk to the economy.
Finally, let me share some of my perspective on the inflation outlook. My overall views
on inflation have not changed materially since the last meeting. I continue to expect core CPI
inflation to moderate from about 2.8 percent to about 2.5 percent next year and, similarly, core
PCE inflation to moderate from about 2.3 percent to 2.1 percent. A significant fall in prices for
oil and gasoline and natural gas in recent weeks has already begun to show through to overall
inflation. I believe this is a positive development in helping to ensure that inflation expectations
remain anchored and perhaps in helping to moderate core inflation next year. Although the
decline in energy prices has reduced the upside risk to inflation somewhat, I agree with others
that core inflation does remain too high, and I think we have to keep that in mind as we consider
our policy options. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Data releases and reports we have gathered
over the intermeeting period do not indicate much change since the Committee last met, so far as
the Sixth District is concerned. Overall growth has been moderate, with the index of District

October 24-25, 2006

38 of 203

economic activity showing a year-over-year increase of about 2.7 percent, and reports of activity
varied considerably among sectors of the District economy. Retail sales have been mixed, and
the outlook for tourism is reasonably optimistic. Auto sales remain sluggish, and the housing
market—even beyond Florida, where both prices and sales have declined significantly—
continues to show additional signs of some slowing. On the positive side, construction is
shifting somewhat from residential to commercial. However, the lack of availability and the
high cost of home and business insurance in Florida and along the Gulf Coast is a serious
concern for our region. Manufacturing activity appears stable. Prices of some commodities are
reported lower. Although gasoline prices are lower, fuel surcharges remain in place. As in the
national economy, the slowdown in housing and moderation in overall activity have shown little
signs of spilling over into the labor market.
Employment gains through September softened somewhat. However, all states in the
District, except Georgia, added jobs, and together accounted for 20,000 of the nation’s 51,000
jobs added during the month. The overall unemployment rate in the District, accordingly, moved
down to 3.9 percent. Shortages of skilled labor continue to be reported in some areas, and
overall labor quality, as Tom Hoenig noted, continues to be a problem, both of which I interpret
as indicating a relatively firm labor market. We had a meeting this past week of our Advisory
Council on Small Business, Agriculture, and Labor. Nearly to a person, participants reported
things were good—not great but good—and the common problem was finding qualified workers
willing to work. Most council members were willing to hire if they found the right people, but at
the same time, they would forgo expanding their businesses if it meant hiring individuals who
were less than qualified. One member from the construction sector noted that an individual
walking around a job site with a piece of pipe, without doing anything else, would fully meet the

October 24-25, 2006

39 of 203

requirements for continued employment—that is, they were carrying something, and they were
moving. [Laughter]
Concerning the national economy, opinions differ as to how much of a slowdown we will
see this quarter and how long it will last. Most professional forecasters, as well as our own
in-house models, suggest that growth will slow in the third quarter and then gradually accelerate
thereafter. On the positive side, the labor market is very healthy. Corporate earnings continue to
be healthy, business investment is supportive, and equity markets not only are at record highs but
show no signs of letting up. At the same time, our headline inflation has come down, in the most
part because of the decline in energy prices. Core inflation, especially in the service price
component, continues to drift upward. Further, it’s not clear that the energy price increases have
played a major role in explaining the increase in core inflation, so it may be problematic to
assume that the recent decline will provide a significant downward impetus to core inflation, at
least in the near term. Federal funds futures prices, the TIPS spread, and inflation expectations
seem to be saying that the Fed’s credibility remains intact and are consistent with the belief that
the Committee will get policy right, rather than signaling that slower growth is ahead in the
foreseeable future. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That reminds me of the Navy saying: “If it stands still, paint
it. If it moves, salute it.” [Laughter] President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, at our last meeting I engaged in a little Texas brag. I
mentioned that the employment growth rate in our District was twice that of the national average.
Then I read in the pre-briefing for the Board last night the penultimate sentence, which had a
wonderful three-word phrase—“Humility is required.” So let me report that economic growth in
our District has slowed somewhat, and I want to put the “somewhat” in perspective. We redid the

October 24-25, 2006

40 of 203

numbers of our first-quarter real GDP growth. Growth of the state real gross product for the first
quarter was 9 percent for the Eleventh District. So it’s not a great wonder that it is slowing—it is
slowing down from too torrid a pace. But our housing sector is still sweet—perhaps the only spot
left in the country—particularly in the Houston area. We actually are building a new auto plant,
President Moskow, a Toyota plant in San Antonio, which is getting an inordinate amount of
attention. The exports from our state are growing at a monthly rate annualized at 45 percent, and
Texas is now the largest exporting state in the nation. So from the standpoint of economic growth,
even as I am trying to be humble, the District is doing exceedingly well.
The only consistently sour note that we hear is what you have heard around this table—and
just now from First Vice President Barron—that we have continued reports of shortages of skilled
and unskilled labor, from chemical engineers to school teachers to bank tellers and even to hotel
housekeeping staff. So we have a significant problem in terms of labor shortages—skilled, semiskilled, and now, increasingly, unskilled. To put some numbers on this, we have a contact who has
surveyed fifty plants on the Gulf Coast for the price of welders. In eight months, the price for a
welder has gone from $19 an hour to $25 an hour. You have to pay them a bonus of $100 when
they show up, and you have to pay them a completion bonus as well. The bottom line is that in the
Eleventh District we’re behaving as though we were a full-employment economy.
In the rest of my comments, I’d like to emphasize not my District but our views on the U.S.
and the global economies, particularly the U.S. economy. I want to go back to your concluding
remarks, Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting, when you reminded us that, if we believe we need to
have output below potential to help address inflation pressures, it’s a delicate operation, and we may
have a very narrow channel to navigate as we go forward—just to keep with your naval analogy of a
few seconds ago. This summer I sailed the Corinth Canal, which is so narrow that at times you feel

October 24-25, 2006

41 of 203

you can reach out and touch both sides. Even though I was on vacation, I was actually thinking of
one side as the shoals of slow economic growth—almost recessionary growth, which seems to be
what the Greenbook is forecasting at least for the third quarter, and the risk that seems to be out
there—and of the other side as the shoals of inflation.
From the 27 or 28 CEOs and CFOs to whom I spoke in preparing for this meeting, as I
always do, I do hear reports of a slowdown. I talked to two of the Big Five housebuilders this time.
They are cutting back significantly. Let me give you some numbers. For example, Centex owns
109,000 lots outright and has 54,000 lots under hard option and 80,000 lots under soft option, as
they call it. They’ve canceled 25 percent of their hard options. That is $85 million worth of
properties. Hovnanian is walking away from $100 million worth of hard option properties. The
effort there is to cut back so that what was a two-month leading supply has now become a threemonth leading supply. You can see how the dynamics are beginning to work. They’re moving on
price, but they are also trying to shut down their inventory and are taking very quick action. That is
a depressing factor. One of the truck dealers I talked with, Rush Enterprises, has about $2.7 billion
a year in sales. I believe they are the largest in the country; they are nationwide. They are reporting
that Christmas retail activity seems to be backing up; in other words, it is slower than it was in
previous years. This is an operator with 41 years of experience. They are also building their
inventory, particularly in the coastal areas, with the heavy trucks that are going to be used for home
construction. The book-to-bill ratio for Texas Instruments has fallen below 1; it is the lowest since
2000. And if you read the newspapers, you will see that the airlines are offering very deep
discounts and for longer periods than before. So there seems to be a slowdown in activity.
With that said, when you talk to the rails, there is a diminution of growth, perhaps 1 percent
third quarter over second quarter, and if you talk to UPS, as I reported last time, you’re still seeing

October 24-25, 2006

42 of 203

some rather robust reports of economic growth of 2 to 3 percent. I think the best way to summarize
the economy is, as President Moskow said earlier, that although there are weak signs, the economy
is still robust. The chairman and CEO of Cadbury-Schweppes said, “I keep looking and listening,
but I’m just not seeing what everybody tells me is going to happen.” Again, as I reported last time,
the CEO of EDS, who is an experienced businessman, said, “It’s a funny period. Everybody is
prepared to be bearish, but it’s simply not materializing.” So, David, from an economic standpoint,
both from the anecdotal evidence and our own economic modeling, we don’t quite accept the
Greenbook’s forecast of the kind of slowdown that you’re expecting for the third quarter or for the
second half.
There are positive benefits, and the benefits are, of course, with price pressure abatement.
My favorite anecdotal example, by the way, comes from globalization at work, Karen.
Interestingly, the CEO of Fluor, who is one of my contacts, reports that when they bid for the Bay
Bridge construction, their bid on U.S. steel prices was rejected as being too expensive. They went
back and bid based on what they could buy steel from China for, and the bid was accepted.
Canadian steel now sells for 25 percent less than U.S. steel, and Chinese steel is being dumped into
this market at a price 40 percent lower than Canadian steel. From the standpoint of raw materials
and energy, you have seen price pressure abatement. But from businessperson after businessperson,
we still hear the same reports, Mr. Chairman, that we hear in our District and that you’ve heard
around this table, which is of significant price pressures stemming from labor. As I mentioned
earlier, it is not just skilled labor; it is now semi-skilled labor such as truck drivers and welders.
Increasingly shortages are being reported, throughout our District and the rest of the country.
So I would summarize by agreeing with President Moskow in that we in the Eleventh
District find the Greenbook’s projection of economic growth to be too pessimistic. Although price

October 24-25, 2006

43 of 203

pressures have abated somewhat, we know by our measure—the trimmed-mean PCE, off of which
we key our view of the economy—that the three-month rate is still running at 2.9 percent and the
twelve-month rate is running at 2.7 percent. I would argue as we navigate this narrow channel, Mr.
Chairman, whether it’s the channel you describe or the Corinth Canal, that I would be more careful
of the inflationary shoals than of the risk of excessive slowdown of growth. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Richard, clarify for me. You said that some of your national contacts were
seeing a slowdown in the book of business. Is that the minority of the contacts? I’m not quite sure I
know what you were conveying.
MR. FISHER. The question that I put to each contact was to compare the third quarter with
the second quarter. I was trying to get a feel because I’m quite concerned about our staff analysis
and the Greenbook’s analysis of the dramatic slowdown to 1 percent in third-quarter growth. So the
answer is, yes, there is a slowdown, but it is not now of the severity that our staff projection seems
to indicate. But I do want to note that there is some slowdown taking place.
MR. HOENIG. As to your reference to the trucking company—one of our trucking
company contacts indicated that business is still good. Their bookings out have been reduced from
three weeks to about four or five days. So they’ve seen a slowdown, but they’re still busy. They
still have business coming in.
MR. FISHER. Part of that, by the way, is in the average fleet of, say, Class A trucks, which
are the big ones. The average fleet age is now fourteen months; the normal fleet age is twenty-two
months. Part of that has to do with all of these Environmental Protection Agency changes that keep
being mandated. So you have to sort out that distortion from economic activity. But the point I was

October 24-25, 2006

44 of 203

reporting is that the utilization of those trucks in terms of carrying Christmas inventory appears to
have slowed and is not running at the pace that it was in previous years.
MR. HOENIG. I agree. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan, did you have something?
MS. MINEHAN. Yes. I just wanted to add something that I forgot to mention earlier.
President Fisher’s comments reminded me of it. Whether you look at the KMV data on expecteddefault frequencies for the five major homebuilders or at the Dow Jones home construction index
and the stock prices for the top five homebuilders, none of them seems to be indicating a major
problem. Now, the expected-default frequency, which again is driven from stock prices, may
certainly be above the rest of U.S. industry, but by no means is it even at any kind of historically
medium position, let alone high position, and there has been a recent uptrend in the Dow Jones
home construction index overall. So that’s another bit of the data that I was using, and others may
be using as well, to suggest that maybe things won’t get as bad as the worst of our projections in
terms of homebuilding.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, very quickly—I asked two of the big homebuilders to whom
I spoke about that very phenomenon. Their answer was very interesting. They have strong balance
sheets. One of them said, “I can feel the private equity shark swimming around my feet.” In fact,
there is rumor of one sizable deal that has been proposed—I haven’t been able to figure out what it
is—to take one of them entirely private. So some of the buttressing, President Minehan, is coming
from significant amounts of liquidity in the system.
MS. MINEHAN. Private equity interest, yes. But not all five of them, and they all point in
the same direction.

October 24-25, 2006

45 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We had a meeting at the Bank last week with
representatives from the housing industry in the Twin Cities, including builders, brokers, and
lenders, and most of these participants operate nationally. In fact, one of the first you mentioned,
Richard, was there. Some of these firms are in nonresidential development and construction as
well. The bottom line of the meeting, I would say, was that the comments overall track pretty well
with the Greenbook forecast of housing activity—that is, both a further and a prolonged slump in
housing. Let me just give you a few of the specifics. They reported, as we know, that sales of new
homes have declined dramatically and prices of new homes are going down with sales, also
dramatically. Retail brokerages are starting to contract in terms of both number of offices and
number of brokers. It was reported that so-called investors have disappeared entirely from many
markets and that inventories of unsold homes are rising and the extent of the increase may be
understated by the published data. There was little expectation among this group of improvement in
housing in the next several months at least, and I would say not a whole heck of a lot of confidence
that there was improvement in store even out beyond that, maybe as you get later into ’07. In
contrast, and on a somewhat more positive note, the people who are also in nonresidential
construction—in particular, office and retail development—thought that the outlook was promising,
indeed positive, and are seeing a lot of activity in that business.
The housing situation notwithstanding, I remain somewhat more optimistic about our
prospects for real growth both in ’07 and in ’08 than the Greenbook. Apparently my assessment of
the implications of the sustained increase in income, of the run-up in equity values, and of the
decline in energy prices is just more positive than the Greenbook’s, and that’s how I arrive at a
somewhat more optimistic assessment. I continue to think that core inflation will diminish modestly

October 24-25, 2006

46 of 203

over this period. So my overall view of the outlook really has changed very little since the last
meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start by saying that I think the Greenbook
outlook is a very good central tendency outlook. I am going to make some comments that are more
on the downside of that, which come from hunches and gut instinct. I want to emphasize that I
don’t want to make policy on the basis of gut instinct, but I think it helps to keep an open mind
about some of the things that might be going on.
First, on the positive side, my UPS contact says that he is expecting a peak season with a
glut of volume and not enough lift. They’re going to have to move express business over to trucks.
So if you’re counting on getting a last minute present at Christmastime, I urge you to order a little
earlier than you might otherwise. That’s his expectation. On the labor side, UPS has some fairly
big increases coming next year as a consequence of recent contracts they signed. They had a long
negotiation with pilots, but on the ground side, obviously the less skilled workers, they’re expecting
about 3½ percent compensation, very much in line with a normal situation.
My Wal-Mart contact said that they have not experienced the pickup in sales that they
would have anticipated from the decline in energy prices. They had expected an increase of about
65 basis points. They always measure their sales as same-store, year over year. They haven’t seen
that. They’re going to be lucky to get 2 percent year-over-year in October. My contact says that
weekly information suggests that October is slowing down week by week as we go through the
month. Wal-Mart received a lot of attention recently in the press about their slowdown in building
new stores next year. They probably had a lot more press than the actual size of the slowdown
warrants. They are expecting to increase their square footage 7.6 percent in ’07 compared with

October 24-25, 2006

47 of 203

8.4 percent in ’06—so the slowdown is hardly gigantic. Construction costs this year are rising
17 percent; next year they’re anticipating 11 to 12 percent. So there is a slowdown in the increase,
but 11 to 12 percent is still a pretty big increase in construction costs.
My contact in the trucking industry says—and this may make a little more explicit what
Richard Fisher was saying—that things in the industry are continuing to slow down. He says it’s
the first time in his experience—and he’s been with the company twenty years or more—that the
seasonal peak has not yet started. Ordinarily the seasonal peak in shipping for the holiday shopping
season would have started. It just hasn’t started, and I think he said they’re running—I forget
exactly what the number was—8 percent below a year ago. (Incidentally, one thing that I was
thinking when Richard was talking was that sometimes the business people have a hard time
doing the seasonal adjustment, so when you compare the third quarter with the second quarter,
they may not be seeing a seasonally adjusted slowdown because the volume is bigger in the third
than in the second.) My trucking industry contact says that the slower business seems pretty
evenly distributed geographically—perhaps a greater softness in the Southeast than in other parts
of the country. It is more concentrated in home improvement—I think Home Depot is one of the
big customers—and probably autos, but the softness is spread fairly generally across commodity
categories.
We’ve also spent a lot of time talking recently with contacts in the housing industry. The
word that we’re getting is that some of the smaller and even regional builders have perhaps six
months, and if they don’t see a pickup, they’re going to be filing for bankruptcy. They are very,
very hard pressed. A lot of them overbuilt. They are stuck with a big inventory. They have the
carrying costs of that inventory, and laying off workers doesn’t solve that problem. They may
bring the new construction down very low, but it doesn’t solve the problem of what to do with

October 24-25, 2006

48 of 203

the unsold inventory. So without a pickup in housing, I think we can anticipate some bankruptcy
filings in that area.
People around the table here and, I think, generally have been treating oil price declines
as an unambiguous positive, and I would like to raise a caution flag on that. I remember from
my first year in graduate school Milton Friedman pounding into me that a price never declines
without a shift in either the supply curve or the demand curve. Over and over again, that’s what
Friedman would say. Now, on the supply side in oil, as far as I know, there have been no
gigantic new supplies that have come on the market, and the optimistic view on oil is that last
winter and spring or starting in the fall perhaps a year ago, there was maybe a $10 to $20
premium built into crude on the basis of geopolitical and weather uncertainties. So a possibility
is that prices in the mid to upper seventies were above what was clearing current supply and
demand. Inventories accumulated—we know that there has been a big inventory accumulation
in the United States for sure—and eventually, with nothing really bad happening on the
geopolitical front and with no hurricanes hitting, the prices dropped back down. It seems to me
that is the optimistic way of looking at what’s happened to oil prices. But I think we should not
rule out the possibility that some fundamental weakness in world demand is showing up in the
demand for energy and that might have something to do with the softness. I take that as a hunch,
not by any means as a certainty; but I think we ought to be open to that possibility.
Clearly, the yield curve has been inverted for quite a few months. The market seems to
be quite persistent in believing that some time next year there are going to be some declines in
short-term interest rates, presumably because of some combination of slower real growth and
more-benign inflation. Possibly it’s not all expectations related. It may simply be that the
underlying demand for funds is softening—that’s surely true in the mortgage and housing

October 24-25, 2006

49 of 203

industry—and that is what’s driving yields down. So I think that it’s important to keep an open
mind to the possibility that a more fundamental slowing than we see in the current numbers is
taking place and to make sure that we don’t dismiss incoming data and say it can’t really be
happening. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Five weeks have passed since our last FOMC
meeting, and not surprisingly the outlook does not appear to have changed in any fundamental
way. Recent data bearing on the near-term situation point to noticeably slower growth in the
third quarter than we anticipated at our last meeting. However, the Greenbook has revised up its
projection for growth during the current and next few quarters so that the overall effect on slack
next year is roughly neutral. This forecast strikes me as plausible, but there are few data thus far
to bear it out. Meanwhile, measures of consumer price inflation remain uncomfortably high,
although the latest readings have been very slightly better.
With regard to the pace of economic activity, there’s uncertainty in all directions. In fact,
we seem to have a bimodal economy with a couple of weak sectors, and the rest of the economy
doing just fine. Those two weak sectors are, of course, housing and domestic auto production.
Autos seem likely to have only a short-lived effect. In the case of housing, we agree with the
Greenbook assessment of housing activity and find it quite consistent with the reports of our
contacts in this sector. Besides the falloff in activity, house-price increases have also slowed
markedly. The Case-Shiller house-price index has been flat in recent months, and futures on this
index show outright declines next year. However, equity valuations for homebuilders, as Cathy
mentioned, have risen moderately in the past couple of months, following large declines over the
previous year, and we interpret that as providing some indication that the expected future path of

October 24-25, 2006

50 of 203

home prices has at least stopped deteriorating. Of course, housing is a relatively small sector of
the economy, and its decline should be self-correcting. So the bigger danger is that weakness in
house prices could spread to overall consumption through wealth effects. This development
would deepen and extend economic weakness, potentially touching off a nonlinear type of
downward dynamic that could trigger a recession. But so far at least, there are no signs of such
spillovers. Consumption spending seems on track for healthy growth.
Nonetheless, the growth estimate for the third quarter begins with a 1 and just barely.
Any time a forecast is that low, it’s reasonable to consider the possibility that the economy could
enter recession. So for this reason, we, like the Board’s staff, took a careful look at various
approaches to assess this issue, including yield-curve-based models, past forecast errors, leading
indicator models, and surveys. Our bottom line is that we agree with the basic results reported in
Monday’s nonfinancial briefing. The highest probability of recession that we found, around
40 percent, was obtained from a model developed by a Board staff member. The model includes
the slope of the yield curve and the level of the funds rate. An issue with this result is that
long-term rates may currently be low, hence the yield curve inverted, for unusual and not very
well understood reasons having to do with the risk premium. Estimates from the other
approaches came in with lower probabilities. Finally, other financial developments that could
presage future economic performance, like stock market movements and risk spreads, suggest
some optimism on the part of financial market participants.
So our sense is that, except for housing and autos, the economy appears to be doing quite
well. Indeed, the recent rather sharp drop in energy prices could boost consumption spending
even more than assumed in the Greenbook. While this is a possibility, it seems more likely to

October 24-25, 2006

51 of 203

me that households ran down their savings to fill their gas tanks when gas prices rose and are,
therefore, likely to use their recent savings at the pump to bolster their finances, at least partly.
Overall, under the assumption of an unchanged funds rate, our forecast shows a beautiful
soft landing, with real GDP growing at a moderately below-trend pace for a few more quarters
and homing in near trend thereafter. But I must admit that we got this forecast essentially by
averaging the strong and weak sides of the economy. I think that way of proceeding is
reasonable, and I hope the landing happens that way. But I acknowledge there is plenty of risk.
We may end up instead with either the strong or the weak side dominating the outcome. For
example, if the housing market decline does not spread significantly to consumption, we could
end up with a strong economy in fairly short order. However, if it does spread, the slowdown
could last quite a while. Scenarios like this are nicely spelled out in the alternative simulations in
the Greenbook.
Which way things go is a key issue, given that we’re in the vicinity of full employment.
The desired soft landing depends on growth remaining below trend long enough to offset the
moderate amount of excess demand that appears to be in the economy so that inflation can trend
gradually lower. The slight drop in unemployment, to 4.6 percent, in September did not help in
that regard, and I should note that recent comments by our head office directors almost uniformly
supported the idea that labor markets, especially for skilled workers, are tight. However, we do
expect the unemployment rate to edge higher over the next year in response to sluggish growth.
Our forecast for core consumer inflation comes down a bit faster than foreseen by the
Greenbook. We have core PCE price inflation edging down from just under 2½ percent this year
to just over 2 percent in 2007 and see a good chance that it may fall a bit below 2 percent in the
following year. We see the relief on energy prices as helpful, although we keep trying to resist

October 24-25, 2006

52 of 203

any temptation to overestimate the extent to which past energy price pass-through has been
boosting core inflation. Inflation also may benefit from an unwinding of the earlier strong
pressures on rents. Finally, as in the discussion we had earlier about the alternative Greenbook
scenario, we think inflation may have become less persistent over the past decade, and this is one
reason that we’re a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook about the possible degree of
disinflation over the next couple of years. But on balance, I have to admit we don’t have a
perfect understanding of why inflation has been so high over the past few years, and so I try to
remain humble, as always, in my predictions.
My bottom line is this. I see a non-negligible chance that the downside risks to the
economy, emanating especially from housing, could produce a recession in coming quarters, but
there’s a very good chance that the spillovers will be sufficiently modest that the economy will
avoid a recession. I also see a significant chance that growth could modestly exceed potential.
In that sense, the overall risks to the outlook for real GDP growth could be characterized as
balanced. In addition, I see quite a bit of uncertainty about inflation going forward with the risks
to my forecast probably being a bit to the high side.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. It’s just a little after 4:00. Why don’t we take a
coffee break and come back at 4:20?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mr. Stockton.
MR. STOCKTON. It’s amazing how great my answers are to your questions at 3 o’clock
in the morning after an FOMC meeting. [Laughter] I want to address just a couple of things that
came up during the question-and-answer session.

October 24-25, 2006

53 of 203

First, on the issue that President Yellen raised about the expectational channel. That’s a
pretty small piece of the story in the way that these model simulations work, so I don’t think you
should worry too much that it is being a significant factor. It is a small factor slowing the pace
of disinflation. The model guys tell me that the dollar channel is probably the more important
factor there.
Second, in response to President Moskow’s question about house-price modeling, I
should have said we do have several models of house-price determination, none of which we
think are very good. [Laughter] One is an error-correction model that takes seriously the notion
that, when house prices are very high relative to rents, there’s a correction that will bring the
price-rent ratio back to the historical average, and we estimate the speed of that correction. That
model taken seriously would suggest outright house-price declines in 2007 and 2008. We also
have a simpler model based on momentum. That model suggests a bit of deceleration but
nowhere near the amount of deceleration suggested by the error-correction model. Our forecast
cuts between those two simply as an indication of our ignorance about which of those models
might be best at capturing the current situation.
Third, in response to President Pianalto’s question, besides the notion that the
less-persistence scenario could reflect greater credibility anchoring monetary policy, some
structural changes could be taking place in the economy in terms of greater flexibility of labor
markets and maybe greater price flexibility as well. I don’t think that’s an unreasonable
hypothesis. One could think about and be surprised at the extent to which workers have taken a
significant hit to their real wage this time without trying to recoup any of it through higher
nominal wages. That may indicate that labor markets and maybe product markets are changing
in a way that will make the overall inflation adjustment more rapid than the inertia models that

October 24-25, 2006

54 of 203

underlie our staff projections. I hope those responses are a little clearer. I’ll sleep better tonight.
[Laughter] Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Fifth District survey for October just
released today shows manufacturing flattening out after a run-up last month, though expectations
remain upbeat. Services firms note solid increases in revenues, and overall District job growth
remains strong. Among retailers, big-ticket sales were softer, and housing-related sales slowed
further; but with other retailers, the picture brightened, with sales and traffic notably stronger.
The housing sector continues to slow, with sales weakening further in the D.C. area and modest
price reductions occurring in other large markets. Some cities in the Carolinas, however,
continue to report modest increases in home sales prices and even permits, and in many
locations, activity varies significantly across different price ranges. District labor markets
remain tight, and our surveys indicate that expectations are for some additional wage pressures in
the next six months. This commentary includes the now-usual reports of shortages of particular
skills. Our price measures moderated some, but they remain elevated.
The national outlook has changed only marginally in the past five weeks. At our last few
meetings, we have seen the staff mark down their forecast for second-half growth as the pace of
the contraction in housing activity has become clear. The information that has come in over the
past several weeks does not suggest any steepening in the rate of decline, and if anything, there
are scattered signs suggesting that we might be getting close to the bottom. Except for housing,
the economy still appears to be in good shape. Consumer spending is holding up well.
Employment is tracking labor force growth. Commercial construction is fairly robust, and
business investment spending continues to grow. So we’re still not seeing any major spillovers

October 24-25, 2006

55 of 203

from the housing market to other economic sectors. Housing is certainly going to subtract from
headline growth over the next couple of quarters, but I expect GDP growth to return to close to
potential at some point next year, and I remain more optimistic than the staff about when that
will occur. There is a risk that output growth will come in lower than I anticipate because of a
more severe deterioration of the housing markets or more substantial spillover effects on other
spending categories. Although it’s certainly too early to rule this out, I think the probability of
such an outcome has receded in recent weeks. So my outlook for real growth is about the same
as it was in September with, if anything, a tad less downside risk.
The inflation outlook has not improved since our last meeting. The September core CPI
reading was 2.9 at an annual rate, identical to the August reading, and core PCE inflation for
September is estimated at an annual rate of about 2.1 percent, I think. I grant that three-month
core PCE inflation has come down off its May peak of close to 3 percent. I do take some
comfort in the fact that core inflation did not remain so high, but that measure of inflation has
been right about 2¼ percent for three straight months. The Greenbook forecast has it stepping up
to 2.4 percent for the next six months and falling below 2.2 percent only in the second quarter of
2008. So three-month core PCE inflation is now as low as it gets for the next year and a half in
the Greenbook forecast, and at the end of 2008, core inflation will have been above 2 percent for
five straight years.
I have my doubts about the prospects for even the modest decline described in the
Greenbook. The notion that slowing real growth will bring inflation down much has already
been heavily discounted around this table—and rightly so, in my view, given the tenuous status
of the relationship between real gaps and inflation. The recent fall in energy prices may help, but
relying on tame energy prices is problematic, I think. It would encourage the public to believe

October 24-25, 2006

56 of 203

that we will allow core inflation to rise whenever energy prices surge. That belief is, for me, the
leading hypothesis explaining the run-ups in core inflation that we saw last fall and earlier this
year. We are likely to see some significant swings in energy prices in the years ahead. So help
from this direction is by no means certain. More broadly, I believe we should be leery of letting
a relative price move core inflation around.
There was a lot of discussion at our last meeting about the state of inflation expectations,
and a number of people pointed to evidence that market participants did not seem to believe we
intend to bring inflation down to the center of the 1 to 2 percent range. This is confirmed by the
Bluebook, which provides a very useful compilation this time from various sources of market
expectations for core PCE inflation, and they are all clustered around 2¼ percent. If the
Greenbook forecast is realized and core inflation gradually comes down to 2.1 percent over the
next two years, it’s hard to believe these expectations would fall much. So with core inflation
running around 2¼ percent and not likely to come down much soon and with expectations
apparently settled at about the same rate, I’m deeply concerned about inflation. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our view of the national
outlook hasn’t changed much since September. If monetary policy follows the path that’s laid
out in the Greenbook, and it’s flat for the next few quarters, then we expect growth to return to a
level close to 3 percent in ’07 and for inflation to moderate gradually from current levels.
However, we still face the basic tension in the forecast—the combination of relatively high core
inflation today and an economy that has slowed significantly below trend—and we still face the
same basic questions: Will inflation moderate enough and soon enough to keep inflation
expectations reasonably stable at reasonably low levels? Will weakness spread beyond housing

October 24-25, 2006

57 of 203

and cumulate? Relative to September, we see somewhat less downside risk to growth and
somewhat less upside risk to inflation, but as in September, I think inflation risks should remain
our predominant concern.
Relative to the Greenbook, we expect somewhat faster growth in ’07, but we have a
higher estimate of potential. The difference is really mostly about hours and trend labor force
growth. We expect more moderation in core PCE and expect it to fall just below 2 percent in
’07, but this difference is mostly the result of different assumptions about persistence. With
these exceptions, our basic story about the contour of the expansion is fairly close to the
Greenbook, and the implications for monetary policy are similar.
The markets do seem relatively positive, a little more optimistic about the near-term
outlook. Equity prices, credit spreads, and market interest rates all reflect somewhat less concern
about both recession and inflation risks. Some of this, however, is probably the result of the
exceptional factors supporting what the markets call liquidity. What is liquidity, and what’s
behind it? I don’t know that we have a good answer to that. Most people would cite a
combination of the facts that real interest rates are fairly low in much of the world still, that
reserve accumulation by the countries that shadow the dollar is still quite large, that a big
energy-price windfall is producing demand for financial assets, particularly in dollars, and that
there is confidence in the willingness and ability of the central bank, particularly this central
bank, to save the world from any significant risk of a recession. I don’t think all of this,
therefore, is the result simply of confidence about fundamentals, so we shouldn’t take too much
reassurance. But it still is a somewhat more positive constellation of asset prices, of market
views about the outlook.

October 24-25, 2006

58 of 203

Someone wrote this week that the fog over the outlook has lifted. I don’t think that’s
quite right. It’s true that the economy still looks pretty good except for housing, and I do think
it’s fair to say that core inflation is moderating and that expectations are behaving in ways that
should be pretty reassuring to us. But it is too soon to be confident that inflation is going to
moderate sufficiently soon enough with the path of monetary policy priced into markets today,
and it is too soon to be confident also that the weakness we see in housing, in particular, won’t
spread and won’t cumulate. So I think that overall the balance of risks hasn’t changed
dramatically, and as in September, I still view the inflation risk as the predominant concern of
the Committee.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee’s focus has been on
encouraging a gradual abatement of core inflation, and I think the limited evidence we’ve gotten
since the last meeting is consistent with this outcome. The price data themselves show some
signs of deceleration of core inflation on a three-month basis from the very high levels of last
spring and summer, though the rates are still elevated. A further decline in energy prices should
help to keep inflation expectations down and will take a little pressure off business costs and core
inflation even if pass-throughs are fairly small. As expected, the rent-of-shelter component has
been increasing less rapidly, supporting the projection that, in a soft housing market with
overhangs of unsold housing units, this component will not be boosting measured inflation rates
very much. Inflation expectations as derived from financial market quotes remain at the lower
levels reached earlier this fall. As the Bluebook notes, the exact level of these expectations is
really impossible to tease out of the data; and although they may be a bit higher than we would

October 24-25, 2006

59 of 203

like, they do look lower than the recent twelve-month inflation rates and, at these levels, should
exert some downward gravitational pull on realized inflation.
The economy appears to be running modestly below the rate of growth of its potential,
and this should relieve pressure on labor and product markets. How far the economy is running
below potential in an underlying sense is uncertain. I suspect it is not as weak as the estimated
third-quarter GDP number but is somewhat softer than the labor market indicators, which show
no slackening in the pace of demand or decline in resource utilization. I base this conclusion in
part on the data and projections of final domestic and total demand, which the Greenbook has
averaging in the neighborhood of 2 percent in the second half of the year. Industrial production
was weak in August and September, pulled down by the ongoing inventory corrections in
housing and autos, and this reinforced my sense that, at least for a time, the economy is growing
a bit below the rate of growth of its potential. Going forward, I think a projection of economic
growth gradually recovering next year as the drag from housing abates is reasonable, with
growth supported by favorable financial conditions and lower energy prices. How quickly it
returns to potential is an open question. Though other forms of spending have proven resilient to
date, I agree with the staff analysis that some spillovers on consumption and investment from the
weakness in housing and in housing wealth are likely to restrain growth at least a little next year.
I also see that the spending risk is still pointed somewhat to the downside, although less so than
at the last meeting. To be sure, the recent signs are somewhat reassuring that the housing market
isn’t weakening faster than expected. Still, in the staff forecast the housing market is left with a
relatively high level of inventory at the end of 2008, and prices are still elevated relative to rents,
suggesting the possibility of greater declines in activity and prices. In addition, equity prices are
vulnerable to disappointing earnings as labor costs rise even gradually.

October 24-25, 2006

60 of 203

The economy is most likely to grow a little below its potential for a while and inflation to
trend gradually lower. All in all, this is a pretty good outcome following the earlier oil price
shock and rise in core inflation and housing market correction. With demand outside of housing
as resilient as it has been and inflation as high as it has persisted, the extent and trajectory of the
expected inflation trend is uncertain and should remain our focus. A failure of inflation to
reverse the uptick of earlier this year before it becomes embedded in higher inflation
expectations continues to be the main risk to good, sustained economic performance over time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, again, as some of you have said, in five
weeks we don’t have a whole lot of new information. But I’m coming back and starting with
housing again. As you know, that continues to be something I watch. Let me just make a few
comments and give you recent feedback from some exams and dialogues with brokers that I’d
like to share with you. Looking at both starts and permits, we all know that housing is
continuing to soften in terms of construction, and we have also identified the increasing number
of contract cancellations for new housing. Someone mentioned earlier the noise that we may be
having around housing data, and I get this through some of the anecdotal conversations that I’ve
had with folks. One topic was the inventory of existing housing for sale. I’m hearing from a
couple of real estate brokers that people who may have wanted to sell their homes or may have
put them up for sale are withdrawing them from the market. They don’t need to move, and it
isn’t worthwhile for them to move if they don’t get the price they want. I think the supply was
possibly bigger than what we’re really measuring, and so we’re seeing some understating of

October 24-25, 2006

61 of 203

what desired house sales would be in terms of inventory. That’s continuing; it is just beginning
at this stage, at least in a couple of regions, according to folks with whom I’ve talked.
One of the challenges that we’re faced with here is that—again, I try to look for the good
news—in the housing purchase process, people file applications for mortgages very often before
they qualify to buy the house. When you look at the Mortgage Bankers Association data on
purchase mortgage applications, as I mentioned before, they dropped 20 percent from their peak
of last summer, but in the past few months they have been leveling off. So if applications are a
leading indicator, we may begin to see some moderation in housing purchases. However, the 20
percent drop in purchase mortgage applications means that mortgage brokers are earning a lot
less income. If they don’t close a transaction, most of them get no paycheck because three out of
four mortgages are originated not in financial institutions but by independent brokers. We’re
beginning to see increasing evidence of this in terms of the quality of mortgages that are out
there. We continue to track the mortgages that have vintages—in other words, that were
originated—in 2005, and we are continuing to see that, as these mortgages age, the early
delinquencies for these are greater than early delinquencies for similar-aged mortgages of earlier
vintages, which implies a loosening of underwriting standards and more stress on the borrowers.
We are also seeing in a small way increased predatory activity with loans. Certain
practices have been described to me lately with new products, such as the 2-28 mortgage, which
is fixed for two years and then escalates and becomes an ARM tied to LIBOR in the third year.
But don’t worry—you can refinance it with the broker and bring your payment down and do it
all over again. We’re seeing those kinds of things—mortgages for which people are being
qualified by brokers with no escrow account; all of a sudden taxes are due, and borrowers don’t
have the money for them. So predatory lending is rearing its head at the lower end of the scale,

October 24-25, 2006

62 of 203

and it’s something we have to continue to watch for. However, before I leave housing, let me
just say that the bottom line is that overall mortgage credit quality is still very, very strong.
We’re seeing predatory lending only in pockets of the market.
I continue to believe that the rest of the economy—except for autos, I should add—is still
very strong. Consumer spending is good, and business fixed investment is very sound. The
moderation in energy prices and the growth in consumer income will continue to add support to
the economy going forward. Jobless claims have been low and moving in a very narrow range
the past few months. As several of you have mentioned, I’m hearing more concern by corporate
executives about the inability to hire the talent they need to meet their business plans, and so I’m
seeing more indication of tightness in labor markets.
Turning to inflation, as many of you have said, core inflation has moderated from the
pace in the third quarter. But going forward in the Greenbook forecast, it is still showing
significant persistence even though we think we will be growing, at least for a period, below
potential. That concerns me because that level is higher than I’m comfortable with in the long
run. We might have had some spillover effects from rising commodity and energy prices earlier
on, but I was hoping at this point that, with the reversing, we would see more-positive spillover
effects that would mitigate inflation. So I am very worried about inflation. At the same time, I
know that negative spillover effects on growth due to the rapid decline in housing construction
and the moderating house-price appreciation are risks, which we cannot dismiss, to growth; but
on net I am still much more concerned about the persistence of inflation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.

October 24-25, 2006

63 of 203

MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My own views are quite consistent with what
I expressed five weeks ago and with the central tendency of many of the speakers today—that is,
a greater concern about inflation prospects than growth prospects. So I thought what I’d do is
just give you maybe three or four perspectives on market activity in the intermeeting period and
suggest to you what conclusions we can draw from them and what conclusions I’d hesitate to
draw.
First, as we noted at the last meeting, the growth in the equity markets is all about
earnings and not about multiples. As the markets record the eighteenth double-digit quarterly
growth rate, with quarterly growth in the third quarter likely to exceed, on an annualized basis,
the second quarter, on one level you would see reasons for earnings momentum and for more
robustness than the Greenbook shows in the prospect for business fixed investment. Despite
those headlines, I think the Greenbook probably has the general slowdown in business fixed
investment and the general slowdown in manufacturing about right. Again, at some superficial
level you would think that these stock prices would be juicing business activity—that animal
spirits would be as high as they’ve ever been. But in fact, what we can say with some
confidence is that historical models of cash and profits have done a poor job of indicating what
the strength of business demand would be here. Although business demand has certainly picked
up over this cycle, it appears not to have picked up as dramatically as a lot of the data might
suggest.
So what does that mean? I think it means that there is generally still conservatism in
board rooms, conservatism by CFOs. Although they have plenty of ammunition in terms of their
access to capital markets and their cash balances, we’ll likely see them use that only when it’s
clear that the economy has turned. If this soft landing followed by a gradual acceleration does

October 24-25, 2006

64 of 203

appear to be the most likely path, I would expect to see these companies put their feet on the
accelerator a bit more and make sure that growth gets back to trend relatively quickly. But the
idea that businesses are going to turbo-charge their way through this without hesitation appears
to be less likely than the data would suggest.
Second, let me turn to the debt markets. There is a discussion among pundits about a tug
of war going on between growth risks and inflation risks. As I look at the data in the debt
markets, I must say that I don’t see that tug of war. The only tug of war is really between a soft
landing and a harder landing, under the view that inflation is almost assuredly going to be solved
by the central bank or by exogenous factors. Again, a superficial conclusion would be, boy, the
markets are not worried about inflation, and we should take great comfort in it. Rather, the thing
that gives me the greatest pause is that, just as inflation is nowhere on the table in the capital
markets now, it could quickly emerge; and it would not take much data, which all of us would
consider to be relatively noisy and perhaps not overly valid, for inflation to become part of the
discussion in the debt markets. That’s something I think we have to prepare for. I suspect, as I
think about the balance of this year, that another round of discussions in the capital markets
about an inflation scare is quite possible.
The third issue is really one of short-term volatility, which I tend not to overreact to, but I
do think this particular case is telling. Typically, several weeks after a quarter, the markets’
assessment of that quarter’s GDP ends up trending toward truth and ends up without a huge
disparity as they get closer to and smarter about the underlying information. I have no reason to
doubt our own staff’s view that third-quarter GDP is likely to come in around 1 percent.
Nonetheless, the markets’ estimates are quite far away from that. Market estimates have, in fact,
trended down, but I’d say the median estimate in the market is still in the high ones, maybe even

October 24-25, 2006

65 of 203

2 percent. So the question really is, come Friday, if the headline number posts the way that the
staff suggests it will, what the market will say about that. My own view is that there will then be
an immediate rush to judgment probably amplified to the downside in a political season like this.
They will say, “Boy, the economy is really on the wrong track, and the economic landing is a
very hard one.” Whether that judgment dissipates as markets look forward and start to
understand the reasons for the shortfall is a bit of a concern. Also, some in the marketplace may
have the view that, if that landing is relatively hard and fast, the pace of economic growth will do
our work for us on the inflation front. Obviously I don’t think that view is shared by many of us
around the table; in fact, there might be more work for us to do. It wouldn’t surprise me if the
markets didn’t, at the end of this period, expect there to be a couple of rate cuts built into the first
half of 2007, and I suspect we’ll need to send Don back out there to give them another speech.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I second the motion. [Laughter]
MR. WARSH. What does all of this mean for the real economy? Again, I’d break it up
into two pieces. First, in terms of a consumer reaction function, I think consumers are going to
be very stubborn and very strong and are not going to be overly scared by a third-quarter GDP
number that they don’t really pay that much attention to. On a very fundamental level they are
feeling much better about their prospects now than they have felt in some time, this is a function
of some of the wage growth that we’ve seen and a function of oil prices and the unemployment
rate. So I don’t really worry that there will be any short or intermediate effect on the consumer.
I think the Greenbook has consumer spending continuing in the fourth quarter at something like
3 percent. That’s probably a very conservative estimate given the strength of some of those
underlying fundamentals. Second, what’s the effect of this on the real economy for businesses?

October 24-25, 2006

66 of 203

I’m more concerned about their reaction function. Despite the rather robust discussion in the
business sector that I mentioned at the outset, I would expect them to be concerned. As they’re
thinking about their capital expenditures plans for 2007 and as they’re doing their fiscal year-end
meetings, on balance the concern and the discussion of a hard landing may well affect their
ability to bet big and make big projects. So, again, I share the rather conservative view that the
staff expressed in the Greenbook in terms of where business investment is going to be.
Finally, let me just talk for a moment about inflation—again in the context of these
market perspectives. I tried to be as witty as David is in this discussion, and during the break it
occurred to me that I should call this section “Inflation: Are Objects in Mirror Larger than They
Appear?” [Laughter] That’s my half-hearted effort at humor. I’ve probably talked about the
TIPS markets at least as much as other folks around this table in the past six or seven months,
and I do find some comfort in them. But I find myself increasingly viewing them as being a bit
divorced from some of the data. My view is that expectations of inflation relevant for price
setting may have deteriorated much more substantially than the TIPS markets and the survey
measures suggest. I think the Greenbook has an alternative simulation that hits this case well,
and its conclusion has to be that expectations may account for more of this year’s rise in core
inflation than either we or the markets estimate. Inflation is likely going to be particularly sticky
in the labor markets, given my discussion a moment ago. Very low unemployment insurance
claims, very low unemployment, and strong wage and job growth make me believe that the labor
market may actually be tightening at the same time that everything else we’ve talked about is
happening in the housing markets. The revision from BLS suggested that they found 810,000
jobs through March. When all is said and done about the subsequent six-month period, they may
have found more jobs as well, bolstering the case that the labor markets may, in fact, be quite

October 24-25, 2006

67 of 203

tight. Total compensation is up about 8.3 percent, the fastest rate since the third quarter of 2000.
Average hourly earnings have accelerated now to 4 percent. At the end of the day, we should
take some comfort from the TIPS spreads, but not reliance. As we think about the measure of
TIPS spreads as an indication of inflation expectations, I am troubled, probably increasingly, that
the TIPS markets appear to be following our forecast rather than the actual data, and we have to
continue to address that problem proactively with the markets. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d actually like to start with a plea based
on something that President Fisher said. I’d like to be treated like a welder. Can I get a show-up
bonus? [Laughter]
MR. FISHER. Then we’ll be waiting for a completion bonus. [Laughter]
MR. KROSZNER. As everyone has said, there has been relatively little information to
change people’s outlook fundamentally. We have the same sort of tension that we’ve had
before—slowing growth but persistent inflation. Although we see some signs that inflation is
coming down, it is still persisting at a higher level than many people, including me, would like it
to be. Despite the slowing housing market, private domestic final purchases continue to be
reasonably robust. The low third-quarter numbers in the Greenbook are really due to some
volatile areas, some special factors: inventories reflecting the weakness in the auto sector, some
changes in the auto sector, and timing of defense purchases. Net exports also tend to be fairly
volatile.
The suggestion is that maybe this low is just temporary, as the Greenbook has said. Also,
virtually everyone around the table has suggested that the labor markets are really quite robust.
Exactly as Governor Warsh said, some of the recent numbers suggest that compensation is on the

October 24-25, 2006

68 of 203

rise, although the ECI is still not quite as robust as some of the other measures. Certainly we
could have a benign scenario in which the continuing high profit margins absorb some of these
higher labor costs without necessarily leading to higher price pressures down the line. But the
high equity markets may also be supporting high demand, or the recent increases in the equity
markets could be to some extent offsetting the decreasing wealth effects from the housing
market. Obviously, there could be a tension if the markets start to come down and profits aren’t
quite as robust as people have been projecting. We also may have other temporary factors that
seem to be boosting domestic final purchases—the decline in prices for oil, natural gas, and
gasoline. I hope that the lower prices will persist, but certainly the energy sector is extremely
volatile with prices moving around enormously; and as a number of people mentioned, there are
a lot of potential problems down the line that could lead to higher energy prices. One thing that
didn’t lead to higher energy prices this year was a very benign climate. We had unusually good
weather this year. Last year and the previous year, we had unusually bad weather. So I don’t
know whether a number of factors are just making us have a bit of luck right now and are
perhaps temporarily boosting demand.
What does this mean for inflation? As we always say, there are transitory factors, and
there are more likely to be permanent factors. We’ve talked about some measurement issues
with respect to owners’ equivalent rent—probably that’s something transitory. We’re certainly
not certain about that. As for energy shocks, we have very little evidence that there has been a
lot of feed-through from energy shocks to core inflation, and as a number of people mentioned, I
don’t think we can rely too much on the decline in energy to say, “Well, it didn’t get there on the
way up, but it will help us on the way down.” I don’t see a good basis for relying on that
asymmetry. There is the standard output gap story, but from discussions around the table and

October 24-25, 2006

69 of 203

certainly from the Greenbook, I think there is not an enormous output gap to rely on to bring
inflation down, even if one believed that that gap has an important effect—and there is vanishing
evidence that it has an important effect.
Then there’s the role of expectations in the economic models—the multiple equilibriums
story. Just our markets’ belief that inflation will be relatively low going forward affects
price-setting behavior, which affects the willingness of consumers to pay more for goods and
services. That leaves us with a benign but very fragile scenario. As we know, with any so-called
multiple equilibriums situation, it’s not clear exactly what is driving expectations. Obviously,
part is their belief in the people around this table, which is something that is incredibly
important; it’s something that we really need to maintain, but something that we don’t
understand very well. In these five weeks, we haven’t had much change in the fundamentals, but
I am left just as uncomfortable about really understanding the inflation situation, the short-run
inflation dynamics, because we have an output gap approach, an energy shocks approach, an
expectations approach, and sort of a measurement approach with owners’ equivalent rent.
I take a bit of each of these, and there has been a lot of discussion of the different ones
around the table; but I don’t think we have a good, overarching view of what is driving inflation,
what the key inflation factors are. For me, that’s one of the most worrisome things going
forward because I find it hard to put all of them into a consistent framework. It would be
valuable for us to think a great deal about that. Certainly, it may come up in the discussion of the
communication strategy, but it’s something that I’m trying to face more and have found it more
difficult to understand.
We’re going to get an enormous amount of information. We have holiday retail sales
coming up, so we’re going to find out a lot about consumption. We have two employment

October 24-25, 2006

70 of 203

reports coming up. We have two rounds of ISM, preliminary revised GDP, ECI, and a lot of
information on the housing market. We’ll probably find out a lot more, because in the colder
areas the housing market tends to slow down naturally. The seasonal is very strong there. So we
should know from some of the data in December whether the numbers from permits, which
suggest that the housing market is continuing to go down, or the starts numbers, which seem to
be flattening out, show where we are likely to be at the beginning of next year. There’s a lot of
uncertainty with respect to both the economy and inflation. In particular, my inflation concerns
come from not having an overarching way of understanding whether the factors that we talk
about as temporary are really going to be temporary. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I see it, the data have actually been
coming in very much along the lines of where we were at the last meeting in terms of the
outlook. The only way that I would change my view slightly is actually good news, in that I see
somewhat less downside potential than I saw at the last meeting. In particular, I think that the
housing market, although it has retrenched a lot, which I actually consider a rebalancing of the
economy, does not look as though it’s going to collapse in a nonlinear way. For example, we see
that the market has some expectations along those lines—for example, the stock prices of
builders have actually come back a substantial amount. We also see that consumers seem to be
holding up very well. The real danger that we were worried about in terms of a housing market
retrenchment is that it would spill over in a nonlinear way to the household sector. We don’t see
any evidence of that either. Consumer confidence is staying strong. The stock market is up—
again, an indication that these spillover effects are not occurring over and above those that we
think would be normal in terms of wealth effects and so forth. So, for me, there is actually some

October 24-25, 2006

71 of 203

good news here in that the possibility of a soft landing has actually increased. My view of where
the economy is heading has not undergone a major change, but I have a bit less in the downside
tails than I had before.
The characterization of a deceleration of core PCE inflation also seems to be a very
reasonable one. I think the evidence is moving in that direction. But I do want to emphasize that
I see no reason that core PCE inflation will fall below 2 percent. We see that inflation
expectations are solidly grounded. The good news in that has been that we had an increase in
energy prices and we did not see an acceleration of inflation expectations. However, the
numbers there are around 2½ percent on the CPI, and that’s consistent with a 2 percent PCE
deflator inflation. When we think about going out past the two years, I do see deceleration along
the lines of the Greenbook. I don’t see anything more encouraging after that. Talking about the
issue of potentially less persistence does not tell us, in fact, that inflation should fall below what
inflation expectations are anchored at. So thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Let me summarize what I heard, and then I
would like to make a few comments of my own.
There were several themes around the table. Many people noted the bimodal economy.
Housing is still quite weak, although a number of people noted that they thought the lower tail
had been trimmed somewhat. Autos are undergoing inventory adjustment, and some people
noted slowing in a few other sectors. However, the general view was that spillovers from
housing to the rest of the economy had not yet occurred. Most people noted that the labor
market is quite healthy, with widespread shortages of labor, particularly of skilled workers. It
was further noted that consumption spending would be supported by the job market, by income
growth, and by the fall in energy prices. Overall, the assessments of growth, as I heard them,

October 24-25, 2006

72 of 203

were that it would be moderate going forward, either around potential or perhaps slightly below
potential, and some saw a bit of upside risk to that projection.
With respect to inflation, costs of raw materials and energy are rising more slowly or are
declining, and headline inflation has fallen with energy costs. Some felt that core inflation
would moderate gradually, but others were less confident about that. The behavior of rents and
the behavior of productivity are two important unknowns going forward, and wage growth
probably presents the biggest upside risk to inflation. Most members expressed concerns that the
high level of inflation could raise inflation expectations and undermine Fed credibility. So the
general view, which I think essentially everyone shares, was that the upside risks to inflation
exceed the downside risks to growth at this juncture.
I hope that summary was okay; let me just make a few comments of my own. As a
number of people noted, the intermeeting data were actually fairly limited. The employment
report did indicate a fairly strong labor market. There is still, to my mind, some disconnect
between the anecdotes and the data; in particular, the wage data do not yet reflect what I’m
hearing around the table about wage premiums. For example, average hourly earnings actually
grew more slowly in the third quarter than in the second quarter. I think the ECI next week will
be a very important check for our anecdotes. On the positive side, as Kevin and others noted, the
tone was generally stronger in financial markets. The stock market is up. I note the ten-year real
rate was up about 15 basis points since the last meeting, which I take to be a positive indication
of growth.
Oil prices continue to decline, which obviously is good for both growth and inflation. I
thought you might be interested in thinking about the quantity effects of the decline in oil prices.
We’ve had a decline in oil prices of about $15, which back-of-the-envelope calculations or

October 24-25, 2006

73 of 203

FRB/US analysis can tell us should add about 0.45 percent to the level of real consumption or
about 0.35 percent to the level of real GDP. Dave Reifschneider was very helpful in finding
those numbers. That’s a change to the level, so the oil price declines could add 0.3 to
0.4 percentage point to growth, say, over the next six quarters. Another way to look at that is to
think about the relationship between oil prices and house prices. A rule of thumb that might be
useful is that a $3 decline in oil prices offsets approximately a 1 percentage point decline in
house prices in terms of overall consumption effects. So oil price declines are essentially the
negative equivalent of a 5 percent decline in house prices. An interesting question that we may
have to address at some point is, what is the policy implication of oil price declines? I think it’s
clear that oil price declines will lower both total and core inflation, but will also increase growth.
Therefore, our policy response to the lower oil prices could depend on our preferences about
growth versus inflation and also our assessments of the risks to both of those variables.
On the housing correction, I agree that there is perhaps some reduction in the lower tail.
But it’s important to point out that, even if we see some stabilization in starts and permits, a lot
of inventory is still out there, and there’s going to be an inventory correction process that could
be quite significant. The current months’ supply of homes for sale is greater than 6 now,
excluding cancellations; the number over the past eight years has been very stable around 4,
although before 1997 it was higher and more variable, which is a source of uncertainty. To get a
sense of the magnitudes of the potential housing correction, I asked Josh Gallin to do the
following simple simulation. Single-family housing sales were about 1.0 million at an annual
rate in July, about 1.05 million in August. So I asked Josh to consider a case in which sales
flatten out at the level of 1.1 million and continue at that level indefinitely; in addition,
homebuilders respond to three-fourths of the increase in sales by extra building and allow the

October 24-25, 2006

74 of 203

other fourth to go into reducing inventory. When you do that calculation, you find that you
actually work off the inventory. By the end of 2008, the months’ supply is down to 4.1. Part of
that decrease occurs because the sales level is higher, and so the denominator is bigger as well.
Thus that particular scenario is a sensible one in terms of getting the inventories down.
However, the effects on GDP, because the correction is still significant, are not trivial, but they
are also not that large. The effect of this scenario on GDP growth from the fourth quarter of this
year to the second quarter of next year is about 0.2 on growth and about 0.1 in the third and
fourth quarters. So a very substantial part of the housing correction is still in place because of
the need to work off inventories over the next few quarters.
Those are a few comments on the real side. I think that some of the tail risk has been
reduced. I agree with the Greenbook that growth should be slow, at least through the first
quarter of next year, because of housing corrections, but consumption will probably pick up and
lead to a stronger growth path after that.
Let me say a few words about inflation. I think I need to push back a little on the view
that there has been no improvement in core inflation or total inflation. In fact, inflation is very
slow to respond to its determinants, and the fact that we actually have seen some improvement in
some sense is a positive surprise, not a negative surprise. The attention that’s paid to the
twelve-month lagging inflation measure is a problem in this context, because we had four
months of 0.3 percent readings from March to June, and they’re going to stay in that twelvemonth lagging measure until next March. I can predict with great confidence that next March
through next June the twelve-month lagging inflation measure will decline. So I think it’s more
useful, President Lacker, to look, a bit at least, at the higher-frequency measures to see what the
trend of movement is. Although, like President Lacker and others, I’m not happy with the level,

October 24-25, 2006

75 of 203

I think the direction is actually very good. For example, the core CPI three-month went from
3.79 in May to 2.75 in September, so it’s a decline of 104 basis points. The core PCE threemonth inflation measure went from 2.95 in May to 2.20 in September, using the staff estimate
for the core PCE deflator for September. So it’s certainly moving in the right direction.
The other comment I would make about this subject is that we must keep in mind how
much is tied to the owners’ equivalent rent component. I would say, in fact, that once you
exclude that, if you do, just for comparison, that 2006 is roughly equivalent to 2005 in terms of
core PCE inflation. To look at the high frequency numbers, excluding OER, which I’m doing
now for illustrative purposes, core CPI fell from 3.01 in May to 2.23 in September, and core PCE
inflation fell from 2.52 in May to 1.93 in September at an annual rate. This is saying that a
significant part of the speedup and now the decline in the rate is related to this owners’
equivalent rent phenomenon—not all of it, but a significant part. It’s important to know that
because, as we’ve discussed around the table, the OER may have its own dynamic. It may
respond in different ways to monetary policy than some other components do. It is an imputed
price, which people do not actually observe, and so it may have a different effect on expectations
than, say, gasoline prices or other easily observed prices. The other important aspect of the OER
is that, to the extent that it is a major source of the inflation problem, it makes clear that inflation
probably has not been a wage-push problem so far because owners’ equivalent rent is obviously
the cost of buildings, not the cost of labor. So if you look at inflation over the past few months,
there has been slow improvement, and so far I don’t think that we have seen a great deal of
feedthrough of wage pressures into inflation. I’ve looked through all the various categories of
goods and services whose prices have increased, and I can find no particular relationship to labor
market factors.

October 24-25, 2006

76 of 203

Another comment along this line: It’s also true that inflation of even 2.20 percent, which
was the core PCE three-month inflation rate in September, is too high in the long run. I agree it
should be lower than that. We do have to ask ourselves, given that inflation has been high and
that, as people pointed out, it has been high for a number of years now, how quickly we should
bring it down. Most optimal monetary policy models will suggest that a slow reduction is what
you would try to achieve if you start off far away from the target and if the real economy is
relatively weak. Now, the question arises whether we are going in the right direction. I think so
far we are, but I would certainly agree that we have to ensure that we continue to go in the right
direction. The Greenbook forecast is predicated on a constant federal funds rate from the current
level; actually the rate declines in 2008. But what it leaves out is the notion that we are gathering
information and trying to resolve uncertainty, depending on how things develop. Obviously,
policy can respond in one direction or another and could, if inflation does not continue to
decline, be more aggressive to achieve that. I felt I needed to talk a bit about the fact that we do
have some improvement in inflation, and so the situation cannot really be said to be
deteriorating.
Having said all of that, now let me come back and agree with what I’ve heard, which is
that, although we have not yet seen much wage-push inflation, clearly the risk is there.
Anecdotally, and to some extent statistically, we have very tight labor markets. It is surprising
how little wage push there has been so far, and if labor markets continue to stay at this level of
tightness, then one would expect that you would get an inflation effect that would be
uncomfortably persistent. That is a real concern, which I share with everyone around the table.
If the Phillips curve language doesn’t appeal to you, another way of thinking about it is that, if
the labor market stays this tight, which means that growth is at potential or better, then the real

October 24-25, 2006

77 of 203

interest rate that is consistent with that growth rate needs to be higher than it is now. I agree with
that point as well. So my bottom line is that I do agree that inflation is the greater risk, certainly.
I think that the downside risk from output has been slightly reduced. I also think the upside risk
to inflation has been slightly reduced. Thus we’re not in all that different a position than we
were at our last meeting. We can discuss the implications of that tomorrow. I think I’ll stop
there. Yes, President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I was going to make a suggestion. I don’t know whether
there is general assent to this. It seems to me it would be helpful, before our December meeting,
to have a better read on the vulnerability of the housing firms to bankruptcy. I can imagine a lot
of defaults there, causing us some concern or a lot of public concern. Presumably, with all our
banking and housing contacts, we ought to be able to get a better read. All I know is the very
informal kind of feedback that I received over recent weeks, and a lot of people brought up that
all these builders have only six months or so and some of them are going to go under. So a
suggestion is that, as part of the Beige Book process, we try to get a better read on that situation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I would ask the people around the table, in their
conversations in their Districts in particular, to talk to medium-sized homebuilders. We’ve had
the large homebuilders at the Board, and we have considerable contact with them; but what we
don’t have is contact with the medium-sized homebuilders.
MR. POOLE. Right. My understanding is that the large ones are in pretty good shape.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Let me ask the Committee’s preference here. The
reception tonight starts at 5:45, followed by dinner half an hour later. We can adjourn now, or
Vince is prepared to give his opening remarks on the policy session, which would allow us to
finish earlier tomorrow. We’ll do the go-round tomorrow, of course. Jeff?

October 24-25, 2006

78 of 203

MR. LACKER. Let’s adjourn now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. How many people would like to adjourn now?
MR. REINHART. Half the class. [Laughter]
MR. KOHN. Is President Lacker allowed to dissent on that? [Laughter]
MR. LACKER. Nothing personal, Vince.
MS. MINEHAN. We’ll probably remember it between tonight and tomorrow, Vince.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Do I take it, then, that we would like to hear
Vincent’s presentation?
SEVERAL. Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Vincent, whenever you’re ready.
MR. REINHART. 2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The pulse of the market
regarding your policy action today is the flat line in the top panel of your first exhibit.
[Laughter] Not weakish data releases early in the period, nor stronger ones later, nor
speeches by some of you interpreted as hawkish shook the belief that the intended
federal funds rate would remain at 5¼ percent after this meeting. Expectations about
the policy rate at the end of next year, proxied by the December 2007 Eurodollar
futures rate—the dotted line—showed more life, falling about 20 basis points by the
middle of the period but ending up 5 basis points higher, on net. As can be seen in
the middle left panel, market participants still anticipate almost ½ percentage point of
policy easing next year. Once again, as denoted by the green shaded area, the 70
percent confidence interval derived from options prices is quite narrow. We routinely
track the economic forecasts of a subset of nine of the primary dealers, and their
average path for the federal funds rate through 2007 is plotted as the dashed line in
the middle right panel. Those dealers and the forecast from market quotes—but not
the Greenbook assumption plotted as the horizontal line—call for policy easing next
year. The primary dealers’ policy call occurs against the backdrop of forecasts for the
unemployment rate (the bottom left panel) and core CPI inflation (the bottom middle
panel) that about match the Greenbook’s. What is different is plotted at the bottom
right: These dealers expect real GDP growth to track about ½ percentage point
higher than does the staff. One possibility is that these market participants, compared
with the staff, foresee both more drag on domestic spending and faster-expanding
potential output. If so, dealers would correspondingly view policy ease as necessary
to generate economic growth that will be acceptable to you.

2

Material used by Mr. Reinhart is appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

October 24-25, 2006

79 of 203

Your own view as to the economy’s potential to produce no doubt influences your
views on policy, as do your interpretations of the three factors described in exhibit 2.
The top left panel plots existing and new home sales as the solid and dotted lines,
respectively. You might see in that chart that house sales have declined sharply and
view the resulting weakness as a risk to the outlook, as has been the case at the past
few meetings. Alternatively, you might see that home sales appear to be bottoming
out amid generally strong fundamentals. As one newsletter put it—and I think that
the author meant it to be good news about the prospects for spending—that “the point
of maximum deterioration in housing activity has probably passed.” The middle
panel plots the real federal funds rate, which some of you may emphasize has risen
considerably and take its level now to be restrictive. Others, however, might stress
that the real federal funds rate remains below its average of the late 1990s. A third
potential source of alternative interpretations might be the measures of inflation
compensation plotted in the bottom left panel. For some, the chart shows that
inflation compensation remains contained and has declined of late at shorter horizons.
Others may find only cold comfort in this because inflation compensation
nevertheless remains above the range consistent with their price stability objective.
The policy choice today depends on your assessments both of the economy in the
near term and of the appropriate path of inflation over a longer time frame—the
subject of exhibit 3, which repeats some material from the “Medium-Term Strategies”
section of the Bluebook. The solid line in the top left panel plots the setting of the
nominal funds rate that, in the FRB/US model, best achieves the objective of
minimizing deviations of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU and of core PCE
inflation from a goal of 1½ percent, while avoiding jarring adjustments in the nominal
funds rate. The forces shaping the outlook are the same as in the extended Greenbook
baseline, and investors are assumed to understand the entire path of policy—which
they deem credible when determining asset values. Wage and price setters, in
contrast, base their expectations on less information and alter their views on long-run
inflation only sluggishly in response to actual inflation. As is familiar from such
exercises in previous Bluebooks, it thus takes a long time to work down inflation
when the goal is below prevailing inflation expectations at the start of the simulation.
With the Phillips curve as flat and inflation expectations as inertial as in the FRB/US
model and with equal weights placed on the objectives, policymakers find it optimal
to trade off a persistent miss of the inflation goal (the bottom left panel) for smaller
cumulative labor market slack (the middle left panel). In this simulation, progress
may seem especially glacial because the steady dollar depreciation that is required to
rein in the deterioration of the current account generates persistent upward pressure
on domestic inflation. But even the modest progress that is made on inflation under
this scenario requires about ¾ percentage point of firming over the next year.
We explored two modifications of the standard framework to help speed
disinflation. In the first, and as plotted as the dashed red lines on the left,
policymakers are assumed to put much more weight on the inflation goal relative to
maximum employment. Indeed, progress in reducing inflation is notable, but the
unemployment rate is also notably elevated. The simulation underlying the dotted

October 24-25, 2006

80 of 203

green lines maintains the assumption of equal weights in the objective function but
changes the assumption about the information that wage and price setters use so as to
create a more favorable inflation-unemployment rate tradeoff in the short run. This
variant assumes that the level of the nominal funds rate conveys a noisy signal to
wage and price setters about policymakers’ inflation goal. It is optimal, then, to
impose policy restraint early on so as to send inflation expectations down and
accomplish a quicker and less costly disinflation. The credibility you attach to such a
channel may play some role in your willingness to firm policy in the near term. But
you may not see any need to do so if you are drawn to the dashed blue lines in the
right-hand column of charts. Those lines summarize macroeconomic outcomes for
policymakers with an inflation goal of 2 percent. Because current inflation
expectations about comport with that goal, policymakers can keep the nominal funds
rate at 5¼ percent for some time and still observe declines in inflation given the other
forces of disinflation in the baseline.
Exhibit 4 considers some aspects of the wording of your statement to be released
after this meeting, starting with the rationale portion in the boxes at the top. As noted
at the left, in drafting the Bluebook, we proposed including in row 2 of all the draft
statements that “economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third
quarter.” This wording seemed to have the advantage of acknowledging the
upcoming release of the initial third-quarter estimate of real GDP on Friday, which by
the staff’s reckoning is likely to be weak. Some of you may be concerned, however,
that this mention might heighten market scrutiny of that data point or potentially set
up the Committee for failure if the release proves surprisingly strong. As noted in the
top right box, we simplified the language about inflation pressures in row 3 of
alternative A, partly in response to earlier criticism that the Committee could be
interpreted as having slipped a derivative. The statement has been pointing to the
levels of the prices of energy and other commodities as having “the potential to
sustain inflation pressures.” Even if you are not drawn to the phrasing of the rest of
the alternative, you might see some merit in this simplification for row 3. Or you
might not, [laughter] given the focus in markets of changes in the wording of the
statement.
The Bluebook effectively offered four alternatives this time, the three in the table
and a possible middle ground between B and C mentioned in the text. These are laid
out in the remainder of the exhibit. In recent statements, the risk assessment has
pointed to upside risks to inflation and the possible need to firm policy further.
Market participants nevertheless appear to attach greater likelihood to policy easing
than tightening. To protest that view and to underscore its commitment to reduce
inflation, the Committee might choose to modify its words to note, as in alternative
B+, that “although the Committee both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in
inflation, it continues to view the risks to that outcome as remaining to the upside.”
Some of you, however, may view this as change for the sake of change that
unnecessarily risks confusing market participants as to the Committee’s intent.

October 24-25, 2006

81 of 203

For the sake of reference, the last exhibit repeats, with no change, table 1 from the
Bluebook. That concludes my prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there any questions for Vince? President
Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Vince, I want to ask you about charts 5 and 6 in the Bluebook. Also, I
want to make a comment and then ask a question. Chart 5, the equilibrium real federal funds rate
chart, shows that the current fed funds rate is slightly above the range of models that close the
output gap within twelve quarters. It doesn’t really speak to inflation tensions in monetary
policy. However, chart 6 deals directly with inflation and monetary policy, and you have the
2 percent target and the 1½ percent target. Neither scenario achieves the target by 2012, though
you do get closer to the 2 percent target if that were, in fact, our target. Both of the charts are
helpful to us as policymakers. My comment is that I recommend that in future Bluebooks you
include them both, as you have done this time and as you have done sometimes but not
consistently in the past. I think they give us a fuller picture of the total outlook, and it’s more
helpful for policymaking. The question is whether chart 5 and chart 6 can be integrated more
closely so that we can understand the implications in chart 5 of the output gap for inflation.
MR. REINHART. You’re exactly right, and that’s why we tried to put them closer
together in this Bluebook. [Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. So we’re making progress.
MR. REINHART. We’re making progress—incremental, as all progress at the Federal
Reserve is. [Laughter] The notion of the equilibrium real rate is: if you held the real rate
constant for the next twelve quarters, the output gap would close at the end of that period. That
doesn’t, however, mean that you would like the inflation rate you get at the end, twelve quarters
from now. It’s not a policy rule. It’s just a way of summarizing the forces at work in the model.

October 24-25, 2006

82 of 203

The optimum policy exercises explicitly take into account your preferences about inflation as
well; hence, you can get different results. In the future we do want to try talking more about the
equilibrium real interest rate in terms of the full model simulations rather than the reduction
presented in chart 5. Actually, my intention was to include a medium-term scenario in the
Bluebook four times a year. They don’t change all that much, and if your calendar is such that
you’re going to have four two-day meetings next year, it seemed appropriate to line those up.
MR. MOSKOW. Well, I know they don’t change very much, but I still think it’s helpful
to have them side by side as we look at them.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I think I’m echoing Michael, but I want to compliment
the staff on the evolution of the Bluebook. I think that seeing that complement of prisms on
different policy choices or different paths is useful, and we should see them all the time and more
of them. I sort of missed the inclusion of the range of ones we saw in June. But having said that,
may I ask a broader question? I want to come back to the debate we didn’t really have about
whether what we see in TIPS about long-term inflation expectations should be encouraging or
discouraging about the prospects for achieving sufficient moderation in inflation. Would Vince
or David or anybody else like to speak to the question of whether, if TIPS five-year inflation
compensation five years forward stayed at its current level of between 2 and 2½, that would be
holding up underlying inflation going forward? Or would that be consistent with moderation?
Now, you’ve given us a bunch of charts that express a view on that, I think. I don’t know much
about the assumptions underpinning those about the path of expectations going forward.
MR. REINHART. Let me make two points, Mr. Vice Chairman. First, a good measure
of the compliment should be directed to Dave and his staff as well because these model

October 24-25, 2006

83 of 203

simulations really do take a lot of effort on the part of the folks in the MAQS Section in
Research and Statistics. Second, in the box in the Bluebook we tried to take our best guess of
that. Actually, President Lacker mentioned it. The basic problem is that those are measures of
inflation compensation, not inflation expectations. There are both an inflation risk premium and
a differential liquidity premium between nominal and indexed debt that pollute the measure of
inflation compensation. Not only could they change, which potentially changes the level relative
to inflation expectations, but also they could very well be time varying. We’ve seen big swings
in our estimated term premium in the nominal yield curve. We could just as well also be seeing
swings in the inflation risk premium. When we go to those factor models of the term structure
and try to back out those estimates of the inflation risk premium and also try to take account of
the adjustment between CPI and what most of you talked about in terms of core PCE inflation,
we see inflation expectations, at least coming from the Treasury market, in the neighborhood of
2 to 2.4 percent across the term structure. That’s a higher number than what many of you have
identified as your comfort zone, and it’s not inconsistent with what we see from survey measures
as well.
MR. STOCKTON. If you think about the extension of the staff forecast—basically, if
you look at beyond the 2008 period—it’s easy to see how you get back to 2 percent. Beyond
that, I guess our underlying assumption would be that you will have to get inflation expectations
down if you want to have inflation below 2 percent over that longer term. Now, given the way
that we typically run these simulations, you have to create an output gap. There could be other
channels that the model can’t capture—perhaps talk or communications or something could shift
that. As we have indicated, we don’t know the evidence that we would be able to present to you

October 24-25, 2006

84 of 203

to assure you that that would be the case. But it looks as though, to get below 2 percent, more
work would have to be done to get at those expectations.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Just to follow up on that, when we were experiencing rates of PCE and
CPI core inflation below 2 percent and there was considerable concern about the level of
disinflation, what were market expectations saying about inflation at that time? What were
measures of inflation expectations saying? My sense is that the professional forecasts have been
2½ percent since time began. But were any other measures suggesting at that time that they
expected inflation that low going forward?
MR. STOCKTON. Basically, it looks as though the five-year inflation compensation
five years ahead was running around 2 percent and even then fluctuating. It’s a little harder the
further you reach back, so I don’t know about the liquidity premiums and all the various ways in
which you would extract that. It has fluctuated but doesn’t really look as though it has had much
trend up or down. There would be more noise in the TIPS than there is in the professional
survey, but they all seem to be sort of consistent with 2 percent.
MS. MINEHAN. It kind of begs the question then, doesn’t it, about what level of low,
stable inflation is the right level of low, stable inflation? [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That comes tomorrow. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. That’s why I pose the question right now.
MR. KOHN. What a lead-in.
MS. MINEHAN. I mean, we don’t have to answer it. I don’t think anybody has an
answer to it, but we’ve been through a whole cycle here, and inflation expectations are not telling
a totally different story, even through the whole cycle.

October 24-25, 2006

85 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The ten-year TIPS came down quite a bit during the
deflation scare.
MR. STOCKTON. You do see fluctuations over the past five or six years. It looks
relatively trendless after that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there other questions for Vince? We’ll reassemble
tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.
[Meeting recessed]

October 24-25, 2006

86 of 203

October 25, 2006—Morning Session
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning. We’ve already heard Vincent’s report on
the statement and policy proposals, so we’ll begin the program this morning with the policy
go-round. After that, we’ll have our discussion on communications. We’ll adjourn at that point.
For those of you who can stay for lunch, we have a short presentation on planning for the Federal
Reserve centennial, which I hope most of you can stay to hear about. So without further ado,
let’s begin the second go-round, and Debbie will take your names. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with my policy conclusion and
then explain how I got there. First of all, I support holding the federal funds rate at the current
level of 5¼, and I also support minimal change in the statement because I think that not much
has happened and any change that we put in place is only going to produce questions in the
market about what we meant and why we did it.
I also want to say that my policy outlook going forward is symmetrical around 5¼. That
may take some people by surprise, given that I am generally characterized as an inflation hawk,
and I want you to understand the logic of that view. In terms of the December meeting, I would,
given current information, put a probability of, say, two-thirds that we will want to keep the fed
funds rate where it is, splitting evenly the other one-third up and down, depending on the data.
When I look six months ahead, my outlook remains symmetrical, but my probability on the
current fed funds rate of 5¼ might drop to one-third and split the other two-thirds on either side.
If others around the table agree that the outlook for the fed funds rate should be symmetrical or if
there are some other views along those lines, I would hope that the minutes could report that
view because guidance to the market on this matter could be important in terms of the way the
market treats incoming data.

October 24-25, 2006

87 of 203

So where does that view come from? We need to have a sharp distinction between, first,
policy preferences, or the objective function, or the loss function; second, the way the economy
works, or the current state of the economy; and third, probabilities of various possible economic
outcomes, or data looking forward. Those three concepts are analytically distinct. With regard
to the first, I have a very asymmetric loss function. If inflation failed to slow or, worse yet, if it
increased, we would have much higher long-run costs from that outcome than from GDP growth
modestly below potential. In that sense, my loss function is decidedly asymmetrical, saying that
we must deal with inflation that fails to slow or, worse, increases. But I note that market
expectations are quite asymmetrical. The policy conclusion comes from combining the situation
in the market—the market structure or the way the economy behaves—with the loss function. If
the economy were in a symmetrical position, the asymmetric loss function would lead to an
asymmetric policy outlook for the funds rate. But the economy is not in a symmetrical situation
and has not been for quite a long time, with the market expectations of easier policy next year.
Now, of course, that may change as data come in, but that’s how I see it right now.
Upside surprises in the data, some combination of stronger economic activity and upside
inflation surprises, could easily drive up the ten-year bond rate 50 basis points, which would take
it up to the current fed funds rate; 75 basis points might restore a more normal term premium. Or
you could even anticipate that the bond market might go a good bit higher than that. Over the
past fifty years, the average spread between the ten-year rate and the fed funds rate has been
about 90 basis points, so there’s lots of room for the ten-year rate to go up without our doing
anything. In fact, if we got an outcome of the data in that direction between now and December,
or even January, I’m guessing that, if the ten-year rate went up 75 basis points in response to the
incoming news, we might be loathe—depending on the nature of the news, of course—to add to

October 24-25, 2006

88 of 203

it by raising the fed funds rate, even though our loss function, in my view, ought to be heavily
tilted toward fighting inflation. So the combination of the asymmetric loss function and the
economy being asymmetric in the other direction, I believe, ought to point to a symmetric
outlook for the fed funds rate. If the incoming data were substantially weaker than currently
expected and the ten-year rate were to decline 25 or 50 basis points from where it is now, that
process couldn’t go very far unless the market started to develop the view that there would be a
policy easing in the future. That is, if the market were convinced that we were going to hang on
5¼, perhaps in part because we keep insisting on our concern about inflation and the market
reads us as having a policy bias toward tightening the fed funds rate, then we would not get the
full possible benefit of a market response to weak data bringing down longer-term rates. We
should want that to happen if we got weak data going forward.
That’s my argument as to why I believe the policy outlook for the fed funds rate ought to
be symmetrical. I’m not arguing for any change today; I hope that’s clear. But I believe that we
should provide guidance to the market going forward that, in the event that the economy comes
in weak, we’re prepared to cut rates. Conversely, we should emphasize that, if we have strong
data, particularly bad inflation news, we won’t necessarily pull the trigger right away. I believe
that is the right guidance going forward. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Yes, two-handed intervention.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Bill, I’m not sure this is quite the way to ask the
question, but if the Committee adopted that approach and if the market’s response to that change
in the signal were to lower the expected funds rate path because of the way they interpret the
change in the signal, would that be consistent with the objectives you’re trying to achieve?
MR. POOLE. I think so, yes.

October 24-25, 2006

89 of 203

VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. So that would leave you with a forecast for inflation
that you’d be comfortable with?
MR. POOLE. Right. My view of the recent news on inflation is that it has been
marginally better, that it is tilted a bit in the right direction. I think that’s the view that the
Chairman expressed yesterday, and that has certainly been my view. But we should want the
market to respond to incoming data in a way that it would be very helpful to the policy enterprise
that we’re involved in. So given that my outlook for the economy is pretty symmetrical around
the Greenbook forecast, I think we should give some genuine weight to the possibility that the
economy could come in weaker. We should not want to rule that out and tell the market that it’s
going to take a really bad outcome for the economy for us to be willing to move.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I wasn’t trying to talk you out of your view, [laughter]
but don’t the policy rules, as a prism on these choices, tell you that, if you alter your weights on
your loss function—
MR. POOLE. No, no. The loss function should reflect our fundamental beliefs about our
objectives and what we’re trying to accomplish. You need to keep the loss function analytically
distinct from your judgment about the way the economy works and the stance of the economy.
Our preferences ought not to blow in the wind.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. This is really just a question about the framework the
policy rules give us for this choice. The way I understood this is that, if you alter the weights
and you’re asymmetric in your weights, in your policy rules, but you’re talking about a forecast
that’s sort of the basic central forecast underpinning your rules, don’t you get a higher path?
MR. POOLE. But there’s a distinction. What I wanted to say was that my weights are
asymmetric, they have been asymmetric, and I expect them to continue to be asymmetric. The

October 24-25, 2006

90 of 203

exercise that we had in the Bluebook and in the presentation yesterday is to suppose that your
weights are different from my weights—not that we alter our weights as we go along but that
your weights might be different from mine—and then what would be the policy conclusion from
that.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I agree with you on that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. I was just listening to Bill, and I consider us neither hawks nor sparrows
nor doves. I hope that we’re being owlish, and that was a very owlish approach. But I’d like to
come around to what Bill said, maybe in a different way. It struck me, Mr. Chairman, when I
reflected last night on what I heard at the table yesterday, that on balance we sustained a barrage
of attacks on the inflationary front. They came from energy. They came from commodity
prices. They also came from potential shifts in the pricing behavior among business producers.
And we’ve come out whole. I attribute this to our actions and our comportment and to the
continued ability of the private sector to adapt and of private-sector producers and consumers to
mine resources worldwide and through cyberspace as they’ve done so effectively. I know we’re
doing a lot of work on that. It struck me particularly yesterday that we are not hearing anything
about pricing power at this table. That was our preoccupation for a while. Not one person at the
table mentioned it in the way it had been mentioned in the past several conversations. We are,
however, continuing to hear about the availability and the cost of labor, and some of those costs,
incidentally—such as the welders and Governor Kroszner’s show-up premium—are not going to
be reflected in the data.
The bottom line is that I think we’ve made substantial progress. But I think we have to
be very mindful, Mr. Chairman, about perception if we’re to influence what really counts, which

October 24-25, 2006

91 of 203

is inflationary expectations, and about whether those expectations are measured accurately by
TIPS spreads, which I personally doubt. One need look no further than this morning’s Financial
Times editorial or Bill Gross’s recent client letter—I’ve known Gross for twenty years, and I
know he’s an oddball. Actually, I’d like that word struck from the record. [Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. What do you want to substitute? [Laughter]
MR. FISHER. He’s increasingly addled, but his words do carry weight. In his recent
client letter, he says, “Inflation is leveling off at admittedly unacceptable levels.” Hence my
careful reference to the word “comportment.” I think first about the immediate statement, and I
want to come to that.
I also think, by the way, of one thing we’ll get to this afternoon, which is the centennial.
The transcripts of these meetings will be released as we approach the centennial, and I think we
have to make very clear that this FOMC, like previous ones, is extremely vigilant with regard to
the greatest threat to our society, which is inflation—at least to our economic society. We need
to issue a statement that makes it clear that we’re mindful of and remain vigilant about
inflationary risk. In Vince’s table, something between B and B+, as you laid it out yesterday
afternoon, would do the trick. By the way, I would tack on “to the upside” at the end of the first
sentence in that right-hand column B—it’s sort of a mix between B and B+—because we do
view inflationary risk as being to the upside. That’s an asymmetry.
I want to make one other comment. Governor Warsh gave a very impressive briefing
yesterday on the financial market’s perspective, and we’ve heard from others that the equity
market’s robustness has given us something of a cushion with regard to the weakness in housing.
Although many at the table do not seem to share the staff’s estimation of third-quarter growth—
we’ll find out on Friday—and to my mind, HSBC is the only securities house I’ve found that has

October 24-25, 2006

92 of 203

an analysis similar to yours, we have to be very careful in stating our views on growth. And this
comes around to Bill’s statement, I think, on the first rationale box of alternative B, because we
say that economic growth appears to have slowed further in Q3. I can accept that. But then we
say “going forward”—implying going forward from Q3—the economy seems likely to expand at
a moderate pace. So are we saying “moderate” from a very slow third quarter? That’s not even
what the staff seems to be saying. That phraseology might spook the equity markets, which are
being driven, by the way, as I think any analyst would find out, not by top-line growth but by
earnings, by continued efficiencies in the cost of goods sold, and the management of cost of
goods sold and inventories. Again, we take comfort from the fact that we have a strong equities
market. So I’d like to suggest replacing the word “moderate” in section 2 of alternative B with
“improved.” I think it’s a small word change. “Going forward”—that’s going forward from the
third quarter—“the economy seems likely to expand at an improved pace.” That’s what we’re
saying, that’s what the staff is saying, that’s what we’re hearing around the table, and I think we
should say so. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a question for Richard. When you said that inflation risks are tilted
to the upside—I think you said something like that—did you mean that you believe the incoming
data will likely show higher inflation, or did you mean that your utility function or policy
objective function puts a high weight on inflation? I think it’s very important to distinguish
those concepts.
MR. FISHER. Like you, I feel that we have some moderate but still substantial
inflationary impulses. What I’m concerned about is expectations.

October 24-25, 2006

93 of 203

MR. POOLE. But I want to pin you down on that because I think it’s an important point.
Do you believe that the probability is higher that inflation will come in higher than it has been or
lower than it has been?
MR. FISHER. Do you want me to answer the question?
MR. POOLE. I’m just trying to make the question sharp. To me, the outlook for the
inflation data that we’re going to see is pretty symmetrical around where we have been, maybe
even tilted a little to the downside.
MR. FISHER. Yes, I do think we’ve had a moderation of inflation; however, I don’t
think it has come down to a level that we should be proud of.
MR. POOLE. Then I agree with that.
MR. FISHER. I do worry that, if we don’t get it down to a level that we should be proud
of, we will feed expectations that we don’t have the backbone to deal with what the market
expects us to deal with, which should, in my view, be our single purpose.
MR. POOLE. The rate that we would be proud of is really a way of stating the objective
or loss function. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support keeping rates unchanged and
alternative B. I think that rate, at least for now, seems consistent with growth of the economy
just a tad below the growth of its potential and a gradual decline in inflation. Incoming data will
tell us if we’re wrong on that, but right now that looks like our best bet to accomplish the
objectives I think the Committee ought to be accomplishing.
I agree that the pace and the extent of disinflation are great uncertainties here. President
Poole has made a valuable contribution here about the loss function relative to the policy path. A

October 24-25, 2006

94 of 203

failure to reverse the earlier increase in inflation is the main risk to good economic performance
that we face. Therefore, we need to see a downward path of inflation. I think our minutes and
our speeches have made it pretty clear that that’s what the Committee means by inflation risks
remaining. I think the public understands that.
President Poole has made a valuable distinction between the loss function and the
economic outlook and what that implies for interest rates, but I don’t agree with his conclusion.
After all, the Greenbook forecast has essentially a flat federal funds rate and a very, very gradual
decline in inflation barely along the path that most Committee members could tolerate. If our
loss function is asymmetrical relative to that, it’s more likely that interest rates would have to
rise than to fall relative to the Greenbook path. Moreover, many members of the Committee
seem to have a stronger path for output, and maybe even inflation going forward, than is
embedded in the Greenbook. So the wording about additional firming that may be needed, the
asymmetrical wording of a risk assessment, is the appropriate representation of how this
Committee is looking at the potential future path of interest rates given both the loss function and
the Committee’s outlook for growth and inflation.
I do have some comments on the language. In section 2, I like the addition of the
forward-looking language and, unlike President Fisher, the use of “moderate.” It seems to me
that the word “moderate” is fairly ambiguous, but it does suggest that we don’t expect a great
deal of weakness going forward or a great deal of strength. I think that’s about where the
Committee is—growth close to, maybe a bit below, the growth of potential, and the word
“moderate” conveys the sense that the Committee wasn’t looking for something really weak or
something really strong going forward. So I think that was a valuable addition.

October 24-25, 2006

95 of 203

Like you, President Fisher, I did wonder about the specific reference to the third quarter
and how that would play out. Governor Kroszner actually brought this to my attention on
Friday. The advantage of the reference to the third quarter is that, by our acknowledging a weak
third quarter, the markets might not react as strongly to a print that begins with the number 1 as
they would if we didn’t acknowledge that. There are also a couple of disadvantages. The third
quarter could come in much closer to 2½ percent. There are a lot of assumptions built into that
number. We could be wrong. But even more important, from my perspective, an awful lot of
the weakness in the third quarter is in net exports and inventory change. The underlying feel to
the third quarter and final demand aren’t really all that different from the second quarter. So
emphasizing the weakness in the third quarter in our language may not give a good sense of what
we think the underlying situation was. Alternative language might be a more general sentence
saying that “economic growth has slowed over the course of the year, partly reflecting a cooling
of the housing market.” That more general sentence about “over the course of the year”
probably reflects better where the Committee is. I could live with the third-quarter language
that’s in there now, but I would have a slight preference for the other one.
In section 3, I actually have a slight preference for the wording under alternative A. I’ve
always been a little uncomfortable with relating the outlook for inflation to the level of energy
prices. The last major increase in energy prices was last spring, and I think they’ve been kind of
level since April or May and actually have come down. Some of the commentary after our last
announcement pointed out the contradiction in which we have energy prices both pushing up
inflation and pulling it down in the future. So my slight preference, again, would be for the
wording of alternative A, which says that the high level of resource utilization has the potential

October 24-25, 2006

96 of 203

to sustain pressures. It doesn’t reference the high level of prices of energy and other
commodities.
In section 4, the risk assessment, looking at the language that Vincent put on the table
yesterday, I think the first sentence of that does a better job of enunciating what the Committee
has been thinking about—that the reduction of inflation is what we’re looking at. But I’m
hesitant to change the risk assessment language. I think that people do understand what we mean
by our risk assessment language now. I am concerned that changing it would provoke a reaction,
and I’m not confident that I know what the reaction would be. So my preference, again, is to
stick with the current risk assessment language that’s in alternative B. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Could you just repeat the change you suggested, Don, in section 2?
MR. KOHN. Instead of “economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third
quarter” it would just be “economic growth has slowed over the course of the year.”
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. This is a glossary or dictionary question. Like Don, I
interpreted “moderate,” because I was advised by the staff to do so, as “at or slightly below
potential.” Have we used that phrase in the recent past in a way that would allow the reasonably
informed outside person to interpret it that way?
MR. REINHART. I don’t know.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ve used it as a verb and not as an adjective. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. What is our euphemism for “potential”? Is it “solid”?
Is “solid” the conventional use?

October 24-25, 2006

97 of 203

MR. REINHART. It’s sustainable or solid. I really hate to have to say this. [Laughter]
We have been using “solid” as “at or above potential,” and it seems symmetrical to use
“moderate” as “at or below potential.”
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. If we consider the merits of Don’s change, or the
Kroszner-Kohn change, to that second section, does it convey the sense of growth? If you look
through the recent slowdown, growth strengthens relative to the pace in the second and third
quarters. Does “moderate” imply some modest strengthening relative to the pace of the second
and third quarters?
MR. REINHART. I think the issue is whether “going forward” means starting from the
quarter we’re currently in or whether it is a statement about 2007. The reason we drafted the
explicit reference to the third quarter is that we’re in the fourth quarter, and at least if you believe
the staff forecast, you think GDP growth has already bounced back from the third quarter.
MR. FISHER. Moderately? [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I was just going to say, too, that all of this is complicated by the fact
that our assessment of potential has been written down. Even an informed observer might not
have caught that nuance of how much we’ve written it down. Looking at what would have been
referred to in a “moderate” or “solid” context, the numbers were different two years ago from
what they are now. That creates an even greater level of possible confusion here. Is 2 percent
good, bad, or indifferent? It depends on where you think potential is, and that has changed. So
there is a complexity here that I think speaks to the difficulty of wording this sentence.

October 24-25, 2006

98 of 203

MR. REINHART. I would say, President Minehan, that the reference in the minutes of
the past two meetings to the staff’s marking down the rate of growth of potential has certainly
caught the attention of market participants.
MS. MINEHAN. Do you think it has caught enough attention that they would still
interpret a fourth-quarter growth rate of 2½ percent or so as okay?
MR. REINHART. I think, actually, that the chart I had in my briefing that showed the
nine primary dealers’ forecast of real GDP tracking above the Greenbook forecast suggests that
they may have moved it down but they haven’t moved it down as much as the staff.
MS. MINEHAN. Okay.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Governor Kohn, concerning the assessment of risk, I think I heard you
say about alternative B+ that you weren’t sure what effect it would have. I’m interested in what
underlies that uncertainty.
MR. KOHN. Well, my basic concern here is that we have something already that people
seem to understand. Why change it? In my view, the current risk assessment is well understood,
thanks to the minutes. Things haven’t changed. As everybody stressed in their discussions of
the economy yesterday and their sense of the risk to the outlook, nothing has changed. So I
didn’t see a reason to change the language.
MR. LACKER. I understand those rationales for retaining language, but you expressed
uncertainty about what the effect of B+ was. It struck me—and I think was intended by Vince—
as adding a dollop of hawkishness to the statement. Do you doubt that the markets would
interpret it that way?

October 24-25, 2006

99 of 203

MR. KOHN. I think that’s quite possible. Given that people haven’t changed their
views, I’m not sure why we would necessarily want to do that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. As I noted yesterday, I’ve become somewhat less worried about the
downside risk to the baseline outlook. So to some degree, that factor has changed a little since
the last time. In fact, I think the baseline isn’t bad at all. Indeed, it’s a testament, again, to the
resilience of the U.S. economy if we can actually pull off, as we seem to be doing, a gradual
slowing of the powerful U.S. housing markets against the background of considerable
geopolitical and energy market uncertainty and price pressures, not to mention the potential for
both strong consumer retrenchment and financial market volatility.
So we seem to be threading the line through a lot of risks on both sides of this baseline,
and we seem to be doing it successfully in negotiating that soft landing. I think we should take
some pride in that so far so good and that monetary policy has played a key role in this
unwinding process. In that regard, I continue to believe that the cost to the central bank of being
wrong on inflation risks is greater than being wrong on the side of growth at this time. If growth
wanes more than is now expected, we can ease policy fairly quickly. Getting behind the curve
on inflation could be a good deal more costly. Thus, I am pretty comfortable with the current
stance of policy, which I see as slightly restrictive. At least for the time being, I think it balances
the risk of being wrong on inflation with the risk of slower growth and is appropriate given the
brighter tone of much of the incoming data, with the possible exception of residential investment.
A risk-management argument could be made for raising rates, and certainly those less
comfortable with the current and prospective levels of core inflation might find such an action
attractive. I don’t, as I continue to worry some about downside risks to growth, and I am more or

October 24-25, 2006

100 of 203

less comfortable with our forecast that, with no change in policy in the near term, inflation will
gradually fall to just over 2 percent as measured by the core PCE in the next eighteen months or
so. That projection, at least at this time, seems right. So I come down on the side of keeping the
fed funds rate at 5¼. So that’s the policy choice.
The next issue is what to say about it. I think it’s important to continue to emphasize
some concern regarding inflation rather than to move to more of a balance of risks. Financial
markets remain quite accommodative, and I really see no reason to encourage them to be more
so, thinking that policy easing might occur sooner than they do now. I think that would be the
outcome of alternative A. So I’d prefer alternative B.
The next question is, which alternative B? We now seem to have B-, B+, and B. Let me
just comment a bit on the variety of alternatives that have been raised. You know, I have a lot of
regard for Governor Kohn, and I take his point—and Governor Kroszner’s point—about
section 2. However, when reading through it myself, I did think that the reference to the third
quarter might help the markets react better if, in fact, the Greenbook forecast is accurate about
the number that we’re going to see on Friday, which is considerably less than what a lot of
people in the market think we’re going to see. I thought that the reference to the third quarter
was helpful there. But, again, I have a great deal of regard for the cumulative wisdom on the
other side of that.
With regard to section 3, I, too, believe that there is some benefit to making the change
that’s suggested in the Bluebook of using the alternative A wording for section 3. The shorter
wording does reflect the moderation that has occurred in energy and commodity prices, and it
puts the level of resource utilization more front and center as an inflation risk. I also find that it’s
somewhat shorter, which, in general, I think is desirable.

October 24-25, 2006

101 of 203

In section 4, I found the B+ wording attractive because it suggests a concern regarding
inflation that I heard around the table yesterday and somewhat of a diminution of deep concern
about the downside risks. In a way, I think there is a benefit at the margin to getting away from
stock phrases. But I take Governor Kohn’s point very seriously that one does that recognizing
that there’s a potential for unknowable consequences. So while I am marginally in favor of B+, I
am more than happy to go with alternative B, either as it’s presented, with the switch of
section 3, or the new language for section 2. I’m easy, you might say. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has been a lot of interesting
discussion so far in this go-round, and I find my own views refining a bit as we go along. The
bottom line today is that certainly I agree with everyone who has spoken so far that to maintain
the funds rate at 5¼ percent is the appropriate action. The incoming data we have received over
the period have not really changed my outlook very much for the economy. Of course, I was a
little more optimistic than some of the people last time, and so I’m glad to see everybody has
come around to my point of view. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. Beginner’s luck.
MR. PLOSSER. That’s right. [Laughter] Well, you’ve got to take it when you can,
right? Inflation continues to be higher than I’d like to see, and I still believe there are larger risks
on the inflation side than on the growth side. Growth will be slower in the third quarter—we
have all acknowledged that. But we also discussed around this table the fact that even the
Greenbook is now predicting a somewhat larger bounceback in the fourth quarter; indeed, I
remain optimistic that in general the bounceback is going to be somewhat quicker than the
Greenbook’s forecast. We’ve had some good news on inflation: It seems to have stabilized

October 24-25, 2006

102 of 203

somewhat. But given our earlier pause, extending the pause seems the prudent thing to do from
my perspective. If growth as forecast by the Greenbook into the next several quarters remains
significantly below trend, actually holding rates steady for a while would be an implicit firming
of policy, which may have the desirable effects on inflation that we might need to have in order
to bring down inflation. However, if growth bounces back more strongly than the Greenbook
forecasts, which I believe is a likely outcome, we may have to consider additional increases in
the fed funds rate going forward. Thus, from that standpoint, I really don’t view the prospective
policy path as particularly symmetric. I believe that the path more likely would be to hold it
fixed and allow a weakening economy to somewhat firm policy and do our inflation work that
way; or if growth responds more quickly, we may, in fact, have to engage in more firming
policy.
As regards the language, I’m a little torn. I’m a bit with President Minehan. I kind of
like B, I kind of like B+, but I also worry a bit about the language and the implications it has for
the market. I actually find myself in agreement with Governor Kohn on many of his points. I
like his prospective change to section 2, getting away from what we think are somewhat unusual
factors in the third quarter and not emphasizing that quarter too much. Of course, you might do
that by just leaving section 2 almost as it was last time. The only difference is that you’re
making a statement that going forward the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace.
The first sentence in section 2 of our last statement, or the only sentence in section 2, really
conveys almost the same thing that I think Governor Kohn was trying to achieve, but I’m
certainly happy with section 2 as suggested by Governor Kohn.
I believe it’s clearly premature to send any signal whatsoever that a rate cut is being
contemplated in the near term, which I think is how the language of alternative A, section 4,

October 24-25, 2006

103 of 203

would be read. I think that any change in the risk assessment language that would lead market
participants to lower their expected path of the fed funds rate would in my opinion be
counterproductive. I also think that mentioning the possibility that the slowdown in economic
growth will become more pronounced, again as section 2 of alternative A seems to suggest,
would be very misleading and would be inconsistent, as has been noted, with some of the
optimism expressed around the table yesterday. Thus Friday, when the advance estimate of the
third quarter is released, language A would be read as our expecting growth to be less than
1 percent going forward, and I think that’s really not what any of our forecasts are suggesting. I
believe there is a greater likelihood that growth will be higher rather than lower in the coming
months than the Greenbook shows; and unless we see evidence that economic growth is
weakening significantly compared with our forecast, lowering the fed funds rate just will not be a
very likely outcome. I think we should be reluctant to suggest in our statement that we are now
more inclined to lower rates. For those reasons, I really don’t favor the language in alternative
A. Relative to alternative B, the language in B+, as I have suggested, accurately reflects the
view that many of us around the table have—that the data we have seen actually have truncated
some of the tail on the downside and that the risk of a really bad outcome has somewhat
diminished over the past few weeks. But I’m afraid that trying to use B+ to fine-tune
expectations too precisely may create more problems than it solves. So I tend to favor keeping
the language as constant as we can. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My preference also is to maintain the rate at
5¼ percent. For the near-term outlook, I think an important recent development that has been noted
is the decline in energy prices. As I said yesterday, lower energy prices do help cushion the effects

October 24-25, 2006

104 of 203

of the housing slowdown, and they do reduce the downside risk to growth over the near term. At
the same time, by lowering headline inflation, I think they help contain some of the inflationary
expectations. So if that rate is maintained, I think we will, in fact, contribute to lower core inflation.
By reducing both the downside risk to growth and the upside risk to inflation, the decline in energy
prices makes it more likely that we can continue to maintain the fed funds rate at what I’ve
described as its current moderately restrictive level until core inflation returns to more a acceptable
level. At the same time, I continue to believe that the upside risk to inflation does remain. The
recent monthly pattern in core inflation, while encouraging, does not firmly establish a downward
trajectory, which I think is very important to establish. Consequently, I would be prepared to leave
the fed funds rate at that level and have it naturally firm as mentioned by others, and I would
support additional tightening should inflation reverse course.
Let me very briefly talk about the statement. While downside risks to growth remain, I
would not want to convey to the markets the impression that any near-term easing of policy is likely
at all. As markets have only recently understood the message in the last press statement, I believe
we can best accomplish this by updating the rationale section using the wording suggested in
alternative B, section 2. I’m comfortable with the word “moderate.” I think Vince gave a good
definition of it—at or slightly less than potential. I don’t think that word would be harmful at all.
But then I would go alternative A for section 3, and I would maintain the wording of the assessment
of risk that was used last time. I would not be in favor of modifying the language of the risk
assessment in an attempt to get the markets to alter their current views of the expected policy path.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Did you mean to say that you wanted to strike the words in the
inflation section? Was that what you were saying?

October 24-25, 2006

105 of 203

MR. HOENIG. Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you.
MR. KOHN. You said you didn’t like the word “moderate”?
MR. HOENIG. No, I said I am very comfortable with the word “moderate.”
MR. KOHN. Oh, comfortable with it. I’m sorry.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I noted yesterday, I’m more comfortable
than I was at our last meeting that economic growth will not deteriorate significantly, and I continue
to believe that the risk that inflation will remain higher than I personally desire is still there. So
today I support no change in the fed funds rate, and I support the language in alternative B.
However, in listening to some of the comments around the table today, I like Governor Kohn’s
suggestion for section 2. For all the reasons he stated, I think that his suggestion makes it a little
clearer than the way it’s stated now. I was also going to suggest that in section 3 we use the
language under alternative A, as Governor Kohn suggested. As a few others have said, I prefer to
leave the assessment-of-risk language unchanged because I’m not sure that much has changed since
our last meeting. The Bluebook notes that we could use the B+ language to protest the view that
markets have that there is a greater likelihood that we’re going to be easing rather than tightening.
I’m not sure they are going to view it as a protest, and I prefer to use our minutes and speeches to
more fully communicate that sentiment. So for those reasons I’m comfortable with the assessmentof-risk language under alternative B. It’s becoming clearer to me that our discussion after this
round is becoming more important because the issues we’re confronting are what level of inflation

October 24-25, 2006

106 of 203

we find acceptable, how fast we are going to get there, and how we intend to get there. So I’m
looking forward to that discussion after this go-round. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support keeping rates unchanged. On the
wording, I guess I lean slightly toward B+ over B, but it’s not a matter that I feel strongly about, and
I could certainly accept either alternative. I remain quite uncertain about how the various forces in
the economy are going to play out. As I said in the economic go-round, I think that, if we maintain
the current stance of policy, most likely we will get the desirable features of a soft landing with
inflation coming down gradually. But I do think there are substantial risks for output growth. I
guess they’re balanced around moderate growth, but I remain concerned about a downside that
would include a period of sustained and significant weakness. On the inflation front, I do think that
the risks remain tilted in the direction of higher inflation both because I’m uncertain just how the
inflation process is working and because, while I believe inflation will come down, I don’t have
confidence in the scenario underlying it. If we don’t get the play-out of the downside housing risks,
I think there is some probability that growth will actually be sufficiently strong that we’ll get some
upward pressure on inflation from the labor market. We’re going to learn a lot by December. A lot
of data are coming out that will bear on growth, inflation pressures, the labor market, and so forth.
It clearly makes sense to wait.
I guess I’m slightly attracted to B+ over B because I think the language more clearly
suggests an upward bias for future rate changes and that does reflect my view of the risks to
inflation and the likely path of policy. At a minimum, it seems to push back a bit against the
market’s view that we’re going to be unwinding rather quickly. But I take the arguments that have
been made around the table for B as opposed to B+. I’m not sure that there really is much to be

October 24-25, 2006

107 of 203

gained by changing the language we have in place on this, and leaving it alone may be the wiser
course at the end of the day. On section 2, I think that Governor Kohn made a good argument for
changing that language. Again, I could go either way. Finally, on section 3, I prefer the wording in
alternative A to that in alternative B. Referring to the high level of prices of energy and other
commodities, given that we’ve had a substantial decline in energy prices, really does seem a bit out
of date and a bit out of touch.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The bottom line is that I’m comfortable with
the current policy stance and see no need to move until we become convinced that our forecast for
inflation moderation won’t be realized. As for the wording, I’m supportive of alternative B as
currently provided in the Bluebook. While I’m attracted to Governor Kohn’s suggested change,
given that it has only been five weeks and there is likely to be some pull-back in the third quarter, I
would be inclined to leave the wording as it currently is written. But I would be cautious about
changing other wording—again, given the short duration between our last meeting and this meeting
and given the lack of evidence that a lot of things have changed dramatically.
As for my reasons, I think that there is clear evidence that output is slowing, but my sense is
that there’s uncertainty with regard to the degree of the slowdown—that is, how slow we will grow.
Despite the output uncertainty, businesses and consumers seem reasonably comfortable with their
prospects. Employment gains remain positive, albeit at a slower pace, and income and spending
continue to grow. There are, however, real-side concerns in the housing sector, yet none of these
scenarios we’ve run seem to suggest anything approaching a recession-level slowdown. Concerns
remain weighted toward an upside risk to inflation, but not necessarily one that demands immediate
action. Despite the concerns on the inflation front, I think we can afford to wait a bit longer so that

October 24-25, 2006

108 of 203

we can assess the actual outcomes regarding inflation and output, see how they match up against the
forecast, and then determine whether the current level of the federal funds rate provides enough
restraint to reduce inflation. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Given our decision to pause a couple of
meetings ago, I don’t think that we should move rates today. We’ve made only small changes to the
outlook since our last meeting, and we’re still facing an uncertain policy environment. I’m feeling a
bit more comfortable about the resilience of the real economy, as I mentioned. Still, I recognize it
could be a while before we have a reasonably clear picture of how the correction in the housing
markets is playing out. With regard to inflation, it’s true the past three months of price data were
better than the previous three, but as we have pretty much a consensus here, it’s still way too soon at
this point to say that core inflation has peaked. My basic thinking about inflation has not changed:
It’s too high, and I see a significant risk that it will not come down fast enough. I just want to refer
back also to the medium-run scenarios in the Bluebook. Remember we had those two targets, the
1½ percent target and 2 percent target. You recall that, depending on which target you chose, you
had a different series of policy actions early next year. So I think our discussion about
communications later today will have some relevance for our near-term policy decisions as well as
our longer-term communication strategy.
In terms of the language, let me go through it section by section. In section 2, I like the
change that Don Kohn suggested, saying that economic growth has slowed over the course of the
year instead of referring specifically to the third quarter. There’s no major benefit in singling out
the third quarter. The substitute sentence accomplishes much of the same thing that pointing to the
third quarter does, and so I like that change. About the second sentence in section 2 and the

October 24-25, 2006

109 of 203

questions as to what the word “moderate” means, I can see there will be some confusion here.
Coming into this meeting, I thought “moderate” meant “below potential” not “at potential” because
“moderate” to me means good but not great. That’s the way I interpreted it, and I would assume
that market observers and Fed observers are going to be doing exactly what Vice Chairman
Geithner did—
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Professor.
MR. MOSKOW. Professor. [Laughter] Professor Geithner did, saying, “what’s the
dictionary say?” They’re going to be rushing to the dictionary to figure out what “moderate” really
means here. So there’s confusion about the definition. Then there’s the confusion that was pointed
out about what the baseline is—from where; from the third quarter; from the average of the first
three quarters? I think these are valid critiques. I think we can say the same thing for the word
“improved,” though I don’t think that helps us. I guess I’m not happy with the sentence, but I can’t
think of a better way to improve it at this point except to drop it completely. On section 3—I agree
that alternative A is better than alternative B, to take out the reference to energy in that first
sentence. Then in section 4, I like the language of B+, but it’s a close call as to whether or not this
is the time to make that change. I guess I have a slight preference for leaving it the way it is now. I
just don’t think this is the time to make changes in section 4, and we’ll certainly have another
chance to revisit this at our next meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. There’s more discussion about the word “moderate.” It occurs to me this
arises also in other contexts. Do we really have to speak in code words? If what we mean by
“moderate” is that we believe growth will be near trend or near potential going forward, why don’t
we just say that? It’s just a suggestion.

October 24-25, 2006

110 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That would break many years of tradition. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. Just say “slightly” or “somewhat moderate.”
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s okay, President Plosser. You’re new. [Laughter]
MR. PLOSSER. I’m a bit of a slow learner, but I’ll catch on.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see a two-handed intervention from President Poole.
MR. POOLE. As he was speaking, I started to write exactly, “Couldn’t we just say the
economy seems likely to expand at a pace at or slightly below potential?” That’s what we’re all
saying we mean. Why not say it?
MR. HOENIG. So long as we don’t get sidetracked onto what “potential” is at this point.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Why don’t we say, “Whatever that is”? [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. You fill in the blank.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good suggestion.
MR. MISHKIN. This is going to come up later. There are real issues about using the word
“potential” that I think will get us into trouble. So I’m sympathetic to your view about being clear,
but I think we had better wait on this. It’s something that’s more complicated than I think we want
to deal with at this stage.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I support maintaining the federal
funds rate at 5¼ percent. Second, I have some concerns about editing on the fly. I’m not sure it
leads to effective communication, but since that’s the game we’re playing, [laughter] I will enter
into it, albeit a little reluctantly. With regard to using alternative B as the framework, in section 2, I
favor the Kohn-Kroszner change mainly because I think it puts a little less emphasis on highfrequency data and, other things being equal, the less emphasis on that the better. In section 3, I do

October 24-25, 2006

111 of 203

think the expression under alternative A is preferable over alternative B for the reasons that
President Yellen identified. It seems out of touch to continue to talk about high energy prices. Yes,
they’re high relative to history, but they’re not high relative to the past ten or twelve months. I
might like to say something more artful about resource utilization, but I think that’s a battle for
another day, and I’ll avoid that. As far as section 4 is concerned, like others, I find that a very close
call. I may just have my own view of policy, which leans slightly toward B+, but I don’t know how
much we gain by making the change at this time. But if we don’t want to do it today, we might
want to think about doing so in the longer term. Making more-frequent language changes may have
some advantages because it may mean that any change carries less weight with it. We seem to have
gotten ourselves into a position in which it’s very hard to change even an adverb or an adjective
without worrying a lot about what people in the financial markets are going to make of it. I’d like to
find a way out of that position, and one logical way out of it, I think, is to make changes more
frequently and make clear that it’s the way we’re going to operate in the future and that these
particular words don’t carry an excessive amount of significance. If we don’t want to do it today, I
also would favor B+; but it’s something I think we need to think about. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think the communications subcommittee should take that
under advisement. [Laughter]
MR. STERN. Good idea. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I support leaving the fed funds rate unchanged
at this meeting. I’ve puzzled over section 2, and I like what Governor Kohn has suggested because
one of the challenges I have had in this whole thing is what I heard around the table yesterday,
which in general supports the conclusion I’ve been coming to. We really are going from very rapid

October 24-25, 2006

112 of 203

growth to slowing, but if you parse out the pieces, what’s really changing is housing. The rapid
growth from 2003 to 2005 was due to unsustainable housing construction; it’s coming down, and
it’s a big chunk of that change. Now, other sectors have noise or are weak. Sectors like autos and
exports are jumping around, but it’s housing that has to adjust. I think it’s going to run below trend
as the Greenbook says. At the same time, as we all were mentioning yesterday, we have tightness
in the labor market, which again signals that in most sectors of the economy it’s hard to find people
who are available to work to sustain the economy. It’s almost as though we have a dichotomy right
now whereby housing is running below trend but the rest of the economy is running at or above
potential. So I think it’s important to leave in the comment about the housing sector—that is what
we’re focusing on. To me that is bringing the aggregate number below potential and is moderating
the growth rate. But in terms of the way to go on section 2, I can go either way. I do like the
change that Governor Kohn suggested in section 3. I think that is a good change. I believe that we
should not change section 4, the assessment of risk, at this meeting. It has been only five weeks.
We’ve had a discussion about changing more frequently; again, I think we ought to leave that to the
communications subcommittee to think about. But I think we ought to leave it as it is because it
says what we really mean. The first sentence says that there are inflation risks, and that’s a sense
that we need to convey. Too much could be read into a change that may be unintended, and so I’d
rather just at this meeting leave it the way it was at the previous meeting. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Many of us have said that inflation is too high. Many of us have said it
recently in public, and I haven’t heard any of us say that we’re satisfied with inflation being
2¼ percent indefinitely. But public expectations clearly seem inconsistent with core inflation
returning to below 2 percent in a reasonable amount of time. We’ve tried to communicate our

October 24-25, 2006

113 of 203

concerns about inflation, but that effort has fallen short. We intended the August decision to be a
hawkish pause, but I think it’s fair to say that the markets overlooked the hawkish part. Markets
subsequently came to believe that a set of rate cuts were in store early next year. In recent weeks
the policy path has moved up a bit, but I don’t see any evidence that people expect us to bring core
inflation down below 2 percent anytime soon. I think communicating collectively and more
explicitly about our intentions would surely help the situation. We’re going to discuss that later
today, but in the meantime, we have to make policy the old-fashioned way, based on our own
implicit or explicit individual targets and our own sense of the appropriate way to achieve them.
My own assessment at this meeting, as it was at the last two meetings, is that a further
tightening is needed to help ensure that core inflation declines to an acceptable rate in coming
quarters and that the real economy can withstand a further increase in the fed funds rate. Discussion
with staff yesterday made it quite clear that, in their view, inflation will not come down below
2 percent anytime soon without our doing something about it, and that’s a view with which I
concur.
Now, reflecting on the results of the last two meetings and the discussion I’ve heard so far,
my sense is that there’s a decent probability that I’m going to be outvoted again today. [Laughter] I
understand and respect the arguments for pausing now. The housing slowdown is weakening
demand growth, and at times weaker demand growth warrants a lower real interest rate, all else
being equal. I could put that into the output gap or the Phillips curve language, if you want. I
recognize that under flexible inflation targeting, if that were our agreed-upon strategy, it would take
time to bring inflation back down to target, and the speed at which one did so would depend on the
state of the economy. But in my view, the rate of convergence embodied in the Greenbook forecast
and the Bluebook extended simulations is too slow and risks that inflation will become even more

October 24-25, 2006

114 of 203

entrenched than it is now. I think bringing inflation down more rapidly than that would be both
feasible and appropriate, and I hope you can appreciate that, given the limited data we’ve seen since
our last meeting, I’m reluctant to signal that my concern about the trajectory of core inflation has in
any way diminished. Accordingly, I favor alternative C.
For those of you supporting alternative B, it’s hard for me to see that market policy
expectations, even after the adjustment of the past few weeks, are consistent with the views I’ve
heard you express around this table. So I would think you would want to enhance the alignment of
market expectations with your views by tweaking the statement in a more hawkish direction.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. I support no change at this time. As many people have said, we’ve had
very little new information to change our views from the last meeting, and I think that the position
that we’re in is consistent with growth a tad under trend potential, whatever word we might want to
use. I share Rick’s caution about being too explicit about that because I think there’s a lot of
controversy about what that precisely means, and I don’t think we want to get into that in this
statement or at least not at this point. Also, we have seen some inflationary pressures come off.
Inflation has been evolving a bit as I expected. I was talking about the temporary factors versus the
more-permanent factors. The key temporary factor seems to have been a temporary elevation in
owners’ equivalent rent and the way we put that into our core CPI and PCE; so some of it is a
measurement issue. Some of it is a transition in the housing market away from purchases toward
rental. That seems to have come off a bit, and so going forward, it does seem as though we’re
unlikely to have that continuing at elevated levels.
My concern, as I mentioned yesterday, is that I don’t understand the path or the dynamics
going forward. Certainly we have some simulations in the Bluebook which are very, very sticky.

October 24-25, 2006

115 of 203

Inflation seems to evolve very slowly, or very little seems to affect it. Part of that seems to be, if we
look at the data, that the energy price run-up appears not to have pushed much on inflation, so I
don’t think we can rely on the energy price decline to give us much benefit in terms of core. Recent
data on output gaps don’t seem to suggest that there’s much empirical evidence that a change in the
cyclical behavior of the economy is going to have an important effect on inflation. Expectations
certainly potentially have a very important effect, and I think we have seen a reduction in inflation
expectations and inflation compensation, both in survey measures and in TIPS spreads or other
market-based measures. But as I mentioned yesterday, that is a very fragile thing. The process is
something that I don’t fully understand. Obviously, our credibility is very important, and our
statements are very important. But it does seem as though the minutes and speeches have helped to
clarify what our position is. If you look at the evolution of the expected fed funds rates in Vince’s
exhibit 1, you see that not much change has been expected over quite a bit of time now and maybe
25 basis points is expected a year hence. That position is different from our position a few months
ago. I think it’s an appropriate position given our discussions. It leaves us a lot of flexibility to
respond either to surprisingly strong growth, to surprisingly strong inflation numbers, or to
surprisingly weak housing. So I think that market expectations are in a reasonably good position in
the near term. We do have to think about the longer-term issues that President Lacker has raised
and that may come up in our discussions of communications.
Speaking of communications, in particular the statement—we’ve been talking a lot about
how the Committee is focused on data and the role of data and our forecasts. Because not much
data have come in and our views have not changed a lot, I think we should not be changing the
statement much. That is consistent with our view that we are really focusing on the data. In
particular, I don’t like speculating about a particular number, especially when that number is going

October 24-25, 2006

116 of 203

to be revealed in a few days, for three reasons. One is the potential embarrassment factor if we’ve
missed the number. The second is that, even if we have very high confidence that we have gotten
the number roughly right, getting it right only feeds the view that a lot of market participants have—
and I’m sure you’ve all heard this—that we know something the rest of the world doesn’t, that we
know these data before the rest of the world. I don’t—maybe some of you guys do [laughter]—at
least the staff has not revealed any of that to me. Third, what we’ve been trying to say is that we
look at a mosaic of data; we don’t look at any one piece, and to emphasize one piece is problematic.
So that said, obviously the type of approach that Don was discussing is one that I would support.
But I do think it is very important to make sure that we have a good understanding, in the context of
that statement, of what “moderate” would be interpreted as. Obviously it will be very important in
the minutes to make very clear what that is, and obviously with our blackout period, it will take us a
while before we can make explicit statements if there’s confusion in the market. So I do think we
need to think about the interpretation of “moderate.” However, I like the idea of conveying that the
economy is likely to be coming back, perhaps not at the robust pace that we’ve seen in the past but
at a reasonable or moderate pace.
Given that energy prices and commodity prices have come down, we should be taking out
that energy prices and commodity prices are pushing up inflation or seem to be sustaining inflation
pressures. Also given that we have not seen much change in the data or have not made much
change in our approach, there’s really no reason to change the assessment-of-risk discussion,
particularly as the markets seem to be interpreting our assessments roughly where we think is
reasonable considering the risks going forward. If the markets were interpreting things as they had
been interpreting them a month or two ago, we may have wanted to change our statement, but I see
no reason to do that now.

October 24-25, 2006

117 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support keeping the federal funds target
constant. Let me enter the fray about language by stating the opinion that we should change
language if we think the markets do not understand our views. We shouldn’t change language just
because the market disagrees with our views. So regarding the distinction between B and B+, I
think because of the minutes and because of the speeches that many of you have given since the last
meeting, the markets hear what we’re saying about inflation; they just simply don’t agree with it. I
feel very comfortable with that. That is, we have told them that inflation is our top concern. They
are very smart, and it’s not, in my judgment, essential that we somehow match the markets’
expectations to our own. Our obligation is to tell them really what we think, and frankly, it is quite
helpful for them to be coming to an independent view. So without going to the distinction between
B and B+ about whether we should change language, I don’t see any compelling reason, in light of
their understanding of where we are, that we should be changing to the somewhat more hawkish
description in B+. As I’ve said before, the language should not be an attempt to rewrite what we
could have done better or could have done differently last time. It has to be a view of, given where
we are, what the incremental benefit of change is. Thus I favor relatively strongly not making the
change to the B+ language that Vincent forwarded yesterday. The markets are most focused on
growth, as I talked about yesterday. The suggestion that Don made about alternative A, section 3,
language is perfectly appropriate, and I think it is reconciled and shared by everyone here.
So let me go to alternative B, section 2, language and try to make my views clear in terms of
the changes that have been suggested. First, if instead of describing economic growth in the third
quarter we refer to economic growth over the course of the year, my concern is that the markets will
then see what gets posted as the third-quarter number and will think that we think that growth is

October 24-25, 2006

118 of 203

going to continue to be weak in the fourth quarter. So even though I don’t like pinpointing a
particular time, I get a little uncomfortable if we use the first sentence to say that economic growth
has slowed further through the present, that is, a 1 percent number gets posted on Friday, let’s say,
and then that will be read to say the Committee believes that that is the trend for the fourth quarter.
Then couple that sentence with the next, in which we say “going forward.” I think “going forward”
then largely means 2007 because we’ve opined in the first sentence on the third and fourth quarters.
I think the general view will be that the “going forward” sentence will relate to 2007 and we will
have left some misunderstanding about where we collectively are on fourth-quarter GDP, and the
markets aren’t going to have that just right. So I would leave the language in the first sentence
referring to the third quarter. Sharing the view that many of you have that “moderate” is not as clear
as we’d like, I think we want to have the first sentence end with the third quarter and have the next
sentence then talking, in effect, about the fourth quarter and beyond. Then because I can’t come up
with a better word than “moderate,” I would suggest the following: “Going forward, the economy
seems poised to expand at a moderate pace.” Again, I’m trying to suggest some optimism, some
inflection point there. The other language I’ve messed around with would be “poised to return to a
more moderate pace” or something else along that line. But I think we’re trying to show an
inflection point, so that would be my modest suggestion for that. All in all, the markets are going to
be most focused on our growth statement. So even though we’ve spent a lot of time on
wordsmithing, I think it is quite important. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. I see the data that have come in over the past five weeks as indicating that
the economy is actually evolving in a way that I find quite attractive. In that sense I hate to use this
language, but I think it’s actually appropriate: I think the right language is “stay the course.”

October 24-25, 2006

119 of 203

[Laughter] In that regard, in terms of the statement, we want to modify as few words as possible.
Clearly it makes sense not to mention energy for the reasons that have been discussed, but I think
the right way to let the markets know where we are is that basically we’ve paused in the last couple
of meetings, that pausing has actually worked out quite well, and that we’ll wait to see how the data
evolve. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I am, as I think the center of gravity in this Committee is,
somewhat uncomfortable with the amount of moderation that the Greenbook expects to see in core
PCE inflation, and I’m somewhat uncomfortable with the view that, with the markets’ expectations
for the fed funds rate, we’re going to see enough moderation of inflation. We can’t be that
confident—even if the fed funds rate stays constant, as the Greenbook suggests, over the next few
quarters—that we will get the right amount of moderation. So I think the range of plausible
outcomes for monetary policy is likely above the path that’s now priced into the markets, maybe
somewhat above the assumption that underpins the Greenbook. I’m not confident that we can
effectively alter those expectations or calibrate our signal in a way that can engineer that kind of
desirable change two to three quarters out in the expected path of the fed funds rate. I don’t think
there’s a good case for moving policy today, of course. I think the first sentence in C is sort of what
we meant in August, and if we had used it then, I’d be in favor of using it today. But I don’t think
there’s a strong case for putting it in today on the grounds that I don’t know that, on the basis of the
evidence we’ve seen over the past five weeks, we can justify what would be interpreted as a
significant firming in the signal the Committee is sending. I also think it has the slight disadvantage
of maybe being harder to extricate ourselves from than the current formulation. Having said that, I
think the signal needs to be asymmetric and the risks are still asymmetric. We should be more

October 24-25, 2006

120 of 203

worried about the risk that inflation doesn’t moderate enough than we should be worried about the
other risks to the forecast.
I would be reasonably comfortable with the changes to sections 2 and 3 that Don proposed.
I have some uneasiness about whether section 2 as modified conveys the sense that, if you look
through the adjustment we’re seeing so far, we have growth strengthening from the pace in the
second and third quarters to a level that’s at or close to potential, and I do think the sense we want to
convey is pretty close to what Charlie, Bill Poole, and perhaps Kevin in a sense said. But I just
don’t think we can at this time wade into a characterization of potential or what’s sustainable
without the risk that we’d regret the formulation that we used. So on the grounds that I don’t have a
better alternative, I would support the modifications to sections 2 and 3 and leave the risk
assessment in section 4 unchanged. I think that will leave us in a pretty good position. We should
be pretty comfortable with where we are, but I do think the plausible scenarios for what we’re likely
to do with the fed funds rate lie above what’s now priced in the market and maybe above the
assumption that underpins the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vincent.
MR. REINHART. Who says 18 people can’t draft a statement? [Laughter] I have some
late breaking news. If you go to the dictionary, the first meaning of “moderate” is “being within
reasonable limits,” which I believe is what Governor Kohn was referring to. But it also means “of
limited or average quality,” and in the federal statistics, there is a term of art, “moderate income,”
which refers to households supported by average or slightly below average income. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That was truly amazing. [Laughter] President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I’d like to just go back and endorse Governor Kohn’s
recommendation. I was worried about the numerator/denominator relationship. If the reference to

October 24-25, 2006

121 of 203

“moderate” as defined and clarified by Vince keys off the third quarter, then I’m concerned. If,
however, we take the phraseology that Governor Kohn suggested, I think it would be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Well, thank you all very much for a very useful,
very informative discussion. My bottom line is that we have not had a great deal of information in
the past five weeks on which to base a sharp change either in policy or in this statement. Therefore,
I would propose that we make no change in the federal funds rate target today.
Many of the issues that were raised yesterday were in some sense prospective. Will the
housing market decline further or stabilize? Will labor markets strengthen or weaken? Will growth
slow or return to potential? Over the next six or seven weeks, until the next meeting, we’ll be
seeing the employment cost index, the third-quarter GDP, two employment reports, and a raft of
data on housing prices and other key indicators. So I think it would be sensible to think very hard in
December about whether a course adjustment is necessitated both in terms of policy and in terms of
the statement.
I would just say that Governor Warsh’s comment about the markets was one that I’ve
thought about myself. If the markets disagree with you, do you try to persuade them or not? I think
the ideal thing is, again, to convey strongly what our views are—in particular, both our objective
function and our outlook—but in general not to try to directly influence the position of the yield
curve because doing so makes us lose an important source of information about the economy.
However, in the intermeeting period we can continue with our verbal tightening in the sense that we
can emphasize our ongoing concern about inflation and the pace of change in inflation, and we can
convey, those of you who believe this, that the risks to lower growth seem to have been at least
somewhat moderated.

October 24-25, 2006

122 of 203

With respect to the language, I’ve been trying to keep track here, [laughter] but I think I
have a clear majority in the third section to strike “and of the prices of energy and other
commodities.” I heard no disagreement there. The Kohn amendment seems to have a majority.
Governor Warsh raised some of the issues that I thought about in trying to distinguish the third
quarter from the fourth quarter. I guess I’m okay with Governor Kohn’s suggestion. Is there
anyone who would like to re-enter this discussion after hearing the whole thing? If not, I take the
general thrust to be in favor of making that change.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is there a comment? Yes, Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. This is certainly something that I am very supportive of, but as I had
mentioned, I was concerned, as Governor Warsh and others were, about the interpretation. Would it
make sense to use the word “poised” rather than “likely,” or do you think that would be a mistake?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think “poised” suggests in the future even more than what
we already have. Frankly, this may or may not occur, but I think that second sentence, “seems
likely to expand at a moderate pace,” is actually a fairly hawkish sentiment because it will tell the
markets that we are less concerned about a meltdown in housing than many people in the bond
market appear to be. So I guess I don’t see the advantage of “poised.” I think “moderate,” even
without Vince’s very appropriate intervention, does convey the sense of reasonable, near trend,
certainly greater than 1 percent. So I do think it’s a reasonable suggestion. We will, of course, be
talking in subsequent sessions about how much more we want to go into forecasts and how much
more explicit we want to be about those things in the future, and that will be a point for significant
discussion.
On the risk assessment, section 4, a few people expressed interest in B+, but I think the
overwhelming sentiment was that changes in this case would be somewhat risky, and so the status

October 24-25, 2006

123 of 203

quo seems to have the majority. Again, it will be a very interesting intermeeting period. We’ll see
what the data are, and we’ll also see how the markets respond to those data. As President Poole
pointed out, if the data are exceptionally strong, I think the markets will anticipate our action and
begin to move financial conditions in the appropriate direction. So that’s my recommendation.
Would anyone like to comment? If not, Ms. Danker, could you call the roll?
MS. DANKER. I’ll be reading the directive wording and the risk assessment for alternative
B from page 29 of the Bluebook:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 5¼ percent.”
Then the risk assessment:
“Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent and timing
of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of
the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.”
Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bies
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
President Lacker
Governor Mishkin
President Pianalto
President Poole
Governor Warsh
President Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. It’s 10:30. Why don’t we take a
fifteen-minute coffee break and return for our discussion?

October 24-25, 2006

124 of 203

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The meeting can come to order. This portion of the meeting is
devoted to a discussion of communications. Governor Kohn, could you lead us off?
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to say just a few words by way of
introduction about the expectations for today and the process going forward. Today we’re
approaching the general topic of communications, but also I think everyone agrees that today’s
discussion, in particular, is about more than communications. It’s about the regime, how we run
policy, to an extent. So we will get into that.
We’ve been approaching this topic in a very gradual, deliberate way. These issues are
important, and I don’t think there’s any rush. There’s nothing that we’re doing now that is so
severely broken that we have to fix it in the short run. We want to consider these issues, as we have
discussed in the past few meetings, on a number of fronts, and the areas in which we may be
changing—the numerical specification of price stability, the forecast, the announcement, the
minutes—are all interrelated. We want to end up with a program across all these things that makes
sense, is coherent, reinforces itself, and balances all the various considerations that we talked about
at the last meeting with principles that should guide these things. We need to look at the individual
pieces and then the whole package, make sure we understand the implications, and prepare the
public and possibly the Congress for some of the changes we might make. So I see this process as
very deliberate in typical Federal Reserve style, and I think that is justified in this case. One thing
we’ve discovered about communication policy is that, once you make changes, they are really hard
to take back. So we need to get clear among ourselves what we are doing, why we are doing it, and
what the implications are for our own deliberations, for our communication with the public, and for
the material we might get from the staff for meetings.

October 24-25, 2006

125 of 203

As for today, the issue on the table is the numerical specification of price stability. Vincent
has circulated a memo with a decision tree in it raising key questions, and I hope we come out of
this meeting without a decision. I think making a decision today would be a mistake because what
we’re going to talk about today will be related to things we’ll talk about in the future. But if we
could get a sense of the center of gravity of the Committee on the various questions that Vincent has
raised and other key issues that you want to raise in connection with this particular topic, then we
will get some sense of how we want to move forward both in terms of staff work and in terms of
future Committee discussions.
We have a two-day meeting scheduled for January, and our thinking on the subcommittee
was that we would devote that extra day to a discussion of the forecast and projections. How can
we make them potentially more useful? What about how we explain them in the Monetary Policy
Report? How might they fit into the announcements as well as into the Monetary Policy Report?
That area has a huge potential for clarifying the Committee’s thinking to the public, but it also has a
lot of challenges regarding how to go about that and preserve the diversity of the Committee, which
so many of you discussed at the last meeting.
If the center of gravity of the Committee today is leaning toward going forward with a
numerical specification of price stability, we would expect to come back to the Committee at the
subsequent two-day meeting in March with some specifics on how we would go there and some of
the choices we would have. We’ll probably need some staff analysis to back that up. We had a lot
of analysis a year and a half ago or almost two years ago, but I’m sure we will need some more
pieces to back that up. So my bottom line here is that we’re just trying to get a sense of where the
Committee is going. This is a deliberate and deliberative process that will take a number of months,
if not quarters, to get to a place with which we’re comfortable.

October 24-25, 2006

126 of 203

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Governor Kohn. Let me just add a couple of
comments. I’ll talk more substantively at the end of the round, but I just want to say that I’m
looking forward to the discussion. I think we’re going to learn a lot. Our objective should be to
find a package of measures that will improve our communication and our policy effectiveness, but I
hope also that we will find something that will attract a broad support and consensus around the
table because we really need to have the whole Committee behind this kind of thing, if at all
possible.
I know the focus today is on explicit specification of a numerical definition of price stability.
Certainly in my case, and I’m sure in many of your cases, the interest in that depends a lot on
interactions with other elements of the package—for example, projections. If that’s important to
you, I hope that you’ll refer to it because I do think we’ll have to proceed on some of these other
elements as well.
Let me conclude by reiterating a point that Governor Kohn made, which is that we will not
be making any decisions today. I ask you please not to give the impression to the outside world that
we have made decisions because the process is going to be extended and gradual and we want to
make sure both that all the pieces of whatever it is we decide to do are coherent and that we’re all
comfortable with the plan. So with that, I will simply ask people to raise a hand if they’d like to
speak, and we’ll go around the table.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, may I ask one clarifying question? Will
someone remind us how the minutes are going to characterize the conversation we will have over
the next several meetings? Is it going to be a standard section like the one we used the last time,
which was pretty much without content? [Laughter]

October 24-25, 2006

127 of 203

MR. REINHART. Since you’re not likely to be making any decisions, then there’s not
much to convey in the minutes other than that you had a full and frank exchange of views [laughter]
regarding your attitudes toward articulating a price objective.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good. So we’ll proceed on that understanding. President
Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Vince Reinhart did a good job of organizing
the issues in his three fundamental questions, but I’d reverse the order. The last of his three
questions asks whether adopting a numerical objective would constrain or influence subsequent
policymaking. I think we should start by asking the question what constraints we want to impose on
ourselves and then work backward to what kind of inflation target would provide constraints that we
view as useful. In other words, what discretion do we want to convince people we will not use, or
to put it yet another way, what monetary policies do we want to rule out for ourselves? It’s fairly
self-evident that giving up at least some monetary policy discretion is useful, and in fact we’ve done
this. After all, our success in bringing down inflation under Chairmen Volcker and Greenspan was
achieved by giving up the discretion to follow pre-1980 style policies in which trend inflation
drifted upward and by giving up the discretion not to respond forcefully enough to inflation scares.
Regarding an explicit inflation objective, let me again start by considering the expected
value of one-year inflation beginning n years ahead, where n is, say, ten years or more. This
number can be taken to represent expected long-run inflation, and we can make it anything we
like—take that as a kind of postulate. I don’t know of any economic reason for expected one-year
inflation beginning ten years from now to vary materially over time. In fact, fluctuations in
expected long-run inflation impede the effectiveness of financial markets and reduce economic
welfare. Moreover, as a matter of public accountability in a constitutional democracy, we owe it to

October 24-25, 2006

128 of 203

the citizens of the United States to tell them this simple and yet very important implication of how
we conduct monetary policy, if only to make the use of retirement-planning software easier.
[Laughter] So I presume we’ll be able to agree that we want to give up the discretion to pursue
monetary policies in which expected long-run inflation varies over time. Ultimately we need to
choose a number for what measured inflation rate corresponds to price stability.
Beyond choosing a specific number, however, I think the more challenging choice comes
when we talk about time periods. Over what time period should we say that we intend to have
inflation return on average to our long-run objective? In other words, how fast should that
convergence take place? This question is critical and substantive, and it’s going to require careful
analysis and consideration. On the one hand, the time frame should not be too short. Obviously,
saying that inflation should return to target next month would have us giving up too much
discretion. On the other hand, setting too long a time frame will not do enough to stabilize inflation
expectations. Moreover, the longer the time frame that we set for returning inflation to target, the
harder it’s going to be for the public to verify our adherence to an announced target and, thus, the
longer it may take for us to establish the credibility of our announced intentions.
The approach I’ve outlined here by starting at the back and inverting Vince’s question 3 has
some implication for Vince’s question 2: How should the FOMC choose an inflation objective? In
general, since the economic benefits of numerical objectives stem from reducing unnecessary
uncertainty, we maximize those benefits when we make the choice of objective more permanent and
less subject to reconsideration by our future selves. This suggests making a numerical objective as
close as possible to a once-and-for-all choice or decision, for example, by having the inflation target
explicitly voted on once by the Committee when adopted and not reconsidered annually. Related to
that, an explicit Committee decision, it seems to me, would be preferable to amalgamating

October 24-25, 2006

129 of 203

members’ forecasts and preferences as in the relatively opaque Humphrey-Hawkins process. The
latter would have the potential for generating objectives that vary over time with Committee
membership.
Let me briefly make just a few other observations that I think are related to this. First, after
we initially announce our adoption of an inflation objective, assuming that’s what we do, we will
need to act and speak in a way that’s consistent with our announcement. That’s sort of obvious, but
our announcement by itself is not going to convey instant credibility. It will be essential that we
follow through. Second, while our announcement will no doubt convey a general sense of what it
will mean for conducting monetary policy, how we actually make monetary policy immediately
following the announcement is going to demonstrate to people what we think it means—in other
words, how it’s going to constrain us in practice. So we should think about adopting an inflation
objective as consisting of two sets of things—an initial statement and the way we subsequently act
and communicate—and I think we should discuss those both. Third, I’m in the camp that believes
that adopting an explicit inflation objective could improve interactions between the staff and the
Committee by providing guidance as to what analysis is most useful to us. For example, the staff
might routinely report alternative simulations of more or less aggressive approaches to returning
inflation to target over time, as in the Bluebook. Finally, regarding the question of whether
unilateral adoption is consistent with our legislative framework, I was not privy to your private
conversations last November, Mr. Chairman, but your nomination hearings appeared to provide the
Congress with an opportunity to object, if they were so inclined, to unilateral adoption of an
inflation target by the Federal Open Market Committee. I take the fact that they did not do so, at
least publicly, as evidence that they would view a numerical inflation objective as broadly
consistent with the wide latitude accorded to us by our existing legislative mandate.

October 24-25, 2006

130 of 203

I recognize that some cite the so-called dual mandate as a reason to question whether we can
adopt an inflation target without a more-formal mandate to do so from the Congress. But in the past
we have made a great deal of effort to communicate; to educate the public about the relationship
between inflation and output, the two of our three mandates that enter in here; and to convince
people that we contribute best to keeping output growing at a maximal rate by keeping inflation low
and stable. Moreover, we can make the average inflation rate, long-run expected inflation, anything
we want. That doesn’t hold for employment growth or output growth or the unemployment rate.
Those are my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Lacker. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s probably best to state at the outset that I
prefer a different approach to quantitative inflation guidelines, and that approach is actually touched
on in Vince’s second question. The approach I would prefer is extending our economic forecast
horizon. I’ll address this consideration first and fill in some of the details requested by Vince and
the subcommittee, and I hope we would consider this option going forward.
Moving to an explicit numerical specification of price stability would be a very big step for
the Federal Reserve, for this Committee. Once we do that, as Don said, there’s no turning back. So
this decision is extremely important for the Committee. To date, when we’ve been faced with major
decisions of this type, we have taken an incremental approach, and I think that approach has served
us very well. For example, we have increased transparency step by step over the past twelve years,
and I think that approach has really been quite successful.
So I’m attracted to an intermediate step of extending our economic forecast horizons. I
think doing so would be a natural extension of what we already do, and it would give us experience
with many aspects of the quantitative inflation regime. My preference would be to extend the

October 24-25, 2006

131 of 203

economic forecast to a horizon that is at least five years ahead. At five years out, the inflation
forecast should be close to our implicit inflation guideline. Output growth and the unemployment
rate should move around only with regard to structural changes, like demographic changes and total
factor productivity growth, for example.
I realize that many details would have to be addressed to extend the forecast horizon, but
figuring them out and getting experience with this approach would help us to learn what’s involved
in moving toward an explicit numerical objective or to learn why not to go that far. First, what is
the policy assumption underlying the forecast? Second, we currently report GDP growth, the
unemployment rate, and core inflation—so how many variables would we report? Third, should we
continue with our current approach of using a central tendency or develop an integrated consensus
forecast? Fourth, should we convey uncertainty bands around that forecast at the longer horizons?
I realize these questions are difficult for us to answer as a Committee, but there are other
tough challenges in moving to an explicit specification of price stability. For me the biggest issue is
the dual mandate responsibility and our relationship to the Congress. Clearly, a persuasive case
must be made that we will continue to fulfill our dual mandate responsibilities. The challenge is
how to make an explicit numerical specification of price stability operationally compliant with the
dual mandate, and to do so, we need to clarify the flexibility of the time period for bringing inflation
back to its target, as Jeff just talked about. The amount of time to do this would depend on the size
of the current inflation deviation and the deviations from maximum sustainable growth and
employment. So I think the intermediate step of explaining longer-term forecasts would help us
learn how to communicate these difficult dual mandate issues more effectively.
Let me cycle back to the questions in Vince’s memo. With regard to the first question, I
think that further clarification of our price stability objective would be helpful and that extending the

October 24-25, 2006

132 of 203

forecast horizon is a good first step. Providing more information about our long-term inflation goals
should help us maintain or even reduce the currently low inflation risk premiums in long-term
nominal financial contracts and interest rates. These inflation premiums are risk compensation
against the economic outcomes that we have a lot to say about. The long-term inflation information
will greatly facilitate communication both within the Committee and externally. I have expressed
my views on explicit inflation objectives previously. Just to summarize, economic theory does not
sharply pin down the optimum inflation rate, but my preference is a range of 1 to 2 percent for core
PCE inflation. My preference is for core inflation to be 1½ percent, in the center of that zone.
When inflation is outside the zone, policy should be broadly designed to move inflation back to the
center of the zone. However, the time frame for core inflation to return to the center of the zone
depends on a number of factors, like the dual mandate that I mentioned earlier.
Finally, an important issue that we should discuss is whether to use core inflation or
headline inflation. Other central banks use headline inflation, and they seem to manage that well.
I’m open to a discussion on this, but I think the communication issues are more complicated for
headline inflation when it deviates so much for transitory reasons than for core inflation. To
conclude, I favor taking the intermediate step of extending the forecast horizon to five years, and I’d
like to leave open the question of whether to establish quantitative guidelines until we get more
experience with that approach.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you. I want to associate myself with comments that President Lacker
offered. If we are going to do this, we ought to make it very clean and explicit. I would not favor
the approach that President Moskow offered because calling the target a forecast leaves too much

October 24-25, 2006

133 of 203

room for it to change over time. I think that the central idea of a target is that it is a long-term
commitment and not something that ought to change with each new FOMC that comes in.
I believe that a coherent policy for the FOMC requires that the Committee at least act as
though it has an inflation target. We can’t have a coherent discussion if Charlie Plosser and I are
both favoring zero percent and other people are favoring 2 percent. I have often said that I would
like zero properly measured, but I think it is far more important to have any reasonable, low range
and to say exactly what that number is. I think we ought to be able to do that.
I have said that the target range should be understood to be permanent unless developments
in the literature and the theory suggest that it needs to be recalibrated. As a matter of governance,
each incoming FOMC is going to have to reaffirm that range, but I think it would be understood that
there would not be a change without substantial analysis and communication with the general
public. In fact, the constraint that there would be communication with the general public would
produce a very, very high hurdle for even discussing a change. I think that would be appropriate
because discussing a change on the inside and springing it on the general public would not reflect
good monetary policy.
I also believe that there’s good reason to adopt an inflation range sooner rather than later. I
realize that we need a deliberate process here, but I would argue for doing it sooner, first of all,
because our new Chairman has views as an academic that are well known on this subject and
because we have been discussing it for some time. Also, we have an opportunity—whether it
would be successful I don’t know but we shouldn’t pass it by—to help deal with the current
inflation environment. It is true that, if you take the staff model and arbitrarily dial down the
inflation expectations that are embedded in the Phillips curve, you get a very nice result. Generally,
the way that the simulations go, the inflation expectations term grinds away over time, and only the

October 24-25, 2006

134 of 203

creation of a period of slack and lower inflation gradually changes expectations. If we can wind
down inflation expectations discretely through this method, it produces a gain in welfare for the
country that I believe we should not lightly pass by, and so I would like to do it sooner rather than
later.
I’m not going to go into the details about exactly how we might do it. I’ve given a lot of
thought to those details and the way we talk about them. As part of the process of talking about a
range, I agree that a range of 1 to 2 percent in core PCE inflation would be a very good place to go.
But what do we mean if we say it applies to the medium term? I could imagine events that would
make the medium term longer rather than shorter. Just to give one example to get the flavor—if the
country went to a value-added tax system, it would dial in price increases for quite some time as a
part of moving to essentially a national sales tax. That would be taken into account, and therefore, a
rigid definition would not serve us well. We would need to be able to explain why the horizon
would have to be elastic under certain circumstances, and I think we could do that when we had
situations for which we could provide solid analysis. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Some people who know me quite well have been surprised at how brief
some of my statements have been. So in this case I hope you’ll indulge me a little. [Laughter]
MR. STERN. The good times are over? [Laughter]
MR. MISHKIN. As many of you know, I have thought quite a lot about this issue and have
written quite a lot about it. I’ve also been thinking a lot about it recently, particularly in the context
of different political environments and structures of committees in which to operate. I just finished
a report on Sweden. Sweden is not the same as the United States, and the Riksbank is not the same

October 24-25, 2006

135 of 203

as the Federal Reserve, so that will reflect some of my thinking that may be a little bit different from
what you have seen before.
Let me go down the decision tree, which I thought was excellent. The Committee and the
staff did a superb job in framing it in a way I find very useful, so I am going to proceed exactly
along the lines that they suggest. The first question is, Is an explicit numerical specification of price
stability helpful? You are not going to be surprised at my answer: It’s a very strong “yes.” I could
go on and on about this because I have written so much about it, but I’ll try to be very brief on these
issues. The key to successful monetary policy is having a strong nominal anchor. The kind of
success that we’ve seen in central banks throughout the world, which would not have been predicted
ten or fifteen years ago, is really remarkable, and it is because having a strong nominal anchor
allows the markets to do a lot of the work for you. But also what’s very important to emphasize is
that you don’t have to do it with a long-run numerical inflation goal—the Federal Reserve has been
very successful in doing it with an individual. So I don’t see that this has been a problem in recent
years. I have to tell you that, maybe because I am here, I feel we are very lucky to have had the
Chairmen we have had. It could have come out quite differently. Having an explicit numerical
definition of price stability, a long-run goal for inflation, means that the nominal anchor is less
dependent upon who the Chairman is, and I think that’s actually something that is very good. It’s
true in the past that we have not had a problem with that, with Volcker, Greenspan, and now
Chairman Bernanke.
MR. POOLE. You did before that though.
MR. MISHKIN. But we did have a problem before that, and that is exactly my point. In
fact, not only might you not get the right person in the future—and that could have happened this
time around, but we were lucky in that regard—but even when you have the right person, the

October 24-25, 2006

136 of 203

transition to a new Chairman has been very complicated. In particular, people might not remember
this, but when Greenspan came in, there was an inflation scare in the bond markets. Long bond
rates went up about 200 basis points, and the bond market tanked. I think that there was also some
confusion in the markets when our current Chairman took this office about whether he was a hawk
or a dove on controlling inflation. Luckily, I think that confusion has dissipated, but I think it
actually made your life, Ben, a little more complicated than you would have chosen it to be. So the
way I think about this is that I would like the transition to a new Chairman to be very boring, and
having an explicit numerical inflation goal for the long run would help in that regard.
Clearly, there are also the standard advantages that having an explicit long-run numerical
inflation goal would clarify communication with the public, the markets, and the politicians. It
increases transparency and accountability. What is not discussed as much—but I think Bill Poole
hit on it—is that it could clarify and make more coherent discussions inside the FOMC. I would
really like to know, when somebody is advocating a certain setting of the federal funds rate, what
his or her inflation goal is. Jeff Lacker has dissented in this particular meeting. I have an idea why
you did because I think you have been clear on what your goal is. But if I were confused about that,
I would have a harder time understanding why you’re taking the position that you’re taking. We
have seen evidence in looking at how central banks operate that having an explicit goal has actually
improved the nature of the deliberations in these committees.
Another thing that is very important is that having an explicit numerical goal would allow us
to think about the way of doing monetary policy, which is becoming better understood in the
academic literature on optimal policy. The way we think about doing optimal policy is looking at
what is an appropriate inflation path. In particular, having a long-run goal that you know you’re
heading to and then talking about the path to that goal is exactly the right way to think about policy.

October 24-25, 2006

137 of 203

Let me tell you where I would like to head ultimately and then where I think the Committee
should head in the short run. There’s a slight difference because of some considerations I’m going
to bring up. I’d like to see in the long run exactly what Bill Poole and Jeff Lacker mentioned, which
is the FOMC’s agreeing on an explicit long-run numerical inflation goal and doing it in terms of
saying that we are defining what we mean by price stability. So I am in full agreement with you
that we should ultimately head there. Then the discussion of monetary policy, both inside and
outside, should focus on what the appropriate path is to get there and how long it should take. This
approach is consistent with what we have learned in terms of modern monetary policy analysis. It is
the way we have learned to think about this and, by the way, is consistent with the kind of policies
for the most part that have been pursued by the Federal Reserve over the past ten years. A key part
of the success of the Federal Reserve’s operations is that, in practice, we have actually been
operating in that way.
When you have such an approach, there are four basic principles regarding the way you
think about changing the path that you think is appropriate in terms of achieving the long-run goal.
First of all, we ask how far away we are currently from the long-run goal—so where we are really
matters. Second, the nature of the shocks, whether they’re transitory or permanent, is clearly
important. Third, it is very important to be aware of how big the projected output gaps are because
we should care about output fluctuations, something I will turn to in a second. Finally, we also want
to be very concerned about financial stability issues because, if something is occurring on the
financial stability front, we have to be able to deal with it. This kind of approach would allow us to
have a concern about business-cycle fluctuations, which I think is key for a central bank. It would
also allow us to change policy in response to financial instability concerns. It should allow us to
deal with the LTCM type of situation, in which there was a potential small probability of very

October 24-25, 2006

138 of 203

disastrous things happening. In fact, it should be consistent with what Greenspan called the
risk-management approach. So I think it is very important to understand that we’re not talking
about going to a rigid form of inflation targeting if we pursue this goal.
Now let me turn to the second issue on the decision tree, which is how we express an
explicit nominal definition of price stability. I want to discuss some subtleties that really do concern
me right now, which means that I’m going to shift slightly from where I want to get in the long run
to where I think we should head in the intermediate term. Four critical considerations worry me.
The first is the political process. It is very important that we do not get too far ahead of the
Congress on this. It is extremely important that we express a further definition of what we mean by
price stability in a way that is absolutely consistent with the Federal Reserve Act and with the law
and with the dual mandate. This consideration became very clear to me in looking at what
happened during the testimony that the Chairman gave when he took his position. It was clearly a
central issue in the testimony that I gave. It’s very clear that this process is part of the American
system and that it differs from many other countries. So that’s consideration one.
Consideration two is that it’s extremely important that we not be considered to be what
Mervyn King artfully has called “inflation nutters.” The British have better training in English than
we have—they always have better phrases for things. But we need to make very clear that, in fact,
we are not inflation fanatics. A key part of the success of the Federal Reserve has been based on the
fact that the Federal Reserve is clearly perceived by the public, the politicians, and the markets as
having a weight on output fluctuations in our decisions. What is also an important part of our
success is that, in contrast to many other central banks, we have been willing to express our
concerns about output fluctuations and the business cycle. So in my past writings, I have talked
about the dirty little secret of central banking, which is that most central banks are not willing to

October 24-25, 2006

139 of 203

admit that they care about output fluctuations. I think this is actually a serious problem for them.
Luckily, we don’t have that problem, but if we move toward an explicit nominal long-run inflation
goal, we need to be clear that we differ in that regard from other central banks. The issue here is
that this is a primary reason that we’ve had the support of the public and the politicians. We
certainly don’t want to lose that. That’s the second consideration.
The third consideration is that we differ from other countries in a major way, and when I
look at the Riksbank versus the Federal Reserve, I see how different we are. We have nineteen
participants making decisions about monetary policy, and that’s extremely unusual. The only other
comparable situation is the European system of central banks. Our situation is different not only
because there are nineteen people but also because the participants reside in different locations.
Now there are six but there will be seven of us existing in house, and there are twelve of you who
factor in different locations and have a very different role. You are CEOs of an organization, and
you have to communicate differently with the public than the Governors do. I really understand this
because I’ve been on both sides, having been at a Reserve Bank and also here. That situation
actually makes things very, very different.
The fourth consideration is that the Federal Reserve has been extremely successful. That
gives people confidence in us and tells us that the more evolutionary we can be the better off we are.
This consideration is important in two senses. One is that we want to say that we have done a good
job in the past, and we are going to continue to do a good job in the future. Thus we build on the
credibility that we’ve established over the past fifteen years or so. The second sense is political:
We really want to promote political support, and looking as though we’re doing something that is
departing from where we were is not a good way to move forward.

October 24-25, 2006

140 of 203

Now that I have given you basic principles, let me put forth a proposal—not one to be voted
on today but where I would like to see us head. Although in the long run I would like the FOMC to
be able to sit down and agree on what our long-run inflation goals should be in terms of a specific
number, I would argue that the four considerations I brought up suggest that we need to go a bit
more slowly to that path. So here is what I would suggest. As part of our reporting procedures that
we do for our Monetary Policy Report twice a year, we produce forecasts. In a similar vein, I think
it would be very effective for all nineteen participants, when they are giving forecasts, to say what
their definitions of price stability are and, in fact, provide that number. But I would recommend that
this be done only once a year, not twice a year.
What are the advantages of doing this? One advantage is that I think we are fairly close or
will become fairly close to having agreement on it. I would argue that the numbers will not be that
different among us, and providing our numbers will make it easier for us to come to consensus in
the future. So it is an intermediate step to get us there in the long run. Another advantage has to do
with the fact that we have nineteen participants. I think it’s very important that all participants are
heard from and that we don’t encroach on their particular views until we can actually build a
consensus. So it really fits in with the issue that there are nineteen people in different locations with
different jobs to do. Also, it’s evolutionary; it really is not a radical departure. It’s very much in the
spirit of saying that we have a dual mandate. We’ve actually had individuals talking about comfort
zones and so forth. We’re just formalizing the process, and we’re doing it in a way that is a step
forward in transparency, so it really moves us very much in the direction we have been going. The
bottom line here is that it gets us close to having an agreement. I think that is not too far away.
I do want to mention the once-a-year issue, which would come up if the FOMC actually
votes on this. I think people worry about that very much because—and I agree strongly with

October 24-25, 2006

141 of 203

President Poole and President Lacker—we do not want to have the number change very much over
time. (We could also talk about some tricky issues that are created by bad inflation expectations
dynamics, but not now because they are more complicated.) In practice, we have actually seen
something that gives us a lot of information about this issue because one of the concerns that people
had when inflation targeting started was that it would be decided by governments. The problem
with governments is that we know what politicians are like—they have to get elected, and they
think short term; this is one reason that we like to insulate the central bank from the political
process. There was then a concern that, if the government provides a number, it will do so
opportunistically. We have not found that to happen, and the reason it has not happened is that
providing a number is so transparent. When you actually have to give a number, you have to have a
darned good reason for changing it. In fact, I think it would be very unlikely that we would find this
Committee, even if we did this on an annual basis, wanting to change it. Transparency really has
huge benefits. It’s remarkable that, when there have been such changes, they have clearly been for
technical reasons and have been in the right direction. In one case, the Bank of England changed
the number because of a change in the calculation of their price index. It was done in the case of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, with some resistance from the Reserve Bank, but they agreed that
the range they went to—eventually to 1 to 3 from zero to 2—was a better number for them. Thus, I
think that concern is really not going to be a problem even if we do this once a year.
I have an aside that I wasn’t going to mention, but I think it’s important to mention. It has to
do with the issue of potential GDP and potential employment or a discussion of the NAIRU, and it
relates a bit to President Moskow’s suggestion, which I do not think is the right way to go. If we
provide information about our explicit numerical inflation goal, it’s very important to explain why
doing so should not drive us to provide a similar definition of potential employment, potential

October 24-25, 2006

142 of 203

output, or the NAIRU for several reasons. The first is that it’s extremely hard to know what the
correct values are for those numbers, and they’re extremely hard to estimate in real time, as we
know. I don’t even know what they are conceptually. This is a big issue in the academic literature.
We have a good example of this issue right now, which is that the Greenbook has a very different
view on this from what we find in the private markets—you see much slower growth of potential
GDP than the markets do. Any suggestion that we have something like an employment goal would
be very, very damaging to us. We also know that, when the Federal Reserve has acted this way,
which they did in the ’70s, it led to disastrous outcomes; Burns focused too much on output gaps,
and it got the Fed into a lot of trouble. This finding comes from work done by your staff—in
particular, Athanasios Orphanides.
In contrast, it is important to clarify that the reason for the big difference between defining
price stability and defining employment goals is that we know from a welfare viewpoint it doesn’t
matter much whether we are off by 50 or even 100 basis points. I think this is the point that Bill
made. He likes zero, taking into account measurement error, but if we said it was 100 basis points
more than that, I don’t think it would be that big a deal. We know that what is really important is to
have a number to pin down inflation expectations, and not the specific number. That is absolutely
not true of an employment goal. So it is very important to get that across, and it is the reason I
reacted to President Plosser’s comments about this issue of talking about potential, although I think
that he agrees with me.
It is also one reason that I have a concern with the proposal that President Moskow has
made. First of all, I don’t think it is explicit enough. But I also have the problem that, if you talk
about a five-year inflation forecast as a goal, people start to interpret that as a goal, and if you talk
about a five-year GDP forecast, they’ll also interpret that as a goal. I think it leads exactly to a lack

October 24-25, 2006

143 of 203

of clarity that will get us into trouble. So we need to be much clearer on this. If you ask me my
five-year inflation forecast, that might not be the same thing as my view of the appropriate level of
price stability because I have to think about what everybody else’s decisions are going to be, who
may be the next Chairman, or whatever.
Another issue, which is not the main subject today, is important to discuss because it may
affect what the staff has to do. I have another proposal, which is completely independent of our
decision to go toward an explicit inflation goal; it is that markets would tremendously benefit from
more information about our forecasts, which are now twice a year, and to have that information four
times a year. By the way, this proposal came out very strongly in the Meyer survey, which I’m sure
you’re all familiar with. They were quite in favor of it. Again, this could be done in an
evolutionary fashion. We have a reporting procedure on monetary policy, which we are mandated
to carry out twice a year. By saying that we’re willing to do it four times a year, we are actually
saying that, in the spirit of cooperating with the Congress, we are trying to be even more helpful. So
I think it would fit in very naturally. What it would require, of course, is a little more work on the
part of all of us because we’d have to do it four times a year rather than twice a year. But I’m
willing to do that, and I think other people would be willing to do it as well.
Another key issue is that we need to greatly improve the quality of the written documents
that go with this process. The current Monetary Policy Report is really terrible. It’s dull; it’s sex
made boring. I don’t want to criticize too much, but it is. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Tell us what you really think. [Laughter]
MR. MISHKIN. If it were a textbook, and I can tell you I know a lot about this, you
wouldn’t sell one copy. [Laughter] So it’s a problem. We see this in practice in that the markets
pay very little attention to the Monetary Policy Report. A feature of inflation-targeting regimes is

October 24-25, 2006

144 of 203

that they produce something called inflation reports. (By the way, I would never want to call it that
in the United States; I would want to stick with Monetary Policy Report—it is a good name, and it
fits into this evolutionary view.) They have improved the quality of these documents so that they
receive a lot of attention. Those reports have become extremely important vehicles for getting the
central bank’s views across to the public and for helping the public understand what the central
banks are doing; they actually also provide support for the central bank to pursue optimal policy. So
improving these documents would have tremendous benefits, and I think it could be done, and I
actually think the staff would probably enjoy doing them—well, maybe not. [Laughter] You’d be
working harder, but that’s why you get paid the big bucks. I think you’d actually enjoy doing this.
In the inflation reports, they’ve moved to using the best textbook writing techniques—nice colors,
boxes. Ben and I have been involved in this process. It’s the reason that I can afford my spouse.
It’s a change in the nature of the way this is done, but I think it’s very doable and will have a lot of
benefits.
The last box in the decision tree is technical issues. That’s not what we’re here to discuss
today. There are a lot of them. How should we report the participants’ forecasts, if we go that
route? What price index should we use? We would have to agree at least on what price index and
whether it is a core or a headline measure before providing our views about what price stability
means. Would it be a point or a range? What should be the form of the Monetary Policy Report
document? Also, what does economic analysis tell us about the optimal level of long-run inflation
rates so that we can actually think about the sense of it? Even though I’ve written a lot about this, I
would like to think about all of it from scratch, and I would encourage the Committee to do that as
well. In that regard, I would like to have the staff do even more work. The staff would need to
provide us with a set of documents to get us to rethink these issues. There are a lot of technical

October 24-25, 2006

145 of 203

issues. The documents that you provided for the January 2005 meeting were excellent. But I would
basically have a complete relook because I think there are some changes that we should be aware of,
and then we can decide on what index. Some of us may change our views on exactly what number
we think is the right number for the long-run inflation goal.
If we go this route, we might try a dry run on some of these things because of what
Governor Kohn mentioned—once you go this route, it’s not easy to go back; so you had better get it
right. We might want to try dry runs of what procedure we would use to provide information. If we
have a Monetary Policy Report document, we might try dry runs that we would actually discuss in
this Committee. I think by doing that we would be more likely to get it right. Anyway, I am sorry
to have gone on so long. I have now made up for the fact that I have been quieter other times, and
I’ll try to be quiet in the future if I can. Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. It probably comes as no surprise to most of you that I share a lot of the
views expressed by Jeff, Bill, and Rick, and so I’ll try to reinforce some and maybe fine-tune a
couple about which I might have some additional thoughts. I do applaud the changes that the
FOMC has made—over the past decade, in particular. It has enhanced its credibility. It has
improved its communication and its transparency about the policymaking process, and I think that
has been a great step forward. In principle, I view the announcement of a long-term numerical
definition of price stability or long-term inflation target, however you want to think about it, as
another important step in that direction, and in that sense, the announcement is going to be
evolutionary rather than revolutionary. I also believe that it will fundamentally improve the
policymaking process without unduly restricting our flexibility to respond to crises.

October 24-25, 2006

146 of 203

I think it is often important to remind the public and others that we—the Federal Reserve,
the central bank—have the unique responsibility to maintain price stability. No other agency of the
government is charged with maintaining price stability, and nobody else can do it for us. So in
some sense, when you think about mandates and what our responsibilities are, we are the only
vehicle for achieving that.
Specifying our long-term price stability objective numerically would help coordinate
expectations by reducing the public’s uncertainty about our goal. Long-run expectations would
become less responsive to short-term inflation, therefore probably less persistent. This should
enhance monetary policy flexibility in many ways. Thus, rather than being unduly constraining, it
could add to our flexibility. But that’s not to say that a numerical definition would not influence our
policymaking; indeed, there would be little point in specifying a target if we thought that it
wouldn’t. The numerical goal would be a long-run anchor—the nominal anchor to our monetary
policy. It would help coordinate our own discussions of appropriate policy and serve as the
guidepost for our policy deliberations.
At times a policymaker would like to deviate from the commitment to long-term price
stability, the so-called time consistency problem. A precise definition of what we mean by price
stability, however, would make it harder to succumb to the temptation to deviate and thereby would
improve policy outcomes. What we know in the context of most policies is that welfare under
forms of full commitment generally exceeds welfare under forms of discretion. Now, that does not
mean that there will not be exceptional unforeseen events or events with such low probabilities of
occurring that reactions to them would not have been pre-specified but would require deviations
from policy as usual. But these special circumstances are easily recognized. In such instances, such
as 9/11 and other crises, the FOMC will be able to react appropriately.

October 24-25, 2006

147 of 203

We are fortunate, as Rick pointed out, that a number of other central banks in the developed
world have set numerical inflation objectives and inflation targets. Numerical specification has
been viewed quite favorably by those banks, and it seems to produce a moderate improvement in
monetary policy. There is evidence that inflation expectations have become better anchored in these
countries and that inflation outcomes have improved without any negative consequences for output
growth.
It can be reasonably argued that the FOMC has implicitly targeted inflation over the past ten
years. Twelve-month averages of core CPI inflation have remained inside a band of 1 to 3 percent.
I believe, given the shocks that have hit the economy over this period, that has not been just good
luck. Rather, it has been good policy. Thus, an explicit setting of a numerical objective would be
evolutionary and not revolutionary for the Fed.
Now, I have not come to firm conclusions about the precise formulation of the price stability
objective. We’ll need to consider—as has been alluded to—which index, what period over which to
define the goal, and whether we should choose a range or a point for the definition. The choices, to
me, are interrelated. For example, a long horizon would mean a tighter range and perhaps even a
point. A long horizon makes the choice between headline and core inflation less important. Any
proposal will have its pros and cons. For example, specifying a range may be preferred if it
communicates explicit upper and lower bounds, presumably above or below which we would say
we are definitely away from price stability. Of course, because of inflation dynamics, to maintain
inflation in that range, policymakers would have to take action before inflation moved above or
below those bounds. On the other hand, a range might induce some complacency on the part of
policymakers so that they would not feel any urgency to take action until inflation moved outside
the range, at which point it might be too late or at least more costly to restore price stability and

October 24-25, 2006

148 of 203

reestablish our credibility. If so, a point estimate actually may be best because it would force the
policy to be more explicit about why or why not any deviation should be tolerated and for how long.
As I said, I’ve not really come to a firm conclusion about a particular formulation in that regard.
Presumably, deciding on a definition of price stability would entail estimating measurement bias in
particular indexes. Robert Gordon in recent work estimated that the bias in the headline CPI is
about 0.8 percent per year. There are likely different estimates of the bias. Presumably having
ranges will help us determine what those definitions might be. If we decided and agreed upon a
bias, let’s say it was 0.8, should that be our target? Yes, if price stability is our goal. However, in
this regard, I agree with Bill, Jeff, and Rick that having a unique number may, in fact, be more
important than what that number is, so long as it is within a fairly narrow range.
I think that this problem is a little more complex because we also have to consider the view
of models in which there is actual optimal inflation. Many models of optimal monetary policy
suggest, depending on the exact formulation of the model, that the optimal rate of inflation falls in a
range of slightly negative to slightly positive. Thus, price stability may be desirable, but it may not
be optimal in some circumstances.
Finally, monetary policy is a Committee decision. We may differ on our forecasts, our
models, and our understanding of the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy,
but it seems to me that the Committee must agree on its inflation objective. I don’t see, as has been
discussed, how we can formulate coherent policy if we disagree on the numerical long-run goal we
are trying to achieve. In helping communication and the public’s understanding of policy,
individual definitions would create much too much confusion. This problem is evident today. For
example, there seems to be a disconnect between the market’s view of long-run inflation, which
according to surveys and financial markets seems to remain around 2½ percent, and the statements

October 24-25, 2006

149 of 203

made by many of us on this Committee who seem to be comfortable with 1 to 2 percent. Do the
markets not believe that we are seriously committed to that goal? Are we really committed to the
goal of 2 percent or below? By publicly committing to a specific target, we might, I hope, obtain
greater congruence of our goals and the market’s expectations. Of course, we have to remember
that we will not succeed at all unless our actions are consistent with our stated objective.
Let me make two really quick points about communications. First, as I said earlier,
sometimes when I’ve read past FOMC statements I’ve said, “Well, why don’t you just say what you
mean?” I agree with Rick: I don’t really like “potential output” either. I think it’s important that
we strive toward achieving a communication strategy in which we are not trying either to confuse
the market or to send signals but are basically stating what our forecasts are, what our policy
objectives are, and how we propose to get to them. Second, I’d like to reinforce the idea—and Rick
spent a good deal of time talking about this so I won’t elaborate on it—of a document like an
inflation report—call it a monetary policy report. Part of our communication strategy would be
greatly enhanced by our ability to communicate on a more regular basis what our views about the
economy are and where we think it is going. As a way of communicating, such a report would be
very valuable. It would be tricky because it needs to be a report of this Committee and not
necessarily of the staff. How we mesh what the staff does with what the Committee thinks can be a
very tricky process. So I recognize that getting to that report entails some discussion about how to
proceed, what constitutes the report, and how we communicate the Committee’s views
independently or how we aggregate them. Thus, I appreciate Rick’s argument that maybe we could
have some dry runs in thinking about how we aggregate our views. What variables we need to put
in the report, which are the critical ones, and what policy assumptions underlie some of those
forecasts are all very subtle and complex issues.

October 24-25, 2006

150 of 203

I taught in a business school for most of my career—thirty years of teaching business
students. One thing I said to students was that the tough part of management often wasn’t figuring
out where you wanted to go; the tough part often was figuring out how you get there from where
you are. Indeed, in running an organization, in many cases that is where you run into most of your
problems and where you step into the biggest potholes. Therefore, I’m very sensitive that, if we
agree that we want to get to some goal, the trick is figuring out how we get there from where we are.
That is critical.
The last thing I’d like to comment on relates to the so-called dual objective and Rick’s
comment about the importance of the central bank’s concern for output and employment, the “dirty
little secret” as you referred to it—that we don’t have to worry about it because the public knows
that we are concerned about it. But I think we have to be very careful in our communications
because I worry sometimes that the public’s view of monetary policy is often that we can do
anything, and at the slightest deviation or problem, we sometimes step into the hole of leading them
to believe that we can either fine-tune or achieve objectives that we really can’t achieve. So in the
context of this discussion, we need to try to communicate to the public that, although we may have a
dual mandate in some respects, our ability to achieve certain objectives is very, very limited. We’ve
come dangerously close in this period to going from a position in which monetary policy was never
considered to matter for anything to one in which it’s all that matters. Our communications can
play a role in which we are a bit more humble and admit what we can do and what we cannot do.
We should be very careful not to lead the public along a path that suggests we can actually
accomplish things that most of us around the table don’t believe we really can. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Minehan.

October 24-25, 2006

151 of 203

MS. MINEHAN. Well, it will probably come as no surprise to anybody around this table
that I don’t agree with some of the things that have been said, though I have a great deal of respect
for the opinions that have been expressed. I want to go through the questions in a somewhat
different order: first of all, whether or not explicit numerical specification of price stability is
helpful; second, whether I think it would affect policy setting; and then third, if we’re going to do it,
some beginning thoughts—and they are only beginning thoughts—on how we would do it.
Is an explicit numerical specification of price stability helpful? My answer to the question
hasn’t changed much since we last talked about this in February 2005. I don’t think it is. Based on
the evidence then and the updates since, I don’t believe an explicit numerical specification of price
stability would have sufficient benefits to U.S. policymaking to outweigh the potential costs
involved in either actually taking our eyes off the other goal of policy or being seen as likely to do
so. There is no doubt that such a specification has been useful in countries with a track record of
very high inflation or no central bank credibility. I think it also was useful in the formation of the
ECB, since there was a new central bank with no track record. In the cases of both the Bank of
England and the Bank of Japan, it was part and parcel of their gaining independence, which was
important in a number of other ways. So I don’t think the situation in other countries necessarily
applies to the United States, and I don’t think we have a good body of evidence that they’ve done
with inflation targets, however they’ve been set, any better than we’ve done over the past whatever
relevant time period it is.
It is asserted that an inflation target of some sort enhances the effectiveness of monetary
policy by helping to generate market expectations and actions that are consistent with the goals of
the central bank. But it’s not clear to me that our current process doesn’t do that about as well as it
can be done while leaving some room for the flexibility that I believe is vital to the policy process.

October 24-25, 2006

152 of 203

Now if we adopted, and we probably are likely to adopt, some form of price stability
specification, what does that do to policy setting? If such a target or goal is to be credible, then
markets ought to have some confidence that the Federal Reserve will react in predictable ways each
time the goal is either met or missed. But we don’t have just one goal. We have two goals, and
how we react to inflation readings or forecasts will depend importantly on the trajectory we see for
economic growth, output gaps, unemployment, however we want to phrase it. Thus, the setting of
an objective for just one of our goals could result in somewhat less transparency about what our
policy actions right now might actually be; even worse, having such an objective could result in
actually making policy in a way that is insufficiently sensitive to growth.
Every paper we have received on this topic has stressed that aspects of setting a so-called
flexible inflation goal can reduce the possible cost of confusion about our commitment to dual
goals. Specifically, we could set a wide range. We could choose a long period over which to attain
the target. We could choose an inflation measure less subject to volatility, particularly over the long
run. We could communicate extensively about all aspects of our forecast, et cetera, et cetera. But in
the end, if everything about the goal is so flexible or needs continual communication, how does it, in
fact, deliver its benefits?
I really wonder what problem we’re trying to solve. The communications subcommittee
asked for our perspectives on the goals of communication. I believe we can improve how and what
we communicate, but I don’t see that the effort to communicate better by definition has to include
an explicit numerical target for inflation. For the best part of twenty-five years, no matter how we
have measured inflation, it has moved down. GDP has faltered only occasionally, and
unemployment has really been the envy of the developed world. This was done without an explicit
inflation target, and I wonder whether one would have helped much. I also wonder whether we

October 24-25, 2006

153 of 203

know enough about what the underlying inflation mechanism is within our economy to lead us to
certainty about what the correct range is. Is it zero properly measured, or is some level of inflation,
low and stable, actually good for the way the economy functions? I am not sure I know the answer
to that question, which makes me hesitant to put a numerical range around my goal.
Finally, we do need to consider the likely interaction with the Congress as we set a target for
one of our goals but not another. In my view, the Congress should be very interested in the
short-run tradeoffs between that target and growth in unemployment. It might be hard, for example,
to explain the virtues of a goal that’s focused on a 1½ percent midpoint rather than the current
inflation of 2½ percent. Over the long run, I think either one of these numbers could be consistent
with solid growth. But in the short run, moving from one level to another would require some
sacrifice, and I think the long-run charts in the Bluebook show that. There’s no research I know of
that proves a lower rate is clearly preferable, though inflation stability at any low level might be. So
how is the sacrifice justified? What else might that interaction with the Congress provoke? The
possibility for unintended consequences is clear.
Now, I think I’m as committed to being accountable, credible, and transparent as anybody
else around this table. However, I believe that we’ve achieved those goals in spades and that an
explicit numerical target has the potential to do some harm. The possible benefits of setting a
numerical target seem to me to lie solely in the advantage to some of being able to point to a
number rather than thinking of price stability as the absence of concern about prices in everyday
business and consumer activity. A number conveys precision, but that precision itself could
backfire by seeming to require a policy response that may not be optimal.
That probably covers the question about whether a numerical price specification is helpful
and the related question 3 about whether the quantification of the long-run objective would serve as

October 24-25, 2006

154 of 203

a new influence on policy setting. I think it would serve as a new influence on policy setting.
Frankly, I don’t find it hard to understand where people around this table come from at present or
where they have come from over the past thirteen years. I think that if you set out a numerical
target, it will change the dynamic around the table, and I’m not sure in a positive direction.
Okay. I know I am in a small minority. I know most people see only good or at least
nothing bad coming from an explicit specification of price stability. I know the decision over time
is likely to be to pursue such a specification. If that happens, here’s a general idea of how I think it
should be done. First, I agree with Don and, I think, Rick as well: One ought to approach this
process very carefully. Once in the public domain, an inflation goal, target, specification, whatever
you want to call it, will be there and will be very difficult to take away. I believe the markets at
present think we’re after the lowest feasible level of inflation that we can get consistent with a
reasonable level of growth. Once a number or a range is attached, market perceptions might change
in unforeseeable ways. When or if we take this step, it will be very hard, if not impossible, to
reverse it, so we had better be both thoughtful and careful about doing it. So I like ideas such as
Rick’s that there are ways we can evolve to this and we can take some dry runs or intermediate steps
that give us a sense of what the longer run might be.
Second, I haven’t given a lot of thought to the possibility of each member of the Committee
setting his or her own goal, but it is consistent with my understanding of the way the Committee is
intended to function, with each of us bringing our own thoughts and frameworks to the table. Over
time, the resulting diversity of perspective is vital to the way the Committee works. Thus there is
some appeal to the direction in which Rick was going, which is, as a first step, disseminating
perhaps twice a year or more frequently the range of FOMC participants’ personal definitions of
price stability in conjunction with their near-term forecasts. I wouldn’t extend the forecast. The

October 24-25, 2006

155 of 203

difference between the two could well indicate policy concerns even without fully specifying the
underlying policy path in the forecast. I don’t know if that’s where you were headed, Rick, but I see
some value in that step as a matter of evolution. Perhaps a key reason I seem to think more about
each participant’s own price stability definition is that it allows for some uncertainty about how the
policy discussion will come out. Maybe unlike others, I see some policy uncertainty as a good
thing. Most of the time we cannot forecast exactly what the Committee will find necessary to do,
and I think we should avoid giving the appearance that policy moves are always known months in
advance when they aren’t. Making it clear that nineteen different perspectives and definitions are
involved could, I think, contribute to that.
Finally, regardless of whether a numerical specification of price stability is set for the
Committee as a whole or reflects a range of our individual preferences, the target specification
needs to be a range rather than a single number. I think of it as an umbrella rather than a target. We
should use a measure based on either the headline or the core CPI on the grounds that most people
know what that is. It is part of the life that they live day by day, and so it resonates in our
communication. We should set a medium-run to long-run target of five years or so over which the
specification would be met if the relevant range were exceeded. I think that gives us enough
flexibility to deal with crises of one sort or another. We should do whatever we can to make sure
that we, the central bank, and not the Congress, set the target if we’re going to have a target. That’s
as far as I can go.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In August, this Committee discussed the
goals for our policy communications and generally agreed that one goal is to improve the
effectiveness of monetary policy and the performance of the economy by helping agents generate

October 24-25, 2006

156 of 203

well-informed expectations consistent with the goals and strategy of the central bank. The other
goal is to enhance the accountability, credibility, and democratic legitimacy of an independent
central bank.
I think that an explicit numerical specification of price stability can help us achieve these
goals. I’m in favor of establishing an explicit numerical objective by a vote of the Committee,
but I recognize that we have many issues to resolve before we would feel ready to implement
such a practice. The economic research in support of explicit numerical objectives is
encouraging but nowhere near conclusive. The same can be said about the experience of other
central banks. So, unfortunately, there is no single off-the-shelf solution for us. Our challenge is
to craft our own framework—one that’s achievable, understandable, and believable. Fortunately,
there are steps that we can take to move us in that direction. A significant internal benefit to
adopting an explicit numerical objective is that it would help communication within the
Committee. At a minimum, knowing each other’s inflation objectives would help us understand
when we disagree, whether the disagreement concerns our objectives or the means of achieving
those objectives. Externally, greater specificity could help us anchor the public’s inflation
expectations. In our current environment, with inflation low and credibility high, I don’t see the
external benefits as being especially large. However, history does have a way of repeating itself.
If we had to face conditions like those of the 1930s or the 1970s again, having an established
practice of achieving explicit inflation objectives could prove helpful, and it could be a potent
insurance policy. So the benefits of having an explicit numerical objective will be significantly
greater during those periods of extreme inflationary or deflationary pressures than they are today.
Of course, as others have indicated, an explicit numerical objective has potential costs.
We might want to deviate from our objective for good reason but feel constrained from doing so.

October 24-25, 2006

157 of 203

Here I’m encouraged by the experiences of other foreign central banks, which suggest that
flexibility is available. There is also the potential loss of credibility from not achieving the
objective when we should be achieving it, but that is a cost that I think we should dedicate
ourselves not to incur. Our challenge is to construct a framework in which we have the
flexibility to make small deviations from a numerical objective—but not large and persistent
ones. Two other potential costs matter to me. First, I want to pursue this option within the
mandate that we have from the Congress today. I’m not sure that inviting new legislation would
prove, on balance, to be constructive. Second, as we explore our options for jointly establishing
an explicit numerical objective, I would like to see the independent contributions of individual
Committee members preserved.
Turning to Vincent’s question about how we should choose the inflation objective, I
prefer, as I said earlier, ultimately to arrive at the objective by a Committee vote rather than by
establishing individual objectives. I think the public would be least confused by a simple
statement from the Committee that says its operating definition of “price stability” is X percent,
with a range, and that specifies the particular index we’re using and the time horizon by which
we’re trying to achieve the objective. In other words, this approach would be the most
understandable. In choosing the X percent with the range and the time horizon, we’ll have to be
sure that we achieve the tests of achievability and believability. We might benefit from having a
period during which the public can get more comfortable with this option. An expression that I
like is “make haste slowly.” One step for getting us started would be to survey the Committee
members about their working definitions of “price stability” and to publish the distribution along
with our semiannual economic projections. Obviously, a potential pitfall of this practice, as
others have mentioned, is that eventually people are going to know that we’re doing this and

October 24-25, 2006

158 of 203

they’re going to want to know our specific individual objectives. So as we move forward with
that practice, we’re going to have to be aware of that.
Turning to Vincent’s third question—“Will quantification serve as a new influence in
setting policy?”—I think that we can expect that having an explicit numerical objective could
change policy setting in ways that we can’t foresee. But I can also see some intentional changes
to the policy-setting process. First and foremost, being more explicit about our inflation
objective will shift the time horizon of our analysis and our discussions at our meetings into the
future a couple of years, which I think is a good thing. A shift in the focus on the medium term
would lead us to spend less time talking about where we are relative to the short-term Greenbook
baseline and to spend more time talking about whether we agree or disagree about issues like
productivity trends, the transmission mechanism, the cost of inflation, inflation measurement,
and so on. These are now regarded as special topics, but I think they would become more
normal fare under a new regime.
I like Governor Mishkin’s and President Plosser’s suggestion to improve the Monetary
Policy Report to the Congress and to the public. Once we start to discuss these longer-term
trends, they could be included in the report, and their inclusion would make the report more
beneficial. The positions I’ve taken on these specific questions are positions that I had before I
walked into this room, but I recognize that my views are evolving as I’m listening to some of my
colleagues’ comments on these issues. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll start at the top of the sheet but then jump
around. So the answer to the first question is “yes”—I do think that an explicit numerical
specification of price stability would be helpful and that the FOMC should move toward such a

October 24-25, 2006

159 of 203

specification. I always thought this step was a close call in terms of its costs and benefits. There
have been a couple of developments since January ’05, when we last discussed the topic, that
have led me to change my position to favor this step. First, we’ve been through two more
episodes—in the spring of ’05 and the spring of ’06—when a surge in actual inflation raised
questions in financial markets about our intentions and expectations. In both cases, higher
inflation expectations did not persist. But making our long-term intentions clearer should reduce
the risk that temporarily heightened inflation pressures result in increases in expectations that
become more permanent and more costly to reverse. A couple of studies in the past two years
have tended to support the hypothesis that a numerical specification might help tie down
expectations at least a little within the financial markets. Second, I think a lack of clarity on this
question has increasingly muddied discussions in this Committee and communication with the
public. Within the Committee, it has sometimes been difficult to discern whether differing
viewpoints reflect diverse perceptions of the course of inflation and economic growth or of the
desirable end point or path for inflation. The public does not know whether the comfort zones
enunciated by various Committee members reflect the views of the Committee or only those of
the individuals. Coming to an agreement on an end point and on the role that end point should
play in policy and announcing that agreement should help our discussions and enhance the
public’s understanding of our intentions.
Having said that, I think we need to recognize that any explicit inflation specification is
likely to exert some pull on policy. It will not simply institutionalize the Volcker or Greenspan
policy regimes, as is sometimes said. It cannot help but to increase the Committee’s focus on
particular numerical outcomes and projections for inflation. That’s good to the extent that it
reduces the odds on a repeat of the cumulative errors of the 1970s, but it also may make it more

October 24-25, 2006

160 of 203

difficult for the Committee to take actions that might be perceived at the time as inconsistent
with achieving price stability in the next few years but that were still in the public interest—say,
by countering financial distress, as in 1998, or by moving very, very aggressively against
economic weakness, as in 2001, when core inflation was actually rising. A risk-management
approach to policy may well call for aiming away from the price stability objective from time to
time.
I continue to believe that monetary policy over the past twenty-five years has been
exemplary. We should be very cautious in tinkering with its design. Whatever we do must be
clearly consistent with the dual mandate and be perceived as such. This is important for
democratic legitimacy. The Federal Reserve Act includes maximum employment equally with
price stability. I recognize and have often used the principle that price stability enhances
maximum employment. But I also note that proposals introduced in the Congress over the past
two decades to make price stability our primary objective have not had support, and they’ve
gotten nowhere. I’m encouraged by the fact that Chairman Bernanke in his hearings didn’t meet
too much opposition [laughter] but I think we need to recognize that there have been attempts to
change our mandate and there has been no congressional support for those attempts. I think the
last attempt was about ten years ago. The dual mandate is also good economics. Fluctuations
around potential impede planning and long-term saving and investment decisions, just as do
fluctuations around price stability. We need to take explicit account of these costs as we pursue
our price stability objective, and this implies that we should tolerate deviations from price
stability on occasion and that the time path to price stability should depend on the circumstances,
including the likely costs in lost output along with the deviations from price stability. Support
for the Federal Reserve in the population and among its elected representatives has never been

October 24-25, 2006

161 of 203

higher, certainly never higher in my thirty-seven years at this institution. That support flows
from the results of the past twenty-five years and from confidence that we know what we’re
doing and will behave sensibly. This was the second type of credibility that Chairman Bernanke
talked about at the last meeting.
We should not depend on any announcement to have a substantial immediate effect on
inflation expectations, where they count most for economic performance. Professional economic
forecasters would have a number to coordinate on, and they probably will. It may help tie down
expectations in financial markets, but even in financial markets, the effects are likely to be small.
Long-run inflation expectations are already well anchored in the United States. Spreads over
indexed debt move around quite a bit, even in inflation-targeting countries. For example, as we
saw in the briefing on Monday, inflation compensation has fallen since July the same amount in
Canada that it has in the United States. As the staff memo on price dynamics noted, the data do
not support an inference that such an announcement per se would affect wage-setting and pricesetting behavior. Such influences would come because our behavior and the economic results
would change.
These caveats and concerns lead me to favor a numerical definition of price stability
without an explicit time dimension rather than an inflation target that we would expect to achieve
in a defined time frame. I have in mind something along the lines of Chairman Bernanke’s
suggestion in St. Louis three years ago—the long-run average inflation rate we will be seeking in
order to meet the price stability mandate in our act. We would not expect to achieve this
objective year by year or even necessarily on a two-year-ahead projection. That would depend
on the circumstances. My expectation, or maybe it’s a hope, would be that the benefits of such a
formulation would exceed its costs—that without greatly impeding the type of flexible

October 24-25, 2006

162 of 203

policymaking that has so benefited the economic performance since 1980, it would help a little to
tie down expectations, aid the public in making its plans, clarify internal and external
communication, and make it more difficult for future FOMCs, when all of us have retired, to
allow inflation to drift higher. I don’t have well-defined views on the exact specification of this
definition—the index, its level, point or range, whether it should be expressed in terms of total or
core—but these specifications will be critical in judging the eventual likely balance of costs and
benefits.
If we go down this route, we’ll have a lot of work to do. Besides the details of the
specification, it’s vitally important that the Committee think through very carefully the role that
any definition of price stability would play in policy formulation and that we convey our
expectations to the public. It would have implications for all our modes of communication as
well as for the inputs to policymaking and would call for considerable communication to the
Congress and the public to prepare the way. Understanding what we’re doing and explaining it
to the public in turn requires that the Committee come to a decision on the definition and the way
it will be treated in policymaking. So I favor the “jointly” arm of Vincent’s chart. I can see
some of the suggestions of aggregating the views of individual policymakers as a possible way
station, but I’m concerned that such aggregation will raise as many questions as it answers. If
we go to a numerical definition of price stability, we should be prepared to explain and justify it
fully, and that requires the Committee to consider those implications explicitly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In light of the hour and the fact that many of
my more learned colleagues have yet to speak, I’ll try to be brief. My comments come from one

October 24-25, 2006

163 of 203

who has been with the Federal Reserve System for some thirty-nine years, has been seated on the
sidelines of this Committee for fifteen years, and has observed the evolution of communications
and the critical importance of transparency.
I’d like to make two observations. First, if the goal of adopting an explicit target is to
institutionalize credibility, then this should not be a big concern now. The Committee has
credibility, and the recent market evidence on low market volatility and contained inflation
expectations is clearly consistent with the conclusion—the recent Wall Street Journal article
notwithstanding—that this Committee has credibility. Over the long run, however, there are
some looming fiscal issues—specifically, the projected growth of nondiscretionary spending—
that make the conduct of monetary policy very difficult. From this perspective, an explicit target
may provide additional reassurance to the market that the Committee can pursue its low-inflation
objectives with some independence from the pressure to accommodate fiscal deficits. Second, as
many have noted, to move to an explicit numerical target raises a number of both practical and
political issues. These issues concern not only the specifics of the target, the choice of the time
horizon, and the methods employed to ensure transparency and accountability but also the nature
of the negotiations to ensure congressional acceptance and support. The System’s mandate has
been modified several times, most recently in December 2000. If, and I would emphasize “if,”
the Congress required or even suggested additional legislation, I believe the risks and potential
costs of opening up the Federal Reserve Act might be great. For example, the Committee might
also get numerical targets for employment or even specific targets for housing or other sectors
that might be of special interest to individual members of the Congress. My bottom line is that,
given the risks, I take some comfort in the current vagueness of the wording of the Federal

October 24-25, 2006

164 of 203

Reserve Act as it relates to monetary policy objectives and the way it has been interpreted over
the past many years.
My sense is that the Committee may well be close to having the right balance with regard
to communicating its objectives and ensuring credibility. Although, clearly, the Congress can
change our mandate any time, I would urge caution in providing the impetus for such change
until we have thought long and hard about the costs and benefits of that change. Having said all
that, I find a great deal of comfort in Governor Mishkin’s approach at gradualism. I would
certainly be comfortable with that approach if we could avoid nailing, so to speak, a tablet to the
halls of the Congress saying, “This is going to be our explicit target.” I think to do so would
simply lure them into a fight that I wouldn’t want to take on at this time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, in preparing for today’s comments, I found it interesting
and somewhat instructive to look back to similar discussions that this Committee has had in the
past. This includes not just our more recent ones but an extended debate that took place in July
1996. I can confirm, therefore, that we have a deliberative process. [Laughter] Looking back
over how my own views have evolved, I am as convinced now as before about the importance of
an unqualified commitment to price stability as the underpinning of our monetary policy. I have
long had an interest in how an inflation-targeting approach to policy might help us, and that’s
where I think it gets interesting because I think the devil is in the details, if you will. As the staff
and I have tried to work through some of the details we would have to confront in implementing
such an approach, I have become somewhat less enamored than I was about the usefulness of
establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective. I am not necessarily opposed to such a

October 24-25, 2006

165 of 203

step, and if we were to go there, I’m more drawn to Governor Mishkin’s approach than to others
I’ve heard. But I do have concerns about the value of doing so, as well as how such a decision
would be implemented and how it might alter the decisionmaking process and our discussions
within this meeting—the so-called unintended consequences of moving along this line.
Let me address these points by framing my comments according to the questions in
Vince’s memo. First, is it helpful? As I understand the literature on central bank transparency
and credibility, the value of establishing an explicit numerical definition of price stability comes
from anchoring the public’s inflation expectations and reducing the volatility of these
expectations. In this regard, I have been struck by how well anchored inflation expectations
have been in the current tightening cycle here in the United States. This is in contrast, I realize,
to some historical contexts, but the fact of the matter is that they have remained quite anchored.
How much further improvement would come from the adoption of an explicit target at this point,
I question. Would it be meaningful? I’m not so sure.
Another argument is that adopting an explicit numerical objective would make it more
difficult for future Committees to backslide on their commitment to price stability. I find this
argument somewhat weak. Short of a change to the Federal Reserve Act, future Committees
would not be bound, nor would they feel bound, to actions taken by this Committee. I can see
someone pushing forward at some time, in terms of the dual mandate, an issue relative to stable
output as becoming a new important element. Moreover, my reading of the literature comparing
the performance of inflation-targeting and non-inflation-targeting countries suggests that there is
very little measurable difference in performance to this point.
In the absence of a clear benefit of establishing an explicit numerical objective, we also
need to look at its costs. One possible cost is the constraint that might be placed on short-run

October 24-25, 2006

166 of 203

policy decisions. In this regard, I wonder how an explicit numerical objective might have altered
our response to the weakening economy in 2001, which Governor Kohn mentioned. Since core
inflation measures tend to lag output, core inflation was still rising as we began to reduce rates.
Would we have been as able to cut rates as readily if we had established an explicit numerical
objective? Perhaps yes, perhaps no.
How should the objective be chosen? Turning to the question of choosing an explicit
numerical objective, I see a host of procedural and logistical issues. As to procedure, I feel
strongly that any decision should reflect unanimity on the part of the Committee; otherwise, the
credibility of such a decision is immediately called into question. Establishing unanimity about
the details of an objective could prove difficult. For example, I would not be comfortable with
using the core PCE deflator exclusively in defining a measure of price stability. Theoretically,
PCE is generally judged superior to the CPI because chain weighting avoids the substitution bias
in the CPI. In another important dimension, however, the case for the PCE is much weaker.
Perhaps most notably, the core PCE deflator is subject to regular and sometimes significant
revisions. The revisions to PCE over the past six years have not been trivial; moreover, they
have all been in the same direction. By underestimating inflationary pressures during this period,
core PCE sent misleading signals about those pressures. Moreover, the CPI plays a much larger
role in the institutional fabric of this economy. I find it interesting that so few members of the
financial community produce forecasts of PCE inflation, even as they view it as the Fed’s
preferred measure. More important, TIPS-derived measures of inflation expectations are based
on the CPI. Thus, to line up market inflation expectations with the PCE we are forced to go
through the sort of exercise that is reported in the current Bluebook. I wonder how accurate or
useful such a translation might be over an extended time. Consequently, if we were to go the

October 24-25, 2006

167 of 203

route of establishing an explicit numerical objective, I would advocate not tying ourselves
exclusively, for example, to the PCE.
As to whether an explicit or implicit approach is preferable, I would lean toward an
explicit approach of surveying members on their long-run objectives. I feel this approach would
be more transparent and efficient than expanding the horizon of central tendency forecasts.
How would an objective influence policy setting? I believe there would be effects, but
gauging these effects would be difficult without a more thorough and detailed understanding of
how the objective would be implemented. If we decide to go in this direction, it will be
important to maintain the diversity and independence of views expressed by the Committee
members, both in our deliberations here and in our interactions with the public.
Finally, if we explore a form of price-targeting or inflation-targeting, we should hold off
on an ultimate decision until we have a thorough understanding of the details of such a regime
and their implications for the policy process within the Committee. Once again, just as
reinforcement, I prefer going forward along the lines that Governor Mishkin outlined for us.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The last time we discussed an explicit
numerical objective in an organized way I said something to the effect that I thought one reason
to have one would be to formalize and institutionalize what I thought the Committee had largely
been doing over the past ten or fifteen years. I continue to feel that way, and in that sense doing
it is evolutionary along the lines that some other people have described. But evolutionary is not
insignificant, and I do think this would make some significant changes, which I believe would be

October 24-25, 2006

168 of 203

helpful. We have already touched on some of the communication and accountability issues, and
I certainly share the views that this would be positive with regard to those matters.
Another important related consideration is that it’s a potentially effective way of
addressing the issue of time inconsistency. I do think it’s very important that we tie our
short-run decisions to our long-run objective. I don’t think there is much disagreement about our
long-run objective. Stated generally, that is to achieve and maintain price stability. I’m eager to
see that we put in place some framework—this is not the only framework that one can
conceive—that accomplishes that objective. So I think that this would be both helpful and
important and that it would be a new influence in policy setting. That’s its intent.
It does raise, as others have already commented, a number of interesting intellectual
issues having to do with whether to have a range or a point estimate, over what time horizon we
are trying to achieve the objective, what it all means for how the Committee is going to change
the federal funds rate over time, and so on and so forth. I think those questions are potentially
very important. By the way, just so I can preserve some degree of freedom, let me state
explicitly that I’m not persuaded at the moment that a range of 1 to 2 percent is the appropriate
target for us, even though that range has been in the public domain for a while.
Finally, how should the Committee choose the inflation objective? At the end of the day,
I think it should be a Committee decision. But I can see getting there in a more evolutionary
manner, and I would associate myself with many of Governor Mishkin’s suggestions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll address the major questions posed in
Vincent’s memo in the order presented. First, I support the enunciation of a long-run numerical
inflation objective. My views on the benefits and costs of enunciating publicly such an objective

October 24-25, 2006

169 of 203

have changed very little since we discussed this topic in January 2005. Beginning with the
benefits, I believe a numerical objective would focus our internal policy deliberations and
improve their coherence, particularly if the Committee does agree on a common objective. A
numerical objective appropriately communicated could also improve the public’s understanding
of our goals and the strategies for attaining them, thereby helping to align market perceptions
with those of the Committee. Solid anchoring of the public’s inflation expectations could aid us
in avoiding deflation in the vicinity of the zero bound on interest rates and could reduce the
potential for destabilizing inflation scares following adverse supply shocks, thus enhancing the
scope for monetary policy to respond to their real effects. Finally, the public enunciation of the
long-run inflation objective would enhance accountability and transparency in a way that I think
is appropriate. It’s a desirable goal in a democracy.
Although I do perceive there to be net benefits from enunciating a numerical objective, I
do not think these gains are enormous relative to the status quo. The public already has a
reasonably good idea of the Committee’s inflation preferences, and inflation expectations are
now pretty well, if not perfectly, anchored. Moreover, the evidence, as I read it, suggests that a
central bank’s credibility on inflation depends more on its actual record of performance than on
its utterances about its objectives. So no dramatic improvement in the sacrifice ratio seems
likely.
Interestingly, a recent survey that several of you have referred to, and I’m assuming most
people have seen, by our former colleague Larry Meyer finds that only a minority of the
respondents favored the Committee’s adoption of a numerical inflation objective. Market
participants appear far more interested in improved communication concerning our assessment
of the near-term outlook and prospects for monetary policy, and that suggests that as we go

October 24-25, 2006

170 of 203

forward we should place considerable emphasis, as Governor Mishkin emphasized, on enhancing
our forecasts in the context of the Monetary Policy Report.
The enunciation of a numerical inflation objective could have costs as well as benefits.
My main worry is the potential for de-emphasis on the other part of our mandate, namely
maximum sustainable employment. Such a de-emphasis could occur in the minds of the public,
and I could easily see how it could affect our own deliberations. I think the current situation
provides a case in point. If the structural Phillips curve has indeed become as flat as FRB/US
estimates, an optimal policy for lowering inflation to target brings it down exceptionally slowly
when equal weights are placed on the inflation and the output gaps in the loss function. You can
see that in the Bluebook simulations. With the public focused on a numerical inflation objective,
however, it is naturally tempting to seek more rapid convergence to a target. I think we feel
uncomfortable with the paths that we see in the Bluebook, and it would be easy to effectively
down-weight our emphasis on the employment objective. Interestingly, almost half of the
respondents to Meyer’s survey believe that the enunciation of a numerical inflation objective
would impair the FOMC’s ability to meet its maximum employment objective. Therefore,
enunciation of a numerical inflation goal, in my view, must occur in the context of a clear
statement concerning our commitment to the dual objectives. In this regard, I remain attracted to
our Chairman’s 2003 suggestion that we state the target inflation rate as a long-run objective
only and emphasize—again, to paraphrase our Chairman—that in deciding how quickly to move
toward the long-run inflation objective, the FOMC will always take into account the implications
for near-term economic and financial stability. Consideration of the horizon issue is mentioned
in the other question section of Vincent’s memo, and I, for one, take this issue to be crucial and

October 24-25, 2006

171 of 203

would be unable to support a numerical objective unless the horizon can be long enough and
flexible enough to respond appropriately to employment considerations.
Now, I’d like to turn to the second major question, which deals with governance in
essence. Will the inflation objective be chosen by the Committee members or by the meeting
participants, and will it be chosen as a group decision or by summarizing our individual views? I
think there are enormous advantages to reaching a joint Committee decision. This approach
would provide the clearest focus in our policy deliberations and Committee communications, and
it would probably work best in anchoring inflation expectations. It would also provide a
well-defined standard against which we could be held accountable. However, I, too, recognize
that it is probably wise to move in this direction cautiously. I would certainly support, as a first
step, Governor Mishkin’s proposal to report a consensus of responses to an annual survey
concerning long-run numerical inflation objectives of the participants. This approach would be a
measured stance, more measured than a Committee vote, and I think it would be less likely to be
divisive within the Committee and vis-à-vis the Congress. Such a survey respects the possible
diversity within the Committee, and the Congress might be less likely to object to the Committee
participants’ stating their individual interpretations of the monetary policy mandate than to the
formal adoption of an inflation objective. Of course, choosing to use a survey now would not
preclude us from voting as a Committee on a single objective later on.
We could, as an alternative, communicate the Committee’s long-run inflation objective
through lengthening the horizon of our inflation forecasts. Such an approach, however, has
significant disadvantages in my view relative to a straightforward survey of opinions. Consider
the current situation. If the extended Greenbook forecast is accurate, adding just a year or two to
the forecast we prepare for the semiannual Monetary Policy Report would not work. In fact, to

October 24-25, 2006

172 of 203

convey our implicit inflation objectives, if we accept the optimal policy path in the Bluebook, we
might have to add five years or more to those forecasts. Moreover, if we extend the inflation
forecast, we will also need to extend forecasts, as Governor Mishkin noted, of real GDP and the
unemployment rate, and some members of the public and the Congress could misinterpret these
estimates as the Committee’s goals for these variables; at a minimum, such estimates could lead
to unproductive discussions about what the correct estimates of those key concepts are. That is
an exercise I would not relish.
Finally, on the question of whether policy settings will be affected by a long-run inflation
objective. In some sense, the answer has to be “yes.” For example, I argued that the benefit of
having an inflation objective is that it would help to anchor public expectations of policy, and if
it did, it would affect bond rates and other financial variables and their responses, presumably in
constructive ways, and would therefore feed back onto policy.
But the real issue is this: Will a publicly announced inflation objective affect the weights
that we put on the elements of our dual mandate? Will it cause us to respond more strongly to
inflation and less strongly to employment? As I said before, I am concerned that this could
happen, if only inadvertently. If we go this route, I myself would make every effort to prevent
such a distortion to the weights that I use in analyzing policy decisions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you know, since we’ve started talking about
this issue, I’ve been undecided—“open-minded” is perhaps another way to say it. Wearing my
supervisor’s hat, I see that we’ve been talking to players in the markets about how important
transparency is to the effective functioning of financial markets and to financial transactions. So
it’s hard for me to give a rationale for why the central bank is not more transparent. Being part

October 24-25, 2006

173 of 203

of a democracy means that for us as a central bank—especially since we weren’t directly elected
by the citizens—transparency is very important.
However, the unintended consequences of what setting a goal would mean have always
held me back. That’s why I support the process that has been laid out here. We really do need to
take the time to think through all the consequences and, as best we can, identify some possible
unintended consequences. So the evolutionary approach—let’s look at it all together before we
decide—I very strongly endorse because, at the end of the day, our credibility is paramount—it
is something that we have to cherish as much as we possibly can.
I also want to think a little more about the dual mandate issue as we go forward. I tend to
believe that having a more explicit target and continuing to achieve low and consistent inflation
will, in effect, support and encourage growth and full employment. So the issue may be one of
communicating that relationship. I really feel strongly about this. I have no empirical basis but
just fifteen years as a corporate CFO. One disconnect that you have as a CFO in the corporate
world is that you live in a world of nominal, not real, rates of growth. You worry about growth
of earnings per share, and you want to know what your top-line revenue is going to do, so you
think about prices and output. Having a nominal anchor for inflation would actually support
corporate decisionmaking, give people better discipline about pricing power versus riding the
wave of inflation, alert them when inflation is below target, and make them understand that this
could be a short-run downturn in top-line revenue growth. When I think back to the ’80s, a lot of
companies thought top-line growth was stupendous, and it took their eyes away from really
working and operating efficiently. So I think that having a nominal anchor would actually
enhance the real-world tie between our role as the central bank and corporation decision
processes.

October 24-25, 2006

174 of 203

Again putting on my supervisory hat, I think that one of the critical things as we state this
objective is that we clearly say how financial stability fits in. We’ve been talking about central
banks moving more and more to inflation targeting, but they have also been focusing more and
more on financial stability and the role of the central bank in financial stability. That is one of
the implementation issues we need to think through. What is the framework in which we will
look at financial stability, and where might it conflict with our price objectives and inflation
objectives?
Regarding how we would choose an inflation objective, I am very leery of one of the
proposals in the staff memo to use longer-term forecasts. I agree with Governor Mishkin that we
can improve the Monetary Policy Report, but making longer forecasts is fraught with a lot of
risk, and I don’t really see there’s much benefit to it. After all, our objective is not to be the best
forecasters in the world. It’s to control inflation. So I don’t think it adds a whole lot of value.
As President Yellen said, everybody will be asking, “What are the underlying assumptions?” It
will get us sidetracked away from our overall objectives. I prefer the alternative in the staff
memo that the way forward is what we did years ago when we took the rates of growth and
money supply, and we just surveyed all of us. Maybe along the lines suggested a bit earlier, we
just say, “Here is the range of price objectives.” Just announcing a long-term forecast doesn’t
clearly say what the objective is. If we want to set an objective, let’s set an objective and not just
give a long-run forecast.
Another part of setting an objective is spending a lot of time thinking about the time
frame over which we are going to achieve it. Saying that this is our long-run objective is one
thing. It’s very different to say how quickly we’re going to return to the goal when we move
away from that goal. In the discussion around the table yesterday, many of us said that inflation,

October 24-25, 2006

175 of 203

even in the forecast, is running a bit higher than our comfort zone. We know we’ve been above
it for a couple of years, but with this forecast we’ll be above our comfort zones for five years. In
effect, having an objective—and knowing what each other’s objectives are—would have
changed the discussion we had around the table. If we really believe that we’re above our
comfort zone, then how can we make the decisions we’re making? What is the path? That
would have implications for the staff. If we really want to hit an objective, strategy, as President
Plosser said, is the real issue. How do you execute? We can all set great goals, but it’s
execution that matters. A nominal objective would force the staff to spend a lot more resources
in talking about the path of policy and the way we would respond to variations around that path.
That perhaps could actually improve decisionmaking.
Finally, getting back to the transparency issue, I think an explicit objective would put
good governance around us, particularly in the difficult times when we are varying from our
objectives, because we would have to talk about the tradeoffs we have with our dual mandates or
financial stability concerns or whatever is creating a long-run deviation from that path. So I
come back to my thought that the effort to look at this is worthwhile, but I really encourage us to
think about all the consequences as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me frame my remarks around the relevant
constituencies, trying not to avoid answering the hard questions. The prism through which I
think about this is, What’s the political acceptance for what we’re trying to do? What’s the
market acceptance and what’s the policy acceptance for what we are trying to do?
As I think about the three issues and weigh the costs and benefits, I find the costs of each
are easy to elaborate in great detail. The benefits appear to me to be very real but hard to pin

October 24-25, 2006

176 of 203

down with confidence as to both when we would achieve those benefits and how they would
accrue to the credibility of this institution. I am most in accord with President Yellen’s
description, which is that there may well be net benefits to going down this path but the costs are
much easier to put our hands around. We’re approaching this discussion through the prism of
inflation targeting, which is really the elephant in the discussion. In some ways, I dare say it
made our previous discussion tough because we were tiptoeing around the core
inflation-targeting question. Inflation targeting has taken a life of its own in academia, in the
capital markets, and in the political environment. Although inflation targeting is a proper
framework for the discussion here, it is a very dangerous way in which to approach our public
discussion.
Let me discuss that point in a little detail. Inflation targeting, certainly on Capitol Hill
and to many market participants, suggests that some mechanical exogenous force will be an
absolute constraint on the FOMC’s actions. That’s not the way most people here today have
talked about inflation objectives, but it does taint the discussion in our relevant constituencies
outside the building, and we have to be very much aware of that fact. It strikes me that, once
we’ve figured out more or less our own path to making an institutional decision on this, we
should be discussing it more broadly outside the institution as a continuation and manifestation
of what the Fed has long done. Instead of using words like “inflation targeting” outside the
institution, we should use words like “price stability.” Talking about this as the next generation
and the formalization of the comfort-zone language, which either by design or by practice has
marked many of our discussions in the past year, is a much more useful way for us to make
meaningful progress in Washington and in the capital markets.

October 24-25, 2006

177 of 203

You saw from Larry Meyer’s survey that there was, I think, a decided tone of “Hey, we
just want to know what the right answer is. Tell us what you guys are going to do next. We just
want data that give us the answer because then we can put them into our Excel spreadsheets and
life will be grand.” [Laughter] I think that’s a trap that we do not want to fall into. What we
want to be doing, rather than generally trying to provide them with greater clarity than we can
provide about what our decisions are going to be, is to give them better information on what
we’re using to make decisions.
I fear that, if we announce an inflation target per se, and provide some specificity about
that announcement, we will have engendered credibility questions that we will need to answer.
In the most recent cycle of our interest rate decisions, very few of us, I think, would have
somehow done things differently if an inflation-targeting regime had been in place. My own
sense is that we can’t believe that we need to hamstring ourselves with such an exogenous force.
At the other extreme, we don’t want to go down this path if we say inflation targeting doesn’t
change our flexibility at all. So the relevant question is, what does this do to our flexibility? If
the answer is that it doesn’t constrain our flexibility at all, then it is really unwise because of all
those costs that we’ve talked about. If the answer to that question is that it does constrain our
flexibility significantly, then we have a huge problem in all our constituencies. So we end up
having to admit, as we go down this path, that it does somewhat constrain our flexibility but
saying that the FOMC is as prepared as ever to respond to real market developments with respect
to employment, output, and financial crises.
So where does that put us? Again, the debate should be framed as a continuation of what
we’ve long done. After we announce our conclusions from these discussions, at some point we
would need to reject the straw man of what inflation targeting has become. If an interrogator on

October 24-25, 2006

178 of 203

Capitol Hill or in the capital markets says, “This is the goal, this is the number, and you will get
inflation down to that goal within X number of years,” the response has to be “no.” That is,
that’s not how we’re thinking about the next generation of transparency.
Regarding an incremental approach to getting from where we are to where we want to be,
I would begin, once we’re ready to go prime time with our announcement, by avoiding the
adoption of inflation targeting per se and by letting that straw man be put out there and shooting
it down to suggest that’s not where we are. My next measure would be to accelerate the timing
of existing information, by which I would reference the minutes, the lag in the forecast, and the
generation of our central tendency. Then I’d add frequency. I think the idea of going from a
semiannual to a quarterly presentation of our information, as Governor Mishkin suggested,
would be next in the evolution of being more transparent to the markets about what we mean by
“price stability.” Then I would consider adding robustness to the data provided—that is, what
data sets that are not in the public realm and that we use for our own decisionmaking could be
helpful? Finally, looking at how that information has proceeded along this path of transparency,
we then ask ourselves whether we need to have a formal vote on the big question that Vincent
laid out for us or whether a vote is unnecessary because we’ve already proceeded so far down the
path that we’ve ended up with a rather, though not totally, explicit definition of what price
stability means.
As a final comment—we’ve discussed around this table whether this decision is an
individual or a collective one. In my judgment, a consensus decision is a good one. But I don’t
think we should fool ourselves. Federal Reserve policy has been personalized, and no matter
what we do, it will continue to be personalized in the form of the Chairman. What the markets
and the Congress will be most interested in is, “Well, I hear that’s the central tendency view of

October 24-25, 2006

179 of 203

the FOMC. What’s your view?” I want to make sure as we go through this process that, because
we know that questions will be asked of the Chairman, we haven’t constrained his flexibility. He
must dutifully report perhaps what our consensus views are, but we shouldn’t let there be any
ambiguity about what are our views and what are his views. To the extent that there’s a
difference, perhaps he is obligated to describe that. But I wouldn’t want this process ending up
by constraining the Chairman about what he could say because at the end of the day, whether all
of us like it or not, it is the Chairman’s judgment, much more than any of ours, that influences
our monetary policy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Well, I don’t have any written material prepared, Mr. Chairman—just
notes I’ve taken, in part because I confess that before this conversation I was somewhat
nonplussed about this issue. That is, I’m a little perplexed about why we’re talking about it now,
given what many commentators have said about where we are presently. We have achieved
significant credibility with the previous two Chairmen of the Committee and you and with the
actions of the Committee. I have been asking my own staff in Dallas to give me the compelling
reason to do this now.
I’ve heard four compelling arguments, or arguments that at least purport to be
compelling, during this discussion. One is that it will improve the policymaking process and
focus, although I think President Minehan properly expressed some skepticism as to whether it
would actually change the focus, intensity, and process that we have had. The second is that it
would coordinate and better anchor public expectations. Governor Mishkin, with great
enthusiasm by the way, made that argument. His remarks were not only insightful, but they were
also charming. [Laughter] The third is that it would plant our current legacy; I think Governor

October 24-25, 2006

180 of 203

Kohn touched on one of those sensitive nerves. The fourth is a subset of the third point: the
political risk of loss of a Chairman with willpower.
I won’t go into all the aspects of this that I have concerns about. But I don’t want to bat
away President Moskow like a mosquito here. I think he made an important point, which was
summarized by President Pianalto, who drew on her ancestry with the term “festina lente,” which
means “make haste slowly.” That’s why I would like to suggest in one dimension only—rather
than discuss what everybody else has already talked about: the political dimension of what we
are discussing. I see an explicit numerical target as extremely risky politically unless we manage
it carefully, and I would just ask all of us to bear in mind what those political risks are.
We do have a dual mandate. I agree with those who have said that we do not want to run
the risk of changing our current charge from the Congress. As I listened to Governor Mishkin—
again, I found his arguments remarkably brilliant and persuasive—I was thinking to myself that I
would love to be in a room with you and hear you use those brilliant arguments with, say, a
Senate Majority Leader like Harry Reid, or a Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee like
Charlie Rangel, or a Chairman of the Financial Services Committee like Barney Frank. We have
to be careful of the risk that either you then have them say, “That’s fine, but tell me what your
employment target is because you have a dual mandate” or you end up negotiating an inflation
target higher than you want it to be. I happen to know those three men very well. I have
appeared before them—I think President Moskow and I along with President Yellen have
probably appeared before the Congress more than anybody else at this table, individually and
certainly collectively, and I can imagine that conversation taking place.
So I would proceed slowly, or hasten slowly, not just in the analytical aspect of this but
also in explaining why we want to tie ourselves to this mast. Is it that we are afraid of the siren

October 24-25, 2006

181 of 203

call of the lack of discipline because we don’t think we can bring about the discipline that’s
required? We need to consider that there are political aspects of this in light of which we may
not even want to open that Pandora’s Box. That’s the only advice I would give or comment I
would make at this juncture, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Oh, let me make one other comment. I keep hearing about Larry Meyer’s poll. We have
a dean of a business school; I’m an M.B.A.; and we have other M.B.A.s around the table.
Uncertainty is the enemy of decisionmaking. Of course they want more frequent forecasts.
Governor Kohn and I talked about this before. They want a full frontal view. I find a full frontal
view most unbecoming. [Laughter] Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Speak for yourself. [Laughter] Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. I don’t know why President Fisher pointed to me when he said that. I
do not endorse his approach. [Laughter] Certainly, I think it’s appropriate—since we’re getting
very close to or maybe have passed our lunch, when we’ll talk about the 100th anniversary of the
Fed—that we are thinking about something that is really quite historic here, potentially a major
change in the way that policymaking is undertaken at the Federal Reserve. The memo that we
have is excellent. The discussion that we have had has been excellent. Even if it has been a bit
lengthy, these issues are important, and it takes time to make sure that our views are aired. After
all the views that have been aired, however, I can add little, so I’ll give just a very short
indication of some of my thoughts, keying off what a lot of others have said.
The way that I think about the issue is that we have our dual mandate, and we should do
everything thinking about how best to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment
growth consistent with low and stable inflation. The question is, Does being more explicit about
what “price stability” means help us to get to our objective better? I think in many

October 24-25, 2006

182 of 203

circumstances that it can. People have brought up issues about whether or not it could interfere
with that, and it’s very important that it not in any way be interpreted, either by the Committee
members or the outside world, as being inconsistent with our ability to achieve that dual
mandate.
One concern that I brought up yesterday was that I don’t think we understand short-run or
intermediate-run inflation dynamics very well. I want to make sure that we don’t overpromise.
When you look at the one example in the Bluebook simulations that gets inflation down to
1½ percent over quite a long period, you see that it would require us to move our policy rate up
100 to 125 basis points for the next year to two years. That strikes me as a very different
approach from what many people around the table would be willing to take, although perhaps if
we did have an explicit 1½ percent goal, people would be willing to do that. But it’s very, very
important to make sure that we understand whether we think that’s the right path. That is the
consideration that President Yellen brought up yesterday. There are a number of issues with
those simulations, such as the foreign exchange movements and other things, that may make us
uncomfortable with them. If we don’t understand the path very well, it is very dangerous for us
to be making even long-run commitments to something when we’re not quite sure how we can
get to it. We know that in the very long run we can get there. But if it’s so long that we’re not
achieving it in real time, that can actually undermine our credibility and make us appear less
transparent rather than more transparent. So I just want to make sure that we work very hard to
push our understanding of inflation dynamics and that we know how we can achieve the goal if
we enunciate such a goal. As I said, in many, perhaps most, circumstances enunciating such a
goal can be valuable, although taking a particular number at a particular horizon could be
problematic.

October 24-25, 2006

183 of 203

To get the main benefits and give guidance to the markets, we would want the goal to be
a consensus decision rather than everyone’s having his or her own goal, which could result in
less transparency and less credibility. I think it could affect the way that we undertake policy. In
some sense, if it doesn’t, then what’s the point of doing it? It has to have some effect; otherwise,
it won’t be credible to the markets, and then it’s simply not worth the candle. As I said, in that
context, we have to make sure that we understand inflation dynamics very well so that we can
explain to the world what the consequences of the goal would be for maximum employment
growth and the evolution of the economy. Thus my main concern is that we don’t know enough
about the short-run or intermediate-run inflation dynamics to feel comfortable with articulating a
goal. We could articulate a goal in a general way—as a range, say—and not be tied down to a
particular number that could be revised. That would be helpful; but in making all these
decisions, we have to be very mindful about understanding how we can achieve the goal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker had a two-handed
intervention.
MR. LACKER. With your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to comment on the role of
the dual mandate and sketch out how I’d like to see this discussion evolve. I feel motivated to do
this because this consideration has played a greater role in today’s discussion than I had
anticipated—this is just a byproduct of my own lack of foresight and intelligence, I think—and
also because I took swipes at the dual mandate earlier in my career on the Committee and was
batted back by previous Vice Chairmen and others. [Laughter] What I want to say first is that I
sense a substantial convergence of views. As demonstrated by Governor Kohn’s use of the
best-contribute formulation, I think there’s convergence of the sense of what it means around
here. (Governor Kohn’s statement, by the way, was outstanding, and I’d associate myself with

October 24-25, 2006

184 of 203

all of it, top to bottom.) But I sense that some of our policy disagreements are on occasion
interpreted as differences in views on the appropriate weights to place on employment and
inflation in a policymaker welfare function or loss-minimization function. Casting it that way
tempts one to view those weights as reflecting value judgments analogous, for example, to my
preference for grits over eggs at this morning’s breakfast.
I realize that what I’m about to say runs a great risk of seeming pedantic and academic,
but I think it’s important. I’ll start provocatively by saying that I don’t care about output per se,
and I don’t think any one of us does, and I don’t think any one of us cares about inflation per se.
We care about the welfare of the citizens of our country. That’s an obvious point to make, but
I’ll just remind you that the practice of viewing policymaking through the lens of the analytical
device of a mathematical policymaker facing a loss function with weights on employment and
inflation arose during the 1960s. In contrast, policy analysis everywhere else in economics was
grounded in models in which the consumer was actually mathematically present—that is to say,
the models treated explicitly the preferences of consumers and then crafted policies to maximize
those in a framework in which you could explicitly calculate what consumer preferences were.
At the time, the state-of-the-art monetary policy framework did not include consumers explicitly;
these were reduced-form models—you know, the Patinkin generation of models. Today, the
state-of-the-art monetary models capture a rich array of inflation and output dynamics and do
treat preferences of our citizens explicitly. These models are capable of deriving optimal policy,
and optimal policy so derived can be represented as the solution to a maximization problem by a
policymaker with given weights. But that, of course, is very different from thinking of those
weights as stemming from non-economic value judgments about the utility value of employment
and inflation. So, in principle, the weights that are most appropriate to use to represent

October 24-25, 2006

185 of 203

policymaking can be scientifically investigated. They can be analyzed through models at this
level and through the data and can be compared regarding goodness of fit and other measures as
well. The congressional mandate in the ’70s codified existing practice and encapsulated the
notion that we’ve got weights and that we view ourselves as having a loss function regarding
these two things when we really just have one loss function and that relates to our citizens’
welfare.
I’d point out that surely we have heavily influenced the interpretation of those mandates.
You look at the act, and three objectives are there. I think that we’ve helped induce people to
call it a dual mandate by encouraging them to drop the moderate interest rate objective. So, in
principle, we could influence the evolution of popular interpretation and understanding of these
other objectives as well. I’d also point out that the way the Congress codified the objectives was
without weights, and so the act is not at all inconsistent with the state-of-the-art approach to
monetary economics. I say this because I’d like to move us beyond the relatively sterile debates
over whether my weight is higher or lower on inflation or output, and I hope that we can evolve
in both our discussions about the dual mandate and our analytical approach to the use of it in
meetings ahead. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I’m tempted to say that I was hoping we would run out
of time. [Laughter] I’ll be very brief. Let me just compliment Don and his subcommittee and
the Chairman for how you’ve laid out the issues. This decision is important to think through
carefully, even if we quickly find a comfortable center of gravity. It’s going to be consequential,
I’m sure.

October 24-25, 2006

186 of 203

On the questions—I’m changing them slightly. Would an explicit, publicly disclosed,
numerical definition of “price stability” be helpful? Probably, but it depends on how we do it. It
depends on what else we do about the way we talk about our forecast, and it depends a lot on
how we think through the implications of the way we make policy.
How will, how should, how would, how could the FOMC choose or choose to reveal an
inflation objective? Three broad options that are implicit or explicit in this memo are worth
thinking through. I’m sure that, if we choose to reveal publicly a quantitative definition of our
view of long-term inflation, we have to do it as a decision of the Committee. It’s hard for me to
imagine how one could do that on the basis of some averaging of preferences, which would
change with the composition of the Committee over time. Much of what’s been said about the
other two choices is right and sounds sensible.
Would the quantification of an inflation objective be a new influence? Of course it
would. That has to be why it’s worth thinking through. As Janet implied, thinking through what
it would mean for our behavior is a critical part of this process. I’m going to discuss the other
questions very briefly and make just two points about process.
First, when you look at the broad evidence, I think it is fair to say that the evidence is
weak on the achievable credibility gains relative to what we’ve already achieved. I’m uncertain,
of course, whether those gains come from actions over time or what you disclose about your
regime, your objectives, your framework. The evidence is somewhat stronger against the
concerns of the skeptics and the critics in that there’s little basis in the experience of other
countries to justify the broad concerns exist—that embracing the softer responsible variants of
inflation targeting bring with them too much risk; that you lose flexibility to respond; that you’re
forced into suboptimal weights among your various objectives; that, for example, you are

October 24-25, 2006

187 of 203

compromised in your capacity to respond to threats to financial stability. I’m not sure that’s
right, though. Of course, we’re not New Zealand, Norway, or Sweden. We say that a lot. But
we should talk through what it is that makes us different. How are we different, and how might
that difference make us view the evidence? In some sense the question we face is, Do the soft
variants of the approach offer convincing credibility gains without significantly reducing the
risks and concerns that have to accompany consideration of this objective? That basic tradeoff is
what is critical.
Second, how do ignorance and uncertainty about inflation dynamics, about the
responsiveness of inflation to some of its traditional determinants, about the shape of the Phillips
curve, and about inertia and persistence affect our choice of regime? How does uncertainty
about all the other dimensions of how monetary policy works and how we measure this affect
our choice of regime? This uncertainty is critical to how we choose among alternative paths for
bringing inflation back to target, how we choose among alternative horizons, and how we think
about policy consistent with those different paths. All the variants of the regimes on the table, all
of which are of the softer form, would still force us to be more explicit in public about where we
are seeking to move inflation and over what horizon. I think we have to ask ourselves whether
we can be confident about how compelling those arguments will be in public given the relative
weakness of the analytical foundation that exists to help inform those choices. Even with a no
horizon, a long horizon, or a variable horizon approach to the disclosed explicit inflation
objective, you don’t avoid confronting the choice about your horizon or how you come up with
an alternative horizon, and so forth. I think that the dimension of ignorance and uncertainty we
live with is inherent, and it is not going to change dramatically over time. Thus it has to inform
how we think through these broader options.

October 24-25, 2006

188 of 203

The third question is, how would alternative variants to the regime affect the dynamics
around the policy setting? As I said, and many others said, they will and must affect it. You
have to assume they will. It’s prudent to assume they will. It’s very important to think through
those dynamics. Would we really be comfortable—even in a very long-run horizon, no horizon,
or flexible horizon regime—producing a forecast that has inflation staying well above our target
for very long periods of time? I’m not sure that you wouldn’t want to assume that over time the
Committee would be less comfortable with that and want to hope and declare as an objective that
we move inflation down quicker over time. I don’t think analysis or evidence is going to help us
think through those dynamics, but I don’t think we can assume them away. I think they’re
important.
I have two quick comments about process. One is—I’ll call it the Kroszner proposal,
though he didn’t make it. [Laughter] I think we should spend more time, and Don should build
into his time frame more in-depth discussion, on what we think we understand about the models
that underpin our decisions and what’s in those models about inertia and all the fundamental
determinants of inflation. We’ve had a lot of turnover in the Committee. We discussed it once
over lightly—in August, I believe. We should discuss it in more depth, at least to make sure we
have a common understanding about what we’re working with and what the limitations and
benefits are relative to the alternatives. Two, I think it’s important not to get into the process
discussion prematurely. A lot of thoughtful, interesting ideas were put forth about intermediate
steps toward some broad change in regime. I don’t think it’s worth spending a lot of time on
alternative variants of the intermediate steps until we’ve really thought through ultimately where
we want to go. If we spend time on and get enough depth about the merits of that choice and we

October 24-25, 2006

189 of 203

find some consensus with which we’re comfortable, then we can go back and figure out how we
want to get there. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. It’s been a very long morning. I appreciate
everyone’s patience in this long but very useful discussion. Let me take just a couple of minutes.
I’m not going to try to respond to all the points that were raised. I just want to make just a
couple of observations.
There was a lot of discussion about how this would affect policy, and indeed, I think it
would affect policy. But, remember, this debate is about communication. I think it’s very
important that we communicate better. While our policy has been good, we have had
difficulties—I certainly have—in communicating with the public and the markets. If we can find
a more effective, clearer way to do that, I think the benefit would be significant.
Let me just say a couple of words—and this goes somewhat against Tim’s comments—
about evolution. Whatever we do, I would agree with several people around the table, should be
incremental and evolutionary for several reasons. First, we have to make sure that we
understand what we’re doing. We have to learn how to implement what it is we’re doing.
Second, we have to maintain continuity with the previous regime, not have any sharp changes in
our policy or our perceptions. Third, a transitionary, evolutionary approach will give us a chance
to educate the public, educate the Congress, and get some reaction and feedback that will
perhaps allow us to make corrections as necessary.
In addition, I think that our steps need to face two real constraints. The first is that we do
have a dual mandate—that whatever we may say here, we have to persuade the Congress and the
public that we will look at both parts of the mandate and that we will not reduce our interest in
employment and output. The second constraint is our institutional structure, the size of our

October 24-25, 2006

190 of 203

Committee, and those features that the Bank of England, for example, does not have. All those
things have to be factored into our thinking.
Let me suggest a way one might think about proceeding that I think meets some of these
concerns. It might be useful, for example, for us at some point to clarify what we mean by the
“comfort zone,” a term that is out there and is causing confusion. I would prefer to do it
collectively, but we can think about ways of doing that. If we could confirm what the comfort
zone is and what it means, I think that would be a step in the right direction. In particular, I
would argue that we should define the comfort zone as the range in which core inflation should
remain most of the time. Over the past ten years, it has remained between 1½ to 2 percent most
of the time. But all we would say about policy is that it should have some bias that will take us,
in the long run, back toward that core range.
While not setting fixed horizons on the comfort zone, we need to exploit our projections
and forecasts, which can describe to the public what we think the next two years will look like in
terms of the paths of inflation and output. I would associate myself with several people who
have commented that perhaps the best thing we can do, even if we downplay the comfort zone or
the target, is to provide more information to the public about our forecast, more-regular monetary
policy reports, and considerably more information about our outlook and our approach. Again,
my preferred approach would be to provide some information about the comfort zone. But for
the public the big change would be the additional information we’re providing, which would
address Meyer’s point about what the public is looking for. When I make the speech describing
this regime, I would go so far as to say—and this is a little radical—that the Federal Reserve is
not adopting inflation targeting; what we are doing is simply providing more information. We’re
providing more information about where the Committee thinks it wants inflation to be on

October 24-25, 2006

191 of 203

average over longer periods of time, and we’re providing extensive additional information about
the forecast and our views about the economy. If we do it that way, we will probably avoid
some of the pitfalls that have been mentioned.
Again, I want to thank everyone for terrific input and to note that this process will be
ongoing. We are in no hurry. We should go on until we feel that we have a conclusion with
which we are comfortable and that we’re all willing to support.
Let’s confirm that the date of the next meeting is Tuesday, December 12. The meeting is
adjourned. Lunch is available next door. Please bring your lunch back, and we’ll have a short
presentation on the centennial while we’re having lunch. Thank you so much.
END OF MEETING

