January 31, 2006

1 of 106

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
January 31, 2006
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., starting at 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday,
January 31, 2006. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Lacker
Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
Ms. Yellen
Mses. Cumming and Minehan, Messrs. Moskow, Poole, and Hoenig, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Fisher, Stern, and Santomero, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Eisenbeis, Judd, Kamin, Madigan, Sniderman, Struckmeyer,
and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Oliner and Slifman, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. English and Sheets, Assistant Directors, Divisions of Monetary Affairs
and International Finance, respectively, Board of Governors

January 31, 2006

2 of 106

Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Chaboud, Mses. Kusko and Weinbach, Senior Economists, Divisions of
International Finance, Research and Statistics, and Monetary Affairs, respectively,
Board of Governors
Ms. Roush, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Stone, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively
Messrs. Evans and Hakkio, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, Messrs. Rasche,
Rolnick, and Steindel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and New York,
respectively
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

January 31, 2006

3 of 106

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
January 31, 2006
[Applause]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all very much. I’ll try to say more later, but I’m
not sure I can make it. [Laughter] Item 1 on the agenda is just basically for me to turn it over to
Roger Ferguson to do as he sees fit. [Laughter]
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you very much. I will do what is right. [Laughter] Let me open
the floor now for nominations for a Chairman and a Vice Chairman of this Committee.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For the day.
MR. FERGUSON. Now, you’ll see what happens. [Laughter] Don’t presume anything.
Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I move that the Committee elect Alan Greenspan as its Chairman to serve for
the remainder of today and Timothy Geithner as its Vice Chairman to serve until the election of a
successor at the first regularly scheduled meeting of 2007.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you very much. Is there a second?
PARTICIPANT. Second.
MR. FERGUSON. Fine. Is there any discussion? Is there any objection? Hearing none, it
is unanimous. Congratulations. [Laughter] Before democracy moves too quickly, [laughter] we
also have to move to plan for the election of a new Chairman. So let me, again, turn to Governor
Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Governor Ferguson. I further move that the Committee conduct a
notation vote upon the swearing-in of a new Chairman of the Board of Governors to elect Alan
Greenspan’s successor as Chairman of this Committee.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you. Is there a second? I do need a second on that.

January 31, 2006

4 of 106

PARTICIPANT. I second.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you very much. Any objection? Any discussion? None. So we
will plan to do as Governor Kohn has suggested and hold a notation vote when a new Chairman is
sworn in for the Board of Governors. Mr. Chairman, I now turn the floor back to you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don’t you continue on with the staff while you’re in full
swing?
MR. FERGUSON. Well, I’m actually not in full swing, because I don’t have the documents
in front of me. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don’t you read that?
MS. DANKER. As Secretary and Economist, Vincent Reinhart; as Deputy Secretary,
Debbie Danker; as Assistant Secretaries, Dave Skidmore and Michelle Smith; as General Counsel,
Scott Alvarez; as Deputy General Counsel, Tom Baxter; as Economists, Karen Johnson and Dave
Stockton; as Associate Economists from the Board, Tom Connors, Steve Kamin, Brian Madigan,
Sandy Struckmeyer, and David Wilcox; as Associate Economists from the Banks, Bob Eisenbeis,
John Judd, Mark Sniderman, Joe Tracy, and John Weinberg.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you. I need someone to move those names for election.
PARTICIPANT. So moved.
MR. FERGUSON. A second?
SEVERAL. Second.
MR. FERGUSON. Any discussion? Any objection? So, again, those are elected
unanimously. Congratulations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We also have to designate the Chief FOIA Officer. Thanks
to a recent executive order, the FOMC is required to appoint a Chief FOIA Officer. The consensus

January 31, 2006

5 of 106

candidate appears to be the Committee’s Deputy Secretary. Accordingly, a vote is needed, indeed
mandatory, to designate Debbie Danker, or her successor, as the FOMC’s Chief FOIA Officer, with
authority to “subdelegate” duties as appropriate. And we stipulate that the addition of that word,
which is not legally required, be expunged from the record! [Laughter] Without objection.
The next item is the proposed revisions to the Program for Security of FOMC Information.
Proposed additions to the Program for Security of FOMC Information reflect: (1) incorporation of
the Board’s new rules on access to confidential information by noncitizens, (2) a minor adjustment
to align the program with the clause in the foreign currency authorization, and (3) a statement of the
Chairman’s powers to make exceptions, which had been inadvertently trimmed in last year’s
rewriting. Would somebody like to move?
PARTICIPANT. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without exception. Our next item is the selection of a
Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account. My notes say
that New York is again the odds-on favorite. [Laughter] I’m always going with the odds-on
favorite. I would suggest that, unless somebody moves, I will do so and assume it’s effectively
implemented. Without objection, so ordered.
Next, selection of a Manager of the System Open Market Account. Dino Kos is the
incumbent. And on the presumption that he is acceptable to the New York Bank, he then becomes
the candidate for Manager of the System Open Market Account. Would somebody like to move the
nomination?
MR. FERGUSON. I’ll move that nomination.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Now, as to the authorization for Desk
operations—why don’t you take over and propose it?

January 31, 2006

6 of 106

MR. KOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are two votes. On the domestic authorization,
I’m recommending that the Committee approve it. There are no amendments that are being
suggested.
MR. FERGUSON. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
MR. KOS. Okay. Thank you. Then, the next vote is on the foreign currency authorization,
the foreign currency directive, and the procedural instructions. In the memo that I circulated, there
was one small amendment that I am suggesting to the authorization, having to do with some
housekeeping language related to reverse repos, to bring it into alignment with domestic operations.
It’s a purely housekeeping item.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. President Lacker has expressed his intention to uphold
the Richmond tradition of voting against both the foreign currency authorization and the directive.
[Laughter] But he remains in favor of the procedural instructions. So lacking Lacker, are there any
objections? [Laughter] Would you like time to—
MR. LACKER. Very respectfully, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to vote against the foreign
currency operation authorization. Those of you who were here when my predecessor registered a
similar dissent three years ago, and three years before that, should be familiar with the reasoning.
For those of you who were not here then, the case is very simple. Sterilized intervention can’t
possibly be more than fleetingly effective unless it serves as a signal regarding future monetary
policy operations. To the extent that such interventions are seen as providing such a signal, we risk
confusing the public regarding future monetary policy and threaten to compromise our
independence. And to the extent that such interventions do not signal future policy support and thus

January 31, 2006

7 of 106

have no lasting effect, we risk compromising perceptions of our competence. And neither outcome
is desirable. So very, very respectfully, Mr. Chairman, I will decline to support the authorization.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further discussion on this issue? Would you like to—
PARTICIPANT. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without other objection—noting, of course, that the
Richmond Bank is dissenting. Dino Kos.
MR. KOS. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With the start of the new year, domestic
markets were preoccupied with the same set of questions that occupied market
participants in 2005. How much longer would the tightening cycle continue? What
is the shape of the yield curve telling us? Are there signs of a slowdown? And are
inflation pressures increasing, or are they likely to ebb?
The top panel on the first page graphs the three-month deposit rate in black and
the three-month rate three and nine months forward in red since June 2005. As the
market began to anticipate an end to the tightening cycle, the cash and forward rates
began to converge in recent weeks. With three- and nine-month forwards essentially
trading on top of each other, and allowing for term premiums, taken at face value
forward rates suggest some more modest tightening but also some probability of an
ease later this year. Those market participants that are bearish on interest rates and
the economy point to data hinting at softness, such as signs of a slowdown in housing.
The bleak view was given a lift on Friday by the weaker-than-forecast fourth-quarter
GDP report. These market participants see either a quick end to the tightening cycle
or a swift reversal toward policy easing later this year. The counter view is that
inflationary pressures will forestall an early end to the tightening, much less usher in
a new easing cycle. Ironically those with that view took comfort from the price data
in Friday’s GDP report.
The compression we see in cash and forward rates at the short end of the curve is
also visible for longer maturities. The middle panel graphs the target fed funds rate in
green along with yields on two- and ten-year Treasury notes. Yields have slowly
been grinding upward the past few days toward 4½ percent as the market, on balance,
has come to discount further tightening beyond today’s meeting. In the past week,
the yield on the two-year note has risen from about 4.35 percent to 4.5 percent.
Given the mixed data, it’s difficult to make the case that the upward move was driven
by data alone. Indeed, for the first time in a while, traders were talking about
looming supply given fiscal needs. Yesterday the Treasury announced a somewhat
higher-than-expected borrowing need for the first quarter. And at last week’s twoyear auction, the low level of participation by indirect bidders was taken as a signal
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

January 31, 2006

8 of 106

that foreign demand was waning. Perhaps market participants are finally coming to
the view that yields are too low given the likely prospect that the cost of financing
positions will continue to rise at least a while longer.
With the convergence of yields along the curve, last summer’s chatter about yield
curve inversions flared up anew. The bottom panel graphs two views of the yield
curve going back to 1977. The red line graphs the spread between the ten-year note
and the three-month bill. The blue line graphs the yield spread between the ten-year
and the two-year notes. These are monthly averages, and the last data point is from
January 2006 through last Friday. The gray areas denote recessions.
Looking at this chart and similar charts, it’s easy to see why the curve flattening
has received so much attention. In recent decades, recessions have tended to be
preceded by curve inversions. Of course, markets are now so much more developed
and sophisticated that maybe it’s different this time. Changes in markets, such as the
role of pension funds or central bank reserve accumulation, may be distorting the
curve. And maybe that argument is right. But a cautionary point is in order. After
all, the inversion in 2000 was dismissed by most analysts as technically inspired
given the shrinking stock of federal debt and the Treasury’s buyback program at the
long end of the curve. On the other hand, the pessimists may be overplaying their
hand too early in the game. We haven’t had much of an inversion as yet. You need a
magnifying glass to see the inversion, which is very small and so far very brief. The
curve has merely gone flat. As I noted last summer, the curve can be flat for years—
as was the case in the late 1990s—without adverse effects on the broader economy.
The Chairman has talked about the conundrum, which most private-sector
commentators have used as a jumping off point to talk about low nominal yields at
the long end of the curve. Until recently, less attention was focused on trends in real
rates both here and abroad.
The top of page 2 graphs the yield of ten-year inflation-linked securities for the
United States, the United Kingdom, and France for the past seven months. The tenyear TIPS yield in the United States (the green line) has traded at about 2 percent.
That’s up from about 1 percent briefly observed in 2004 but well below the 4 percent
earlier in this decade, when the market was still maturing. U.K. and French real rates
have also fallen since the beginning of the decade. The United Kingdom probably
has the most developed inflation-linked market, with maturities going as far out as
fifty years. The middle panel graphs the real rate on ten-, thirty-, and fifty-year
inflation-linked bonds since September 2005. Note that thirty- and fifty-year yields
have gone down faster than the yields at the ten-year maturity. The fifty-year real
yield traded below ½ percent, and the fifty-year security issued just last week traded
under 40 basis points.
What accounts for such low rates? Well maybe institutions are worried about the
United Kingdom’s long-term inflation prospects. But that does not seem to be borne
out by anecdotal or other indicators. Two intertwined trends in the United Kingdom
related to the insurance and pension fund businesses are frequently cited. First, after

January 31, 2006

9 of 106

the decline in equity prices earlier in the decade, U.K. and other European insurers
lowered allocations to equity and shifted toward fixed income. Second, in the United
Kingdom, pension rules now require fund managers to match the duration of
liabilities with similar-duration assets. But the shortage of supply relative to demand
has pushed bond prices up and yields down. As a result, the very long end of the
U.K. real yield curve has been inverted. The long end of the nominal curve, as shown
in the bottom left panel, has also inverted. To fill out the picture, the bottom right
panel graphs ten-, thirty-, and fifty-year break-even rates; but given the distortions,
it’s not clear how much should be read into these numbers. Such movements in U.K.
real yields have caught the attention of U.S. portfolio managers. With continued talk
about the prospect for changes to pension fund rules here, there are those who believe
that the United States will gravitate toward the U.K. approach of requiring the
matching of duration for assets and liabilities. If so, then the prospect of a steady bid
for long-dated assets may both damp yield volatility at the long end and lower yields
from what they might have been. That would truly make the curve very suspect as an
indicator of future economic performance.
If the shape of the U.S. yield curve is bearish for the economy, there is no
shortage of indicators pointing the other way. I will note that in 2000, when the curve
last inverted, the stock market soon slumped, credit spreads began a sudden widening,
and the dollar was appreciating. In this cycle, these other indicators are not flashing
warning lights just yet. The dollar tripped up many forecasters in 2005 by
appreciating. But as shown in the top panel on page 3, more recently the dollar has
depreciated against most currencies, including a few Asian currencies whose
exchange rates against the dollar had been somewhat sticky in the past. Equities have
been rallying globally, especially in countries leveraged to the global economy, such
as Korea in technology and Brazil in commodities. Even the Nikkei has recovered
from its Livedoor-inspired swoon and the curtailment of trading on the Tokyo Stock
Exchange due to problems in processing large volumes. Credit markets continue to
be favorable. As shown in the bottom left chart, the volatility on the S&P 100 rose
from very low levels recently but has already come back. And Treasury volatility—
shown on the bottom right—is low and recently has drifted still lower.
Moving to page 4, the top panel graphs the high-yield and emerging market debt
spreads. These two spreads essentially moved together for several years and were
viewed as being of similar riskiness. As shown in the top panel, there was a
divergence in mid-2004 when emerging-market yields blew out about 150 basis
points. In mid-2005, the divergence cut the other way, with emerging markets
outperforming and spreads narrowing to new record lows. While some commentators
ascribed the narrowing of emerging-market debt to the search for yield, rising risk
appetite, and “excess liquidity,” others pointed to improving fundamentals driven by
higher commodity prices, better fiscal performance, lower inflation, and higher
reserve levels that insulated these countries from external shocks. The pie charts
below attempt to explain, if not justify, the benign explanation. The two middle pie
charts show the ratings distribution of the high-yield index as of October 2002 and
again as of year-end 2005. The rating distribution of the high-yield index is nearly

January 31, 2006

10 of 106

identical. The two pie charts at the bottom of the page show the rating composition
of the emerging-market index as of the same two dates. Note that the share of higherrated BBB or investment-grade assets in blue grew from 29 to 38 percent.
Meanwhile, the share of low-rated B and CCC paper, which accounted for 33 percent
of the index in October 2002, shrunk to only 11 percent at year-end.
In short, the ratings composition is higher for the emerging-market index relative
to the high-yield index in absolute terms, and the trend has been toward relative
ratings improvement. Of course, ratings are not the only factor. In a default
situation, bondholders of a corporation can often assert their rights and recover
meaningful amounts in a bankruptcy process overseen by the courts. In contrast,
while countries have the power to tax, the ability of the creditors in a default to
recover in negotiations—as we saw with Argentina—may not be as favorable.
Finally, a few words about domestic reserves management. On page 5, the top
panel graphs the fed funds target in blue, the highs and lows for each day in gray, and
the daily effective rate in red. You’ll note that, although the effective rate was
generally close to the target in the maintenance period that covered the year-end,
there was a bit more variability of rates, usually late in the day, with some tendency
for rates to soften. Part of this was related to normal year-end noise. Note also the
drift higher in the effective rate ahead of the December FOMC meeting. This
reflected the market’s anticipation of the new target rate and the tendency to move the
funds rate from the old to the new target rate days before the meeting.
The middle panel looks at this phenomenon more closely. It graphs the difference
between the market (effective) rate and the target fed funds rates in the days before an
FOMC meeting. To make a cleaner comparison, the sample includes only those
periods in which the FOMC meeting fell on the first Tuesday of the two-week reserve
maintenance period and periods in which there were no high-payment days through
the meeting date that might have influenced market conditions. It should be noted
that, in all these maintenance periods, the market had come to fully expect a 25 basis
point tightening move by the start of the period. The blue line shows, for the 2004
sample dates, the drift higher in the funds rate as the FOMC meeting date gets closer.
On average, the funds rate was about 7 basis points firm on the Thursday preceding
the meeting and rose to be 21 basis points firm to the old target on the Tuesday
meeting date itself. In our 2005 sample, the anticipation effect was even more
pronounced in the days ahead of the meeting, with the funds rate 15 basis points firm
on the Thursday and the expected move almost fully priced in on the day before the
meeting.
The bottom panel underscores the difficulty that the Desk faces when it tries to
lean against expectations that are so widely held. This graph shows, for the same
sample of periods, the amount of average excess reserves in the days leading up to the
FOMC meeting. It also shows what more-typical levels of excess reserves look like
over the first four days of a maintenance period, based on reserve levels from periods
in 2004 and 2005 in which there was no policy change and in which there were no

January 31, 2006

11 of 106

high-payment dates in the first four days. In 2004, the Desk was already providing
much higher levels of excess reserves than normal in the days leading up to the
FOMC meeting during these periods, in order to mitigate the anticipation effects.
And these anticipation effects became even more pronounced in 2005, despite our
having increased the levels of excess reserves even further. We tend to believe that
the higher anticipation effects seen in 2005 reflected a learning process on the part of
market participants since the start of the tightening cycle in mid-2004, as buyers and
sellers tested their ability to arbitrage their reserve holdings over more days in the
maintenance period around the expected policy change. It’s not clear what the natural
limit is to this process.
Mr. Chairman, I am happy to report once again that there were no foreign
operations in the period. I will need a vote to approve domestic operations. Debby
and I are happy to take any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’d like to go back to the British experience, which I think is
intriguing in a number of different respects. The United Kingdom has TIPS-type issues going out
fifty years. What do they index the fifty-year maturity to, incidentally?
MR. KOS. It’s the RPIX.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So it’s not terribly dissimilar to ours. But what I think is
really quite fascinating is that these relationships are largely demographically driven. In other
words, the question is essentially that, if we’re heading into a society in which an ever-increasing
proportion of the people are retired, then you have some real pressure to fund—which we don’t do
but everyone else should. Let’s put it this way: Every pension theoretician will tell you there is no
problem with pensions. All you have to do is make the appropriate maturity matches. And if you
get a big surge in potential retirees, the demand for longer-term issues goes up, which we take as a
given.
But this is the first evidence—at least that I’ve been able to see—that this is an
overwhelming force because, irrespective of the other forces that drive the long-term rates, the
spread between the thirty-year and the fifty-year is really quite pronounced. And it is suggesting
that it cannot be an economic forecast. We have enough trouble forecasting nine months.

January 31, 2006

12 of 106

[Laughter] But to draw the distinction between thirty years out and fifty years out, I submit, is a
wholly random variable. And so it has to be the demographics. And what the demographics are
telling us is that the issue is large enough to essentially dominate the longer end of the markets.
This suggests to me that the thirty-year, which we struggled to get rid of and is now coming back,
may not turn out to be the longest maturity we’re eventually going to sell because the evidence
suggests that there is a very heavy demand in thirty-year forwards, all of which will tend to depress
the thirty-year yield if we don’t have a greater maturity. And there will be market pressures to delink that whole thirty-year plus back onto the issue.
I was wondering whether or not this subject is engaging the Street because I’ve been
puzzled by the tranches of the thirty-year issue, which mature from 2020 on, when the fiscal
problems in the United States seemingly mount potential instability—which is another way of
saying that these pressures may overwhelm the economics. At least they are doing so in Britain.
And the question is, do you think we’re going to be replicating Britain’s experience?
MR. KOS. Well, my reason for including this detail at the meeting really is because that’s
the anecdotal feedback that I’ve been getting over the past few weeks and months. And, in a sense,
the U.K. experience caught a lot of portfolio managers here by surprise, and it has made them
rethink their assumptions about the effect that a change in pension rules would have on our long
end. And that, I think, is exactly the point that you’re making.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But if we know that there has always been this presumption,
well, it can’t be large enough to have an effect.
MR. KOS. I think what we’ve learned from the U.K. case is that it can be. In a sense, the
thirty-year gilt in the United Kingdom became disengaged from the rest of the curve some years
ago. And we had an upward-sloping curve to about ten, and then it became inverted because of

January 31, 2006

13 of 106

these pension effects—or that seems to be the prevailing consensus. So some participants in our
markets are trying to think ahead over the next five, ten, fifteen years about what changes in pension
rules would do to the shape of the curve. What will be the demographics that will drive it? And it’s
making them rethink their assumptions about demand driven by demographics, as you say, versus
other kinds of demands that might increase supply because of fiscal factors. So you might get an
ironic effect in which you’ll get more supply but the demand is even higher because of what’s
happening.
MR. REINHART. Mr. Chairman, may I make three points? The first is that I would
underscore what Dino said. A great event study occurred when the prudent-man law in the United
Kingdom changed, and you saw longer-term yields fall as a result because pension managers had to
go out further on the curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What was the date of that?
MR. REINHART. Around 1998. Second, as you know, in the discussion with the
Treasury, we actually tried very hard to convince them to go to thirty and then to go beyond. But
that’s a very slow-moving boat. Third, real long-term securities are very convex in return. So just
because of the arithmetic of the yield curve, you would think that the fifty-year yield should be
below the thirty-year, as the thirty-year is below the twenty-year. So in an environment of
uncertainty about future yields, it isn’t that surprising.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, what happened to the term premium?
MR. REINHART. In fact, the yield curve is a competition between two factors in
uncertainty. Because of uncertainty, the term premium itself should march up at approximately
linearly in maturity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It gets overwhelmed by the arithmetic.

January 31, 2006

14 of 106

MR. REINHART. But convexity is a quadratic and starts about at the twenty-year maturity
pulling down yields. That’s why typically the thirty-year yield is below the twenty-year yield.
When you get out to the fifty-year, then the effect of convexity is even more pronounced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When we were doing the analysis of the change in the term
premium, since we know the convexity characteristics and we know what the longer-term rates are,
were we able to infer part of our analysis from the longer-term elements? That’s the only thing we
really add.
MR. REINHART. Sure. For instance, when the United Kingdom first issued a fifty-year
security, we priced what a fifty-year maturity would be in the United States. And it was well below
the thirty-year and not that dissimilar to what actually happened. So partly it is just that, because
bonds are in price and that’s what people care about but we quote yields, the effect of convexity is
going to pull down longer-term yields.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Going back to the Chairman’s question on size, Dino, the press and many
analysts focus on central bank reserves when they talk about what’s buffeting intermediate-term
rates. If you talk to Barclays, they give you awfully big numbers of potential dedicated moneys on
the pension side, an order of magnitude of, say, multiples of six or seven times what central bank
reserves are. Could we study the potential size that’s at play here? And, of course, the United
Kingdom is not just dedicated to U.K. fixed-income instruments. They’re also looking at our fixedincome instruments at the longer end of the curve. So getting a sense of dimension here, if possible,
might assist this conversation. I think that this is very, very important.

January 31, 2006

15 of 106

MR. KOS. I think it can be looked at. I think the other point that you hinted at, which is
very important, is that it’s not just U.S. managers looking at U.S. TIPS but European managers
looking at U.S. inflation-linked securities. It’s a very good point. I think it’s worth studying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I just wanted to note that I meet on Monday mornings before Open
Market Committee meetings with a few pension fund managers and mutual fund managers just to
hear what they’re hearing in the markets. They are very much on the same wave length that you
were, Mr. Chairman, in feeling that the flatness of the yield curve was largely due to the desire for
long-dated securities in the pension fund arena to better match assets and liabilities and that it was
not at all, or at least not in major part, a comment about the economy but more a function of
institutional and market demand for these long-dated securities. Now, I don’t know whether they
think that the legislation now in the Congress is going to pass, but they seem to be very focused on
the fact that they need more longer-dated securities and that supplies of the thirty-year would, in
effect, create more demand for the thirty-year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The legislation really is irrelevant. The problem here is that a
set of liabilities is being created by the steepness of the retirement curve, and there is an obvious
requirement to fund that set. But the bill in the Congress is trying to play games with the type of
discount rate that companies can use. The only real discount factor that fund managers can use, if
they seriously believe that what they are promising is to be guaranteed, is to put pension funds in
U.S. Treasuries and to tranch them in a manner that exactly meets the maturity requirements. That
situation, therefore, has nothing to do with what the piece of legislation is and everything to do with
the rate of change of the population over 65.

January 31, 2006

16 of 106

MS. MINEHAN. I agree with you, but the fund managers that I have talked with would
frame the problem in the context of increasing pressure from the outside.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, whether that bill passes or not, the pressures
to fund these liabilities are going to increase, especially after the baby-boom generation starts to
retire and fund managers look at the size of it.
MR. KOS. I have heard a few anecdotes regarding CEOs who have been very surprised and
become angry when they saw that their unfunded pension fund cost them earnings over the past few
years. They basically directed the CFO and, in turn, the pension managers not to let this happen
again. Thus, regardless of legislation, there has been a shift at the margin from equities into debt
with matching duration.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes. That’s certainly what the fund managers were saying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair, would you move to ratify?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Would you like to make an economic
presentation, Dave?
MR. STOCKTON.2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few years back, I noted that my
briefings could largely be characterized as a collection of confessions and excuses.
This morning I would like to add a new element to that list: denial. As you know,
the BEA’s advance estimate for the growth in real GDP in the fourth quarter—shown
in the top left panel of your first exhibit—came in last Friday at an annual rate of 1.1
percent, about half the pace that we had projected. But at this point, we don’t believe
that this estimate should be taken as a signal that the economy has fundamentally
weakened. To be sure, after a first round of sorting through the details of that report,
we haven’t found a smoking gun that gives us any strong reason to override the
BEA’s estimate. But we have assumed that there will be a bounceback in some areas
that were surprisingly weak last quarter, most notably motor vehicle output and
federal spending.
As we see it, the recent configuration of data suggests that, to the extent that there
was any noticeable weakness in the fourth quarter, it was short-lived, and we are
2

The materials used by Messrs. Stockton, Struckmeyer, and Sheets are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

January 31, 2006

17 of 106

heading into the first quarter on a reasonably solid trajectory. As seen in the top right
panel, after spiking up this autumn, initial claims quickly returned to pre-hurricane
levels and have dropped even further in recent weeks, giving no suggestion of any
softening in the labor market. Industrial production (line 1 of the middle left panel)
actually peaked in the fourth quarter, driven by a sharp acceleration in manufacturing
output (line 2). Moreover, as shown to the right, recent manufacturing surveys are
supportive of our forecast of moderate gains in production as we move into the new
year.
Consumer spending and capital outlays have also remained solid. Setting aside
the effects of the large swings in motor vehicle purchases that occurred in the second
half of last year, consumer spending, shown in the bottom left panel, has been on a
steady uptrend. And yesterday’s reading on real PCE excluding motor vehicles in
December suggests that the first quarter started on a strong note. Shipments of
nondefense capital goods (plotted as the red line in the bottom right panel) were
released last week after the Greenbook was published, and they were stronger than we
had projected. Moreover, new orders (the black line) have remained above
shipments, suggesting that equipment spending should be buoyant in coming months.
The top left panel of your next exhibit lays out our longer-term outlook for real
GDP. As seen by the blue bars, the growth of real GDP is projected to step up this
year to 3.9 percent before falling back to 3 percent in 2007. That pattern is influenced
importantly by our assumed hurricane effects, and as shown by the red bars, aside
from those effects we are expecting a gradual deceleration in activity over the next
two years. Our inflation projection is shown to the right. Overall PCE prices are
expected to decelerate over the next two years as consumer energy prices slow
sharply. We continue to expect a small bump-up in core inflation this year as higher
prices for energy, nonfuel imports, and commodity prices are passed through into the
prices of final goods and services. But we expect core inflation to edge back down in
2007 as these influences abate.
Although this story is pretty much the same as the one in December, we did have,
in addition to last Friday’s GDP excitement, a few other developments to deal with
over the intermeeting period. As shown in the middle left panel, crude oil prices rose
further in recent weeks and are now projected to average $6.50 per barrel higher than
in the December Greenbook. As Nathan will be discussing shortly, we also revised
up a bit our projection for foreign activity, lowered our projection for the dollar,
and—as shown in the middle right panel—raised our forecast for nonfuel import
prices. With oil and imports providing a little more upward pressure on costs, we
nudged up our forecast for core PCE prices this year and, along with it, our fed funds
assumption over the next year—plotted as the black line in the bottom left.
We made no substantive changes to our fiscal policy assumptions. As shown in
the bottom right panel, fiscal policy provides some impetus to activity this year,
related largely to hurricane spending and the implementation of the prescription drug
benefit, but is expected to be a nearly neutral influence next year.

January 31, 2006

18 of 106

The principal source of slowing in aggregate activity in our forecast continues to
be the housing sector, the subject of exhibit 3. The accumulating data have made us
more confident, though far from certain, that we are reaching an inflection point in
the housing boom. The bigger question now is whether we will experience the
gradual cooling that we are projecting or a more pronounced downturn. I’ll be
interested to hear your reports this morning. As for the recent data, sales of existing
homes (the red line in the top left panel) have dropped sharply in recent months and
by more than we had expected. New home sales (the black line) have also moved off
their peaks of last summer but are more consistent with our expectation of a gradual
softening. That expectation receives some further support from the more-timely
mortgage bankers’ purchase index—plotted to the right. Purchase applications also
are off their highs but are not indicating any sharp retrenchment through January.
With respect to house prices, the recent data and anecdotes also have pointed to
some weakening. As a result, our forecast of a sharp deceleration in home prices—
shown in the middle left panel—seems less of a stretch than it did a while back. As
shown to the right, the bottom line is that, after contributing importantly to the growth
of real GDP over the past four years, residential investment is expected to decelerate
sharply this year and to turn down a bit in 2007. As we have noted before, our houseprice forecast also has implications for consumer spending. Slower growth of house
prices is the chief factor causing the wealth-to-income ratio (the black line in the
bottom left panel) to drift down over the projection period. That downdrift, along
with the lagged reaction to higher interest rates, results in a gradual rise in the
personal saving rate over the next two years. As shown to the right, although
spending growth falls short of that of income, overall PCE receives considerable
support from the strong gains in disposable income that result from the projected
flattening of energy prices, ongoing employment gains, and a step-up in the pace of
hourly compensation.
Business investment is the subject of exhibit 4. Spending on equipment and
software, plotted as the black line in the top left panel, slows gradually over the
projection period, largely because the accelerator effects that propelled the earlier
recovery in capital outlays begin to wane. Nevertheless, with the cost of capital
remaining moderate and corporate balance sheets strong, we are forecasting solid
increases in real E&S spending this year and next.
Our projection for total nonresidential structures, shown in the panel to the right,
reflects some divergent patterns in the components. We expect outlays for drilling
and mining (line 2) to increase sharply further this year in response to the run-up that
has occurred in the prices for crude oil and natural gas. Although those prices are
expected to level off, the lagged effects of the earlier gains should result in some
further, albeit diminished, increase in drilling activity in 2007. Excluding drilling and
mining (line 3) we are projecting a modest recovery in nonresidential construction
activity in response to ongoing gains in employment and gradually declining vacancy
rates in the office and industrial sectors.

January 31, 2006

19 of 106

One of the reasons that we are reasonably optimistic about the investment outlook
is that the total return to capital—plotted in the middle left panel—remains quite
favorable. And although we expect that return to recede a bit as labor costs pick up, it
would still remain elevated by historical standards over the forecast period.
The remainder of the exhibit is something of a going-away present to the
Chairman. While he always seemed to have a grip on where productivity was headed
in the future, we always seemed to be struggling to explain what had happened in the
past. Most recently, those struggles have centered on understanding the continuing
strong gains in productivity in the first half of this decade. One important element of
our story has been that the investment boom of the late 1990s was at least partly
responsible for sowing the seeds of the further acceleration in multifactor productivity
that we have experienced this decade. That capital equipment embodied rapidly
improving technologies and allowed firms to sometimes radically restructure business
processes. More broadly, as adjustment costs associated with absorbing those
investments waned, the productivity advantages showed through more clearly.
The bottom panel provides some modest support for the proposition that some of
the improved performance of multifactor productivity of the first half of the decade
can be traced to the earlier investment boom. That panel employs a new data set
based on research spearheaded by my colleagues Carol Corrado, Paul Lengermann,
and Larry Slifman that calculates multifactor productivity for detailed industries.
Along the x-axis, we measure for each of 60 industries the average rate of growth in
investment over the 1995-to-2000 period relative to that industry’s historical norm.
On the y-axis, we plot the acceleration in MFP experienced by each industry from the
1995-to-2000 period to the 2000-to-2004 period. As seen by the red regression line,
those industries for which the growth of equipment and software was unusually high
in the late 1990s were more likely than others to experience a subsequent acceleration
in multifactor productivity in the first part of this decade. Obviously, this is not a
structural relationship and is meant to be impressionistic. But the recovery in
equipment spending over the past few years leaves us optimistic that multifactor
productivity can continue to grow at a rapid clip, though perhaps not quite at the pace
registered over the first half of the decade. Sandy will now continue our presentation.
MR. STRUCKMEYER. Your next two exhibits detail the supply-side
assumptions of the staff forecast, starting with the projection of structural labor
productivity. In our analysis, structural labor productivity growth is defined as the
increment to labor productivity that can be sustained over time. It is a medium- to
long-run concept that attempts to eliminate the bulk of the cyclical influences on
productivity growth. As shown on the top right, structural labor productivity growth
can, in turn, be decomposed into the contributions from capital deepening, labor
quality, and structural multifactor productivity growth.
As indicated in the middle left panel, the recovery that has occurred in the level of
business capital spending over the past four years translates into a pickup in the

January 31, 2006

20 of 106

growth of capital services, although not to the pace that prevailed during the boom
years of 1995 to 2000. The contribution of capital deepening to structural
productivity growth—that is, the product of the growth in capital services per hour
and the capital share of output—picks up gradually over the next two years. Note in
the middle right panel that the bulk of this contribution comes from investments in
information technology—as has been the case for all of this decade.
In contrast, the pace of growth in structural multifactor productivity—shown in
the bottom left—has greatly exceeded the pace over the 1995 to 2000 period. This is
just the manifestation at the aggregate level of the driving forces shown in Dave’s
scatter plot. However, we have allowed for slightly slower growth in 2006 and 2007
than in the preceding years as the marginal gains from additional organizational
improvements and embodied technical change begin to wane. In addition, as noted in
the right, we’ve seen some leveling-off in expenditures on research and development
lately, which may well manifest itself in a somewhat slower pace of technological
change in the years ahead.
Your next exhibit presents our estimates of potential output growth. As shown on
line 1, we expect potential real GDP to expand at a 3¼ percent pace over the next two
years. As you can see on line 2, total potential hours worked—or trend labor input—
is expected to slow somewhat. Although population growth is expected to be well
maintained, the trends in both labor force participation and the average workweek are
offsetting factors. As we’ve noted before, the downtrend in the labor force
participation rate (shown in the middle left) mainly reflects the changing
demographic composition of the workforce. The estimated trend in the workweek (in
the middle right panel) shifted down in 2001—reflecting the introduction of NAICS
in the payroll survey—and is expected to fall at about the same pace in 2006 and
2007 as it has since 2001.
The implications of these supply-side assumptions for the labor market are shown
in the bottom two panels. Although nonfarm payrolls are expected to increase briskly
in the near term, we expect gains to slow progressively over the next two years,
reflecting the moderation in the pace of economic growth and the slower growth in
the potential labor force that I just described. Indeed, we expect trend payroll growth
to average only 100,000 per month over the next two years. As shown on the bottom
right, the unemployment rate holds fairly steady this year and next. Given the pace of
economic growth last year, our model of Okun’s law was surprised by the extent of
the decline in the unemployment rate—the gap between the red and black lines. We
are expecting this error to be worked off over the course of this year, and in 2007 the
unemployment rate moves in sync with the Okun’s law simulation.
Your next exhibit presents the outlook for the growth in labor compensation. In
the January Greenbook, we projected hourly compensation, as measured by both the
ECI and P&C compensation per hour, to accelerate over the next two years. We
think that continued strong growth in structural labor productivity will elevate wage
demands, while labor market slack will be a relatively neutral influence on

January 31, 2006

21 of 106

compensation growth. Inflation expectations to date have remained anchored, but we
have allowed for some pass-through into wages of the higher price inflation in 2004
and 2005.
This morning’s reading on the ECI showed that hourly compensation in private
industry increased 3 percent in the 12 months ending in December—the same as the
judgmental projection in the January Greenbook. However, as you can see in the
bottom left, our econometric equation for the ECI has overpredicted the actual growth
in compensation since the middle of 2004, possibly suggesting that our estimated
NAIRU of 5 percent is too high. In looking at the range of econometric wage and
price models that we follow, the evidence on a change in the NAIRU is mixed. We
have noted a tendency for some models to overpredict inflation lately. But as shown
in the bottom right, the random nature (and the smaller absolute size) of the errors
from one of our better reduced-form price equations does not yet suggest the need to
lower our estimate of the NAIRU. I will return to the implications of this assumption
later in my remarks.
Your next exhibit presents the outlook for inflation. Recent readings on headline
inflation (shown in the top left) have remained at the high end of the elevated range
that has prevailed since 2004. Those readings reflect mainly the direct effects of
higher energy prices, which have increased at an average pace of 20 percent per year
over the past two years. In contrast, we have seen some moderation in the pace of
core consumer price inflation, with the twelve-month change in both the core PCE
and the core CPI indexes slowing to about 2 percent.
Looking ahead, we have had to cope with somewhat greater pressures on inflation
in this Greenbook. These pressures stem mainly from the upward revisions to our
projections of crude oil prices and core nonfuel import prices that Dave discussed.
As a result of these changes, the moderation in PCE energy prices is somewhat less
than in past Greenbooks, and we anticipate greater spillovers on the prices of other
industrial materials (shown in the middle right). On net, we expect core PCE prices
(line 4 in the bottom left panel) to increase 2¼ percent this year before decelerating to
1¾ percent in 2007 as the influence of these cost shocks recedes.
The bottom right panel shows two alternative simulations that address key risks to
the inflation outlook. The adverse shocks simulation assumes that the economy is hit
with additional increases in the prices of oil, non-oil imports, and industrial materials
that match those that prevailed in 2004. Under the assumption that the funds rate
remains on its baseline path, core PCE inflation moves up to about 2½ percent in
2006 and 2007 (the red line). In contrast, as I noted earlier, our estimate of the
NAIRU may be too high, and a second simulation examines the implications of a
4¼ percent NAIRU—essentially one standard deviation below our current estimate.
Under this assumption, core PCE price inflation falls to 1½ percent by the end of next
year. Even though these two simulations embody some fairly large differences in
assumptions from the Greenbook baseline, both simulations remain well inside a

January 31, 2006

22 of 106

70 percent confidence interval about our forecast. Nathan will now continue with our
presentation.
MR. SHEETS. Your first international exhibit focuses on the dollar. As
indicated by the red line in the top-left panel, despite widening U.S. external
imbalances, the dollar rose strongly against the major currencies through much of
2005. As seen on the top right, against the euro and the yen, the dollar has recorded
net gains of more than 10 percent over the past year, even after tailing off some
during the last two months. The dollar’s rise against these currencies occurred as
interest rate differentials (shown on the bottom left) moved strongly in favor of dollar
assets, and market commentary has pointed to this as a key factor supporting the
dollar. Against the Canadian dollar, however, the greenback has moved down since
mid-2005, and—as displayed on the bottom right—the dollar has also fallen against
an array of emerging-market currencies, as market confidence in these countries has
climbed. On balance, the broad nominal dollar has strengthened about 1¾ percent
over the past year.
As shown in the top panels of exhibit 10, the dollar’s resilience last year came in
the context of a shift in the composition of reported U.S. financial inflows, away from
official financing and toward private financing. In 2005, foreign official inflows (line
1 on the left) were down sharply from their 2004 pace. A plunge in official inflows
from the G-10 countries (line 2) led this decline, as the Japanese authorities ceased
intervening in foreign exchange markets. In contrast, inflows from emerging Asia
(line 3) continued to move up, reflecting massive reserve accumulation by China.
Purchases of U.S. securities by private foreigners (the top right panel) surged last
year to more than $700 billion. All major categories of instruments saw increased
foreign purchases, with particularly large gains in Treasury securities (line 2) and
corporate bonds (line 4).
The positive sentiment toward the emerging market economies, which was seen in
foreign exchange markets, has also been manifest in global debt markets. As shown
on the bottom left, the EMBI+ spread—which had hovered above the U.S. double-B
corporate spread in recent years—cut below the double-B spread in mid-2005 and has
now sunk to historical lows of just above 200 basis points. These favorable
conditions, however, have not triggered a rise in external borrowing. As shown on
the bottom right, net issuance of international debt securities by the emerging Asian
economies has remained stable over the last year or two, and the Latin American
countries have been paying down debt on net. Moreover, a sizable fraction of these
economies continue to run current account surpluses.
Your next exhibit focuses on the outlook for activity abroad, which in our view is
quite favorable. As shown in line 1 of the top left panel, we estimate that total
foreign growth in the second half of last year climbed to 4.1 percent, as growth in the
emerging market economies (line 6) exceeded 6 percent. Going forward, we expect
the foreign economies on average to expand at a strong pace of 3½ percent. Recent

January 31, 2006

23 of 106

data have pointed to renewed signs of life in the euro-area economy (line 3),
particularly in Germany, as strengthening in the export sector appears to have jumpstarted investment. We expect this impetus eventually to feed through to increased
employment and consumer spending. Accordingly, we have marked up our forecast
for the euro area and now expect growth there to remain near the 2 percent pace
posted in the second half of 2005. Our forecast for Japan (line 4) calls for the
expansion to broaden and for growth to remain above our estimate of potential. As
shown in the middle left panel, over the past decade, Japanese corporations have
dramatically reduced their debt burdens (the blue line). As balance sheets have
strengthened, business investment (the black line) has risen and labor market
conditions (the red line) have improved. More recently, as shown on the right, urban
land prices—after many years of sharp contraction—appear to have stopped falling,
and bank credit seems to be following a similar pattern. These developments suggest
that conditions in the Japanese financial sector may finally be normalizing.
The bottom panels focus on China. Over the intermeeting period, the Chinese
authorities reported that GDP in 2004 was $280 billion (or 17 percent) larger than
they had previously realized. Given these revisions, China’s GDP last year now
appears to have exceeded that of France and the United Kingdom, making China the
world’s fourth-largest economy. Other recent data indicate that China’s trade surplus
(displayed on the right) jumped to $100 billion in 2005, as import growth declined
sharply. Returning to the top left panel, this deceleration in imports did not reflect a
slowing in the overall pace of Chinese activity last year, as GDP growth (line 8)
remained near 10 percent. We see growth there notching down to around 7¾ percent
in 2006, as the authorities are expected to implement administrative measures to
restrain investment.
As displayed in the top right panel, average foreign inflation is projected to
remain well contained, cycling near 2½ percent through the forecast period. Inflation
rates in the foreign industrial countries are seen to step down in mid-2006, as the runup in oil prices plays through.
For the emerging market economies, oil price increases typically pass through
into consumer prices more slowly, as a number of these countries have price controls
or subsidies in place that temporarily cushion the upward pressure on prices. As
such, the rise in oil prices should continue to push up consumer price inflation
through the next few quarters, but these pressures should abate in 2007.
The top panels of exhibit 12 focus on trade prices. As shown on the left, the spot
price of West Texas intermediate (the black line) has surged about $20 per barrel over
the past year and now trades above $65 per barrel. Oil prices have been driven up
both by strong global demand and by concerns about the reliability and adequacy of
global supplies. Recent developments in Iran, Iraq, and Nigeria have further
intensified these concerns. Tracking futures markets, our forecast calls for the price
of WTI to remain elevated through the end of 2007. Nonfuel commodity prices (the
red line) have also risen sharply over the past year, as metals prices have surged in

January 31, 2006

24 of 106

response to strong global demand. In sync with futures markets, our forecast calls for
commodity prices to flatten out near current levels, as supply responses help cap
further price rises.
The center panel displays our projection for the broad real dollar. After rising
somewhat on balance last year, the dollar is projected to depreciate slightly, at an
annual rate of about 1⅓ percent, through the forecast period. We see the expanding
current account deficit and associated financing concerns—as well as monetary
tightening by some foreign central banks—as likely to be sources of downward
pressure on the dollar.
Core import prices (the right panel) spiked in the fourth quarter, driven largely by
a surge in natural gas prices following the hurricanes. Given that natural gas prices
have already retreated, the run-up in core import price inflation should quickly
unwind. Smoothing through these fluctuations, we see core import price inflation
moving down to around 1 percent by early next year, consistent with flat commodity
prices and only modest dollar depreciation.
Recent data on U.S. nominal trade (the bottom left panel) indicate that the trade
deficit has widened further. In October and November, exports of goods and services
(line 2) increased $17 billion, led by a rise in capital goods exports (line 3), owing in
part to a rebound in aircraft exports following the Boeing strike in September.
Notably, exports of industrial supplies in October and November (line 4) were down
relative to the third quarter. A large share of U.S. firms that produce these goods are
located in hurricane-affected areas, and their production has been temporarily
impaired. As shown on the right, this circumstance is highlighted by a sharp drop in
real exports from several industries that were particularly affected by the hurricanes.
Nominal imports of goods and services (line 6 on the table) rose a hefty
$80 billion in October and November, notwithstanding soft growth in consumer
goods (line 7) and capital goods (line 8). The recent rise in imports primarily
reflected large increases in industrial supplies (line 9) and oil (line 10). These gains
were due both to higher import prices, particularly for oil and natural gas, and to
rising import quantities (which have substituted for impaired domestic production).
Notably, as seen on the right, real imports have risen sharply in some of the same
hurricane-affected industries in which exports have been particularly weak.
As shown in the top left panel of your final international exhibit, we estimate that
the growth of U.S. real exports of goods and services (the blue bars) dipped during
the second half of 2005, as the hurricanes contributed to softness in goods exports and
as last year’s dollar appreciation reduced the stimulus to services exports. Imports
(the red bars), in contrast, expanded at a solid rate in the second half of last year, with
a boost from the hurricanes. This pattern is expected to reverse in the first half of
2006, with exports recovering from the effects of the hurricanes and imports of oil
and industrial supplies moderating. Thereafter, imports and exports are projected to
grow at comparable paces, in line with solid U.S. and foreign growth and with the

January 31, 2006

25 of 106

dollar projected to depreciate only mildly. As shown by the black line in the top right
panel, the contribution of net exports to U.S. GDP growth in the second half of last
year is estimated to have been around negative 0.6 percentage point, but it is
projected to swing slightly positive in the first half of this year. Subsequently, the
subtraction due to net exports should run at roughly ⅓ percentage point; imports and
exports grow at comparable rates, but with imports more than 50 percent larger than
exports, a sizable subtraction from growth results.
As shown in the middle left panel, the U.S. current account deficit widened from
about $150 billion in 1997 to $780 billion in the third quarter of last year. Over the
forecast period, we see the deficit increasing further, to over $1 trillion, or about
7½ percent of GDP. The bottom panel provides some additional perspective on the
widening of the current account deficit. As shown in the first column, from 1997:Q1
to 2001:Q4—a period of dollar appreciation—the current account balance fell
$217 billion, which was more than accounted for by a decline in the non-oil trade
balance. Over the next four years (the second column), the current account balance
dropped another $421 billion, largely because of a continued decline in the non-oil
trade balance (despite a net depreciation of the dollar) and a sharp rise in oil imports.
As shown in the last column, we expect the current account deficit to widen nearly
$300 billion over the forecast period, with all four major components contributing to
the decline. Notably, net investment income is expected to fall sharply, as growing
U.S. indebtedness and rising short-term interest rates push up our payments to
foreigners.
The middle right panel shows that our current account projections for 2006 and
2007 are markedly gloomier than those of other forecasters. Thus, there is a distinct
possibility that investors will be surprised by the extent that the current account
deficit widens. We see this as representing an important downside risk for the dollar.
MR. STOCKTON. The final exhibit presents your economic projections for 2006
and 2007. The central tendencies of those projections anticipate real GDP to increase
about 3½ percent this year and then to run between 3 and 3½ percent in 2007.
Forecasts of core PCE price inflation are centered on 2 percent this year and between
1¾ and 2 percent in 2007. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate is expected to be
between 4¾ and 5 percent both this year and next. I would appreciate receiving any
revisions in your forecasts by the close of business Friday. My colleagues and I
would be happy to take any questions that you might have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In exhibit 6, the average workweek is something of a
puzzlement. I’m curious to get a sense of what is our now retrospective explanation of the sharp fall
in the year 2000-01 and the failure to start back up as the economy picked up. Are we looking at an
age or a demographic mix?

January 31, 2006

26 of 106

MR. STRUCKMEYER. Well, the 2001 effect was the incorporation of the NAICS
classifications into the payroll survey. So it was just a methodological change that was realized.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, really, we never had such a drop. The series is just
discontinuous.
MR. STRUCKMEYER. It’s discontinuous. If you look at the two slopes, they’re about the
same before and after, but there is discontinuity in 2001.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We know labor force participation changes as people move
into different age brackets. So if we have data of average hours by age, do we have any judgment
as to whether their average workweek hours change as well?
MR. STRUCKMEYER. Not to my knowledge.
MR. STOCKTON. I don’t know either, Mr. Chairman. I would suspect, though I don’t
really know, that workweeks would tend to decline later in an individual’s life cycle, certainly
relative to the prime age working years.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Individuals also may be more affluent so that they have an
ability to actually—
MR. STOCKTON. Or affluent and more likely to be taking on part-time work in
retirement. [Laughter] I’m not suggesting that your workweek is likely to fall; I’m sure it’s going
to maintain its current level! [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I object to that! [Laughter] I mean, there are data by age.
Certainly in the household survey we pick up something.
MR. STRUCKMEYER. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’m just curious. President Santomero.

January 31, 2006

27 of 106

MR. SANTOMERO. I wanted to go to the housing issue. In the projection in the
Greenbook, as I understand it, you’ve got housing prices going up at about a 5½ percent rate as
compared with last year’s number, which I think is 12 percent. We’ve been looking at the
sensitivity of what happens to our GDP growth rate in ’06 and ’07 to the extent that housing prices
stay flat. Our numbers suggest that a flat housing price associated with the decline in residential
investment would shave about ½ percentage point off GDP in ’06 and about 0.6 or 0.7 if you add
the consumption effects. Does that sound like a reasonable sensitivity to you?
MR. STOCKTON. That sounds like a reasonable sensitivity. As you know, we have
presented this effect in the past. It’s a little larger than the effects that we get when we run our
model, which would be measured more around ¼ percentage point to ½ percentage point. Now,
you may recall that last June John Williams presented some simulations of various housing-price
scenarios. Our relatively small effects come from just simulating a lower path for the price of
housing, and as you know, our model has a relatively low marginal propensity to consume out of
housing wealth, one that is similar to that out of overall household wealth.
It’s not difficult to imagine upping those effects. If one wants to assume that, instead of the
three and a half cents on the dollar effect that we have incorporated in our model, the marginal
propensity to consume was around five to seven cents on the dollar, those effects would obviously
be increased. The second potential channel that our straightforward model simulations don’t
account for is that a lower path for housing prices could be accompanied by some hit to consumer
sentiment. There would be an outsized effect on consumer spending if households really became
more pessimistic given the downturn in what is an asset with a high profile in their portfolios. And
the third possibility that John explored in his simulations was related to one of the alternative
simulations we show this time around: If weakening in house prices and housing activity occurred

January 31, 2006

28 of 106

when the term premium was widening back out, you would then have the effects not only directly
on the housing-sector side, which could be amplified, but also on other forms of interest sensitive
spending.
So I think there are some pretty wide confidence intervals. The numbers that you cited are
bigger than our standard simulation, but seem reasonable and in the ballpark if one wants to make a
few adjustments in some of the assumptions that we made. As I contemplate our outlook and the
things that I worry about the most on the domestic side of the economy, I’d say the housing sector is
clearly one of the biggest risks that you’re currently confronting.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Nathan, if you look at the differences between the
Greenbook forecast of the path of the external balance and those of other forecasters, can you
summarize for us what the major sources of differences are? Are they about the exchange rate
assumption, or are they about something else?
MR. SHEETS. I think the source varies from forecast to forecast. One difference across
these forecasts relative to ours is in the oil price. The other forecasters are in the $50-$55 range,
whereas we have an oil price of $65 to $70. So that’s a piece of it. Looking at the assumptions
embedded in these forecasts pretty carefully, the one forecast that has a much sharper depreciation
of the dollar than what we’ve written down is the Global Insight forecast, which shows the dollar
falling quite dramatically over the next year or so. But I don’t find significantly different
assumptions about the exchange rate in the other forecasts. So I guess the bottom line is that I think
a lot of this difference is just a difference in models, and we’re confident that—if you give us an

January 31, 2006

29 of 106

exchange rate, relative prices, and so forth—we’re pretty good at mapping those underlying
variables into a path for the current account.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for our colleagues? If not, before we
go to the general discussion, because of the unusual nature of this particular one-day session with
various timing problems, I just calculated that, in the eighteen years I’ve been here, we’ve gone
from an average presentation of three minutes to one of six minutes. [Laughter] The drift has been
inexorably upward. And I will suggest to you that, unless we are somewhat unusually restrained
today, we’re going to run way over what our luncheon plans are, and we will be forced to call them
dinner. [Laughter] So may I suggest, if at all possible, that you try to restrain the time that you’re
employing on this particular occasion. With those restrictions, who would like to start off?
[Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. With restraint, Mr. Chairman, most of our contacts this round were
positive about current business conditions. However, they were cautious about the prospects for
’06, largely because they didn’t see any obvious drivers for growth.
With regard to current conditions, national labor markets appear to be solid. Both of the
temporary-help firms headquartered in our District reported that their business was very good. Of
course, they mentioned that it was softer in the Midwest, primarily because of the problems of the
Big Three automakers and their spillovers and because of suppliers in the regional economy. One
mentioned that Michigan was the only state in which he had seen a drop in the demand for business
and technical workers. I mentioned last time that things could get worse if the Delphi negotiations
result in a strike, and all three parties—Delphi, UAW, and GM—are talking. Delphi has toned
down its rhetoric, and the deadline has now been pushed back to February 17.

January 31, 2006

30 of 106

Turning to cost and price pressures, wages and benefits continued to increase at a moderate
pace. With regard to other costs, I heard the usual concerns about prices for energy and energyrelated inputs in shipping, but the reports about other material costs were mixed. There was one
interesting case in which capacity considerations were showing up in higher prices, and that’s the
airline industry. United reported that the reduced capacity in the industry has made it easier for
them to raise prices, particularly when it comes to passing through fuel costs. And, as you know,
they are scheduled to exit bankruptcy shortly.
As I mentioned in the past, I’m concerned about the high amount of liquidity circulating in
financial markets. For example, one of our directors who heads a major private equity firm noted
that such funds were having no trouble attracting investors. He said that the amount of new money
invested in private equity firms is expected to expand 50 percent this year, and there is a slightly
ominous look to some of the new investors, such as underfunded state pension funds that are
“reaching for return,” as he described it. Similarly, early last week we held our semiannual meeting
of academics and local business economists, and I heard comments about unusually high liquidity
levels from several economists who work for investment firms and commercial banks. And as we
all know, risk spreads are quite low by historical standards. So I worry that there’s a lot of money
chasing investments out there, and that this may have driven the price of risk down too far.
In the national outlook, even with the weak fourth-quarter numbers we continue to expect
that economic activity will expand at a solid pace similar to that in the Greenbook. We see growth
at or slightly above trend over the next two years and the unemployment rate remaining around
5 percent. Of course, if the fourth-quarter sluggishness spills forward, we would have a more
complicated set of issues to deal with, but I agree with the staff and expect that growth will bounce
back this quarter. With regard to prices, we think that core PCE inflation will average close to

January 31, 2006

31 of 106

2 percent over the forecast period. The outside economists at our meeting last week generally
agreed with this outlook, although a couple predicted that GDP growth would fall somewhat below
3 percent in 2006.
Most of these economists thought that we would raise the fed funds rate to 4¾ to 5 percent
and then go on hold. As always, we’re going to have to take a hard look at the data and forecasts
before we decide what to do. Inflation could moderate further. We’ve been pleasantly surprised at
firms’ ability to absorb cost shocks. If they continue to do so, we could be looking at core PCE
inflation rates heading down this spring. In that event, inflation risks would be diminished, and
there would be fewer risks in ending the current rate cycle. But there’s a good chance that recent
cost increases will pass through, and we’ll experience a repeat of last winter’s uptick in core
inflation. Moreover, I can see some plausible outcomes for growth that would pressure resource
utilization. And in that event, we’d be looking at a forecast for core inflation that was stuck above
2 percent. I think this would be a problem. With inflation remaining at such rates, we could begin
to lose credibility if markets mistakenly inferred that our comfort zone had drifted higher. When we
stop raising rates, we ought to be reasonably confident that policy is restrictive enough to bring
inflation back toward the center of our comfort zone, which I believe is 1½ percent. And as I read
the long-run simulation in the Bluebook, it seemed to say that the funds rate needed to rise a bit over
5 percent by late 2006 to bring core inflation down to 1½ percent within a reasonable period. So for
today, we should move forward with an increase of 25 basis points, and we should allow ourselves
enough flexibility so that policy can either stop or continue moving, as the situation warrants.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Recent data on economic activity, as
summarized by the fourth-quarter GDP figure, have been surprisingly weak. But there are good

January 31, 2006

32 of 106

reasons to believe that much of the softness will prove temporary, so I tend to agree with the
Greenbook and other forecasts in expecting a rather sharp rebound in the current quarter.
That said, I want to sound a note of caution. This view is based on incomplete data for the
fourth quarter and a paucity of information concerning activity in the first quarter. It is not
inconceivable that the weak numbers for the fourth quarter could presage a more-prolonged,
sluggish phase as the lagged effects of past policy tightening and higher oil prices take effect. This
caution is heightened by my concern that the economy faces some pretty big downside risks,
especially having to do with the interrelated issues of possible overvaluations in housing markets
and low term premiums in bond markets. These risks are highlighted by the alternative simulations
in the Greenbook concerning a rise in the saving rate and a higher term premium. In summary, I see
the Greenbook’s view of real activity for this year as very reasonable, but downside risks to that
forecast give me pause.
Turning to inflation, core PCE inflation over the past twelve months—at 1.9 percent—has
come in higher than I would like to see. But assuming that growth slows to trend later this year, my
outlook for inflation in 2006 is more optimistic than the Greenbook. One reason stems from work
our staff has done on the extent of pass-through from energy prices to both labor compensation and
core price inflation. As I’ve said before, the evidence suggests to us that there has been relatively
little pass-through since the early 1980s, perhaps due to the credibility of our commitment to the
stability of core inflation. Under our assumption of very little pass-through, we expect the core PCE
price index to rise around 1¾ percent, both this year and next. The Greenbook shows an increase of
2¼ percent this year, presumably reflecting larger energy-price pass-through, and then a drop to
about 1¾ percent in 2007 as the effects of energy prices subside. So though I differ with the
Greenbook on inflation in 2006, over the longer period I think we’re about on the same page.

January 31, 2006

33 of 106

So as I look at the total picture, I would say that the overall outlook is quite positive. The
economy is near full employment with real GDP tending toward trend-like growth. Core inflation is
within a reasonable range but a bit on the high side. Needless to say, it’s fitting for Chairman
Greenspan to leave office with the economy in such solid shape. And if I might torture a simile, I
would say, Mr. Chairman, that the situation you’re handing off to your successor is a lot like a
tennis racquet with a gigantic sweet spot. [Laughter]
Positive though the situation is, it also obviously raises the issue of how much higher the
funds rate needs to go to keep the economy on this desirable trajectory. There are a number of ways
of looking at this question, all yielding similar answers. First, a funds rate of 4½ percent rests right
near the center of the range of estimates for the equilibrium funds rate. Along the same lines, our
staff ran simulations of FRB/US to calculate the net effect of monetary policy actions over the past
several years on real GDP growth. The results are that, after adding importantly to growth over the
last few years, past policy accommodation is roughly neutral in terms of growth this year and next.
A second approach is to compare a funds rate of 4½ percent with the recommendations of Taylortype rules. Such calculations suggest that a 4½ percent funds rate this quarter is a bit on the tight
side now but should be about right later this year under the Greenbook forecast. The long-run
simulations in the Bluebook are a third method to judge the stance of policy. These simulations
show the funds rate optimally peaking at a little over 5 percent, well above where we are now. But
a major factor accounting for this relatively high peak is the Greenbook’s assumption, incorporated
in the Bluebook simulation, that energy pass-through pushes up core PCE inflation to 2¼ percent
this year. And as I’ve emphasized, we’re not convinced that this much pass-through is likely, and
our lower inflation forecast implies a lower peak for the funds rate along an optimal path.

January 31, 2006

34 of 106

Taken together, then, these approaches suggest to me that if we tighten policy at this
meeting, as I think we should, we will be close to the appropriate peak in the funds rate based on
what we know now. As for the future path of the funds rate, I believe it should be highly dependent
on unfolding events and cannot be prejudged with any degree of confidence. So the bottom line is
that we need to position ourselves for flexibility in our policy choices going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Consistent with the national economy,
overall activity in the Third District slowed somewhat more than expected in the fourth quarter.
Despite this slowing, the general view in my District is that our regional economy is likely to
expand at a moderate pace in 2006.
Payroll employment continues to expand in our three states, but at a more moderate pace
than we saw in the first half of 2005. Overall, market conditions remain firm. The three-state
unemployment rate ended up at 4.8 percent, slightly lower than the national rate. Regional
manufacturing activity continues to expand at a moderate pace. The index of general activity in our
manufacturing survey declined to plus 3.3 in January, its lowest level in seven months. But the
indexes of shipments, new orders, and employment were all up. This divergence is unusual.
Typically, they move together. When they do diverge, I tend to put more weight on the shipments
and new orders indexes, as these reflect the respondents’ own firms rather than the opinions about
general economic conditions. In addition, the fact that our firms have not yet changed their capital
spending plans for 2006 suggests that their outlook remains positive.
Retail sales in our District are rising moderately. Retailers still express concern about the
potential depressing effect of higher gasoline and heating costs on consumer purchases in 2006.
Our auto dealers have not fared as well. In fact, our District has seen a decline in automobile sales.

January 31, 2006

35 of 106

Growth in construction is one of the question marks in the 2006 outlook. In our District,
nonresidential construction continues to improve. In fact, the office market absorption rate is rising
in the Philadelphia metropolitan area, and office vacancy is declining in both the city and the
suburbs. By contrast, over the past month or so, we have continued to receive anecdotal reports that
a slowdown in residential construction may be at hand. Real estate contacts report that house-price
appreciation has slowed or even ceased, and there has been an increase in inventories. These signs,
however, seem to point to a softening of activity, not to a sharp drop.
We have received some welcome indication of a moderation in price pressures in the
District. Our survey measures of prices received and prices paid were down in January and well
below their October peaks. Expected price increases also declined sharply. The only caveat I
would put on that statement is that the survey was taken before the most recent run-up in energy
prices.
Turning to the nation, the advance fourth-quarter GDP report was quite a bit weaker than we
were all expecting. That said, we, too, think it’s too soon to conclude that the weakness seen in the
fourth quarter is more than a temporary soft patch. Our forecast for GDP over the next two years is
similar to that of the original Greenbook that we received this month. We expect growth to be on
average around 3½ percent, near potential. We have a somewhat smoother path than the Greenbook
since we expect the boost in activity from the rebuilding effort in the hurricane-afflicted areas to be
more spread out than front-loaded.
We also see somewhat stronger employment growth next year than the Greenbook because
we see somewhat stronger output growth in 2007. We project nonfarm payrolls to rise at an average
of 160,000 a month this year, stronger in the first half as people displaced by hurricanes continue to
return to work. We project an average increase in payrolls of about 150,000 per month next year.

January 31, 2006

36 of 106

The Greenbook employment projection is similar to ours in 2006, but the Board staff sees a
deceleration next year to an average of about 100,000, as was pointed out in the presentation.
However, our unemployment rate forecasts are similar, about 5 percent, because we see somewhat
higher labor force participation.
We anticipate core PCE to rise a bit less than 2 percent in 2006 and then to accelerate to
2 percent in 2007, reflecting a modest acceleration in unit labor costs. In contrast, the Greenbook
sees a slight deceleration in core inflation over the forecast period.
Our forecast is predicated on being near the end of the tightening cycle. Exactly where we
stop is yet to be determined; the data will tell the Committee. But all of these data suggest that we
are closing in and we are close to being done. For this meeting, I think it’s prudent for us to do what
the market expects and make another move of 25 basis points. But I think we also want to be in a
position to pause if that is appropriate, given the incoming economic data.
Of course, I will not be here for that interesting discussion. [Laughter] As you know, this is
the last FOMC meeting that I will be attending as President of the Philadelphia Federal Reserve
Bank. I am honored to have had the opportunity to lead that institution. Of all the experiences
during my six years of service at the Fed, none was more challenging and more rewarding than
serving on this Committee. I have enjoyed and learned from the first-rate staff of the Reserve
Banks and the Board of Governors. I feel privileged to have served at a remarkable point in
economic history. In my tenure, we’ve gone through a recession and a recovery, seen concerns shift
from disinflation to inflation, moved to a record low funds rate, and then returned it to more-normal
levels. And all of this was accompanied by an unprecedented degree of transparency in our policy
discussions. I have also been inspired by the leadership shown by our Chairman, I may add, in
forging a consensus from diverse opinions in periods of uncertainty and in fostering a collegial

January 31, 2006

37 of 106

atmosphere among us. I want to thank you all for an important part you’ve played in making my
service at the Fed a rewarding experience. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I should point out that a luncheon in the President’s honor is
planned at the March meeting. And I guess you and I will be looking from the sidelines, but neither
one of us will know what happened at that March meeting until we get to it. [Laughter] Thank you
for your nice remarks. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s not a lot new in New England. So I
thought I’d just skip over my usual probably more-lengthy-than-necessary comments on the region.
Let me just mention a couple of things, though. Employment growth is still slower, and income
growth is still slower than that of the nation. Our regional unemployment rate went up rather than
down over the past year, and we have seen some slowing in residential real estate markets.
However, surprisingly enough, there seems to be a good deal of optimism in discussions we have
had with people about business spending and about commercial real estate markets. So, for the first
time in five or six years, we’ve actually had net absorption of space, both downtown and in the
suburbs. That situation is making a big difference in the smiles on people’s faces around town. I
hope it means that New England is getting back and moving along the same trajectory as the nation.
Turning to the nation, we, like most observers, were surprised at the modest growth rate of
the economy in the fourth quarter. But we, like almost everybody else, believe that the reduced
pace of government spending and smaller-than-expected inventory investment that affected the
fourth quarter are likely to be temporary and reflect issues of timing rather than overall economic
strength. Thus, we, too, anticipate a slightly stronger first quarter this year than we had before. But
our forecast takes the same basic trajectory over the balance of ’06 and ’07—that is, strength in the

January 31, 2006

38 of 106

first half of ’06 and then moderation as the effect of tighter monetary policy, cooling housing
markets, and less fiscal stimulus takes hold. This is the same trajectory as that in the Greenbook.
However, as we look at GDP, our forecast for ’07 is slower—½ percent or a little bit less—
than the forecast for ’06, reflecting an expected outright decline in housing investment. We also see
inflation trending off both this year and next, with core PCE inflation never above 2 percent over the
two-year period. I mean, not “never,” which is a strong word, but at the points we’re mapping.
Some of this difference in price pressures is accounted for by a sense of a somewhat greater supply
of labor resources, as reflected in a slightly lower NAIRU and a higher labor force participation rate.
Looking at these forecasts and assessing all the data and anecdotal inputs I have received
since the last meeting, I am struck by a couple of things. First, these forecasts, and the vast majority
of those available from other sources, describe an almost ideal outcome. U.S. demand is strong but
slowing, as consumers save more and borrow less. Fiscal stimulus diminishes, business spending
remains solid, employment grows, inflation edges off, and foreign growth is spurred by domestic
demand at last and acts to create some export growth, though we continue to have a widening
current account deficit. If these forecasts were to be realized, it would truly be just about the best of
outcomes, and I would agree with President Yellen—a major sweet spot as the Chairman hands
over the reins.
But that scenario sort of begs the question of risks, both large and small, and how they are
balanced. We could certainly be surprised by new energy shocks or geopolitical events of such
magnitude to cause financial turmoil and consumer and business retrenchment. We could also
witness the turbulence that could accompany a sharp unwinding of the nation’s ever-growing
external deficit. But you don’t have to focus on major upsets. Risks of a lesser proportion loom as
well. We could very well be wrong about the remaining capacity in labor markets, and the resulting

January 31, 2006

39 of 106

upward pressure on wages and salaries could create a more rapid pace of inflation, particularly
given the solid pace of external growth and pressures on a range of commodity prices. To date,
however, the growth of wages and salaries has been on the slow side, particularly relative to
productivity, and there is little evidence that firms believe they have the pricing power to pass on
much more than energy surcharges. Indeed, their profit margins suggest that they have a cushion
against increases in input costs. Alternatively, the impact of a cooling housing market could take a
larger bite out of consumption than we now expect and cause a greater-than-projected, though
welcome, increase in personal saving. This would, of course, slow the economy from baseline and
damp price pressures. We haven’t seen this yet either, but it could be just as likely as missing on the
inflation side.
Thus, as I look at both the upside and downside risks, they seem to me to be more balanced
than they have been. As some evidence of this, both the Greenbook and the fed funds futures
markets anticipate that policy is near a tipping point—move a bit more now and then retrench in late
’06 or early ’07.
I also find myself beginning to wonder about the cost of being wrong. When policy was
arguably much more accommodative, it seemed to me that letting inflation get out of hand might be
harder to deal with and ultimately more damaging to the economy than if growth slipped a bit. That
may still be true. But just as our credibility regarding price stability is important in setting market
expectations so, too, is some sense that policy will be supportive of growth when the threat of rising
inflation is less imminent. In short, we need to be credible about achieving both our goals. At this
point, another nudge toward a policy rate that neither stimulates nor restrains the economy seems
appropriate. But the need for further moves seems to me to be increasingly driven by the incoming
data.

January 31, 2006

40 of 106

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I took note of the two Davids’ forecast of 4.7 percent growth
in the first quarter. Especially against President Yellen’s comments, it brought to mind the name of
one of Henry Jerome’s albums on the Decca label called “Brazen Brass.” That is, some might
consider brazen or even brassy that it jibes or, in this context, jives with what I’m hearing
anecdotally both in our District and nationwide—though we have only three and a half weeks of
observations and the year-end to look at.
Very quickly to sum up these observations, the CFO of UPS put it this way: “The economy
feels much better than what I read.” UPS reports a very strong December adjusted for seasonality,
and January has stayed strong. Over the year-end in the recent past, they have had only one holiday
peak day of processing 20 million shipments. They had three at year-end of more than 21 million.
Burlington Northern–Santa Fe’s volume for the first three weeks of ’06 is up 9 percent year over
year. Interestingly, they just auctioned off their entire lumber-carrying capacity for the year at an 8
percent premium over current market. Texas Instruments reports a positive book-to-bill ratio, which
is a very rare thing coming out of the fourth quarter. They find that they underinvested relative to
demand and report a seven- to ten-day delivery delinquency rate. As the CFO says, “We have
stopped scratching our heads about demand, and we’re just taking it all in.”
The CEO of Wal-Mart U.S.A. reports that “the consumer hasn’t hidden” as expected. It’s
true that traffic is down, but average purchases are up in the Southeast and Texas, and the West is
strongest in overall demand, aided by the warmest winter by their calculations in 112 years. The
CEO and the top managers met with their 5,000 suppliers the week before last in Kansas City, and
he reported that the suppliers described themselves as “upbeat.” Wal-Mart and others report what
we’re hearing from the railroads, the shippers, and other retailers—all of which lends verisimilitude

January 31, 2006

41 of 106

to what was evident if you parse the Beige Book. And that is that the rim—from Richmond down
through Atlanta to the State of Florida and then, of course, the “uber” states across Texas and up to
California and the West Coast—is enjoying robust growth. To the extent that there’s weakness, it
appears to be in the north central and northeastern regions.
On the price front, Dick Evans, on our board, of Cullen/Frost, a very astute banker, says that
he “keeps hearing people talk about potential inflation, but the economy seems to be able to pull it
out of the hat.” Wal-Mart International reports no pricing power other than in resin-based products.
The CEO marvels at how the world continues to, as he puts it, “replace technology at lower and
lower prices.” Further up the retail chain, Penney’s CEO reports no price inflation in home
furnishings and continued price deflation in apparel. And on the two subjects for which I reported
price pressures before, the CEO of DX Services, a large chemical company, reports that PVC prices
have fallen off because of overproduction but the prices of the key building blocks of chlorine and
ethylene are falling. “There’s no pricing on the upside,” according to that CEO. And as for my
other favorite subject of diapers, incidentally, Proctor & Gamble and Kimberly Clark have rolled
back their price increases of 5 percent.
Our shipping contact at Northern Navigation reports that Panamax rates—and Panamax is
the key fleet of bulk carriers—are now down to $16,700 per day from $17,300 in December, which
was down 35 percent from the average for the year of ’05. The container fleet will absorb a
14 percent increase in fleet size per year for the next three to four years driven largely by what one
could consider Chinese ego because they have now entered the building market in size. And
interestingly, UPS worries that, if this continues, they will come under price pressure to decrease air
freight rates. Despite fierce demand and delivery delinquencies, Texas Instruments reports that it
has slowed down its price increases.

January 31, 2006

42 of 106

So, Mr. Chairman, we have forecast a core PCE inflation of 2 percent for the year, and we
feel comfortable with it. I started with Henry Jerome. Let me conclude with another Henry, the
Fifth, at least as written by Shakespeare. I’ve been honored to serve with you, Mr. Chairman, the
least time of anybody at this table. In Alfalfan terms, I’m just a sprout in the crop of otherwise
experienced men and women. But I’m sure they would agree with me, without getting too
dramatic, about the appropriateness of Henry V’s remarks at Agincourt—and I’ll rephrase them—
economists and bankers now asleep (remember these are bankers) shall think themselves accursed
that they were not here. I consider myself privileged to have been here, Mr. Chairman. This isn’t
Agincourt, but it’s important. I’ve served under two saxophone players now, [laughter] and I would
say without question, you’re a leader of the very best kind, and I thank you for your leadership.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. And the last time I spoke to Henry V
[laughter] I got a view of his notions of strategy. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Fifth District economic activity continued to
advance broadly in December and January. Service-sector employment and revenue strengthened,
and retailers reported generally strong sales and a pickup in hiring. In manufacturing, the signals
are mixed. Shipments flattened out in December and turned down in January, and our new orders
index turned negative as well. At the same time, we’ve seen a very sharp rise in our index of
expected manufacturing shipments six months out. Major swings in this index do a pretty good job
of predicting subsequent upturns in orders and shipments. The last time we saw a rise nearly this
steep was at the beginning of 2002, and a sharp rebound in orders and shipments soon followed.
While the figures for prices paid and prices received for both manufacturing and services have come
down off their November highs, they remain noticeably elevated, and measures of expected price
trends have moved up over the past two months.

January 31, 2006

43 of 106

On the national economy, until I saw the fourth-quarter GDP report, I was thinking that
economic growth was on pretty solid footing. Friday’s report came in weaker than expected, of
course, but as Dave Stockton mentioned, it appears plausible that several temporary factors are at
work. So I continue to think that prospects for economic growth are pretty good this year. Both
employment and consumer spending are likely to continue expanding at a healthy pace, and the
fundamentals for business investment point toward fairly robust spending growth.
At our last meeting, I, like many others, believed that the threat that energy-price increases
would pass through to core inflation and inflation expectations had diminished since the immediate
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. However, I wasn’t convinced that the threat was entirely behind us,
and unfortunately, my concerns on that score remain. Oil prices have nearly returned to their
September highs. The fourth-quarter core PCE price index came in at 2.2 percent, 0.3 above the
Greenbook’s estimate, and the Greenbook has reversed course and marked up the ’06 inflation
forecast a bit. The staff is now expecting core PCE inflation to rise to 2.3 percent in the middle of
2006 and not to fall below 2 percent until 2007 and then only slightly below. This forecast
represents a bulge that is somewhat more extended than I would like to see. So, for today, I believe
we should strive not to move the near-term yield curve down.
In the broader context of the historic nature of today’s meeting, however, it’s quite striking
that among the prominent subjects are a quarter-point bulge in inflation and the issue of whether
long-run and trend inflation should be 1.5 percent or 2.0 percent. Few now doubt whether the
Federal Reserve can or will keep inflation stable, a question that was seriously in play decades ago.
Your leadership in the intervening years, Mr. Chairman, completed the work begun by your
predecessor to restore the expectation of price stability that had been lost in the transition from the
prior commodity standard. Given the number of centuries that regime was in place, I believe future

January 31, 2006

44 of 106

monetary historians would be justified in marking the Volcker–Greenspan era as a millennial
transition. This achievement required altering public expectations about the trend rate of inflation
that we would tolerate. It also required substantially damping the association between strong real
growth and resurgent inflation. Moreover, it required demonstrating that there was no need for
adverse cost shocks to spawn higher trend inflation. The key to all of this, in my mind, was
establishing a pattern of predictable FOMC behavior that was well understood by the public.
Leading this transition as you did, Mr. Chairman, required tremendous acumen and tremendous
courage. Personally, Mr. Chairman, I count serving with you, however briefly, as one of the
greatest privileges an economist could imagine.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. By now I’m sure that most of you are tired
of hearing me report that conditions in my District are not as vigorous as conditions in most of the
country. I know that I’m tired of repeating it. Fortunately, optimism is increasing in many parts of
my District. My directors and business contacts that have national and international business
interests report fairly solid conditions in most of their industries. They tell me that they plan to
maintain a strong pace of capital spending this year and that they expect healthy productivity gains
from doing so. These trends encourage me to think that our economy will be able to maintain the 3
percent rate of structural productivity growth that underlies the Greenbook baseline projection.
Since we are nearing the point of monetary policy neutrality, I’m counting on a strong rate of
productivity growth to help us gradually nudge the inflation rate back down over the next several
years. I have not changed my thinking about the underlying trends in the economy since our last
meeting. I was pretty much in sync with the Greenbook outlook then and remain so today. The

January 31, 2006

45 of 106

BEA’s fourth-quarter revisions appear to affect the timing of economic activity across a couple of
quarters but not to affect the longer-term outlook.
Even though I still expect to see headline and core inflation moderate over the projection
period, I have become a bit more sensitive to the upside inflation risks in the baseline projection.
First, in the Greenbook we received last week, the staff concluded that inflation this year could
creep up a bit more than they had thought in December, and the staff elevated their estimate of core
PCE inflation for the fourth quarter from 1.9 percent to 2.2 percent as a result of the most recent
BEA report. The staff hedged against that possibility by imposing a temporary 25 basis point surtax
on their December fed funds rate path beginning at our next meeting, and it seems sensible to me to
keep this option open. At our December meeting I said that I thought we were very close to being
able to stop increasing our fed funds rate target at every meeting. I still think so. If monetary policy
is a combination of science and art, I think we’re now out of the laboratory and inside the art studio,
and having flexibility as we go forward is highly desirable to me.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I have to admit that I’ve spent more time since our last meeting
thinking about what to say in acknowledgement of your last meeting than I’ve thought about
economic conditions, and it’s impossible to come up with words to express my feelings. I just
simply want to say that it has been truly an honor and a privilege to serve under your leadership of
this Committee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also have not had the occasion in the public
farewell ceremonies to say thank you to you. So let me say what an honor it has been to serve under
your leadership and to be associated with the great confidence and respect you’ve given people in
what we do at the Fed. Thank you. Thank you very much.

January 31, 2006

46 of 106

Given your request for brevity, let me confine my remarks to a few observations about our
District that may have implications for the national outlook. Generally I would say that the
anecdotal information and the available data suggest that economic growth in our southeast region
continues at a very solid pace. At the past two meetings, I reported evidence of the slowing in the
real estate markets, and those reports continue. It has become especially notable in a few selected
markets, including several that have been hot for some time, like Florida. Banks are now clearly
pulling back on their construction lending. We’re receiving increasing numbers of reports that
planned projects have either been put on hold or are not going to come out of the ground. And
we’re now beginning to see some signs of downward pressure on prices—in some cases in the high
single digits, but in a few markets substantially higher than that. As an example, we heard one
report that in the Panama City area of Florida, condos that had been going for $600 a square foot are
now being priced at $450 a square foot. That’s a 25 percent correction. I think we have to view
these corrections that are taking place as healthy. Worker shortages due to hurricane cleanup work
in Louisiana and coastal Mississippi are also contributing to the slowdown in Florida. I would
emphasize, again, that this evidence is not indicative of a broad trend throughout the District. Our
general real estate situation still feels pretty solid.
I’d also like to make a couple of comments on the situation of the hurricane areas, where,
according to the staff , FEMA spending turned out to be less than expected in the fourth quarter. At
the last meeting I noted it had become clear that the stimulus from the flow of government funds
would be slower than expected. Work in both Mississippi and Louisiana is still mostly in the initial
cleanup phase. Despite what we see in public statements, there is no substantial rebuilding under
way yet, except for casino reconstruction in Mississippi. The grace period on mortgage payments
has already or is about to run out, and this could bring additional hardship for the affected property

January 31, 2006

47 of 106

owners, with obvious implications for lenders. Indeed, a handful of small community banks may
actually be at risk.
Considerable uncertainty exists concerning federal flood insurance policies going forward,
and in certain areas no rebuilding can take place until flood maps are redrawn, building codes are
reassessed, soil contamination is assessed, and permits are issued—all of which could take many,
many months. Because so few people have been able to move back to their properties, even those
homes that were only modestly damaged by the storm are now beginning to show signs of
deterioration due to mold and a lack of maintenance and repairs. I think the take-away from this
discussion is that the economic kick we’ve been expecting from hurricane rebuilding is probably
going to be spread over 2006, 2007, and perhaps even a bit further.
The damage to the energy sector in the Gulf now appears to have been worse than most had
thought. Although national production of crude is reported back at about 92 percent of prehurricane levels and natural gas production is back to 95 percent of pre-hurricane levels, our sources
tell us that 25 percent of the Gulf region capacity for crude and about 16 percent of the Gulf
capacity for natural gas remain shut in. And that shortfall, in my view, remains significant. More
than half the crude oil that is shut in is attributable to the production lost from Shell’s Mars
platform, which isn’t expected to be operational until mid-2006. Our contacts are also now saying
that natural gas production will probably not fully return to pre-hurricane levels because the
production at several sites is already in decline—as much as 8 percent below the peak.
Finally, as has been the case for some time, we’ve continued to receive information from
our directors of pricing pressures, of plans to push through price increases, and of a greater
willingness on the part of upstream purchasers to accept those increases. And I think we are likely
seeing some of that in the latest inflation data.

January 31, 2006

48 of 106

On the national front, very briefly, like everyone else, I was surprised and somewhat
disappointed by the considerably weaker than expected initial report on fourth-quarter GDP, but like
the Greenbook, I think I’m satisfied that we can explain most of the shortfall. I do not see it as an
erosion of fundamentals, and in fact, I think we may well see some offsetting gains in the current
quarter. I expect a return to solid growth in the current quarter. My own forecast for output,
inflation, and unemployment for 2006 and 2007 remains positive.
At the same time, there are some especially interesting unknowns and risks at the moment
that we’ll have to watch being played out. As others have already suggested, energy remains a
major wild card with the very delicate balance between worldwide supply and worldwide demand.
With recovery of the energy industry in our Gulf Coast region not yet complete, with the fragile
political situation in many oil-producing regions around the world, and with the ever-present risk of
natural disaster and sabotage, it seems reasonable to expect continued elevated energy prices and
substantial energy-price volatility. It’s not clear to me whether households and businesses have
fully adjusted to these new realities. The residential real estate adjustment, which seems to be
beginning to take place both in the level of activity and in prices, could have important implications,
as Dave Stockton and others have already suggested. Whether consumers will be able and willing
to continue to smooth their expenditures relative to current income seems to be substantially
dependent upon home prices, mortgage interest rates, and the ability to tap home equity. And the
potential inflation pressures we’ve highlighted for some while, and which still do not seem to have
played out fully, should not be too easily and too quickly discounted.
All things considered, I think we have to be reasonably comfortable with the outlook and the
policy path we have been on, but I look forward to discussions of policy and the way we
communicate what we see ahead. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

January 31, 2006

49 of 106

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, in thinking about the status of the U.S. economy and the
appropriate funds rate target at this meeting, I would start by suggesting that, in my judgment at
least, the current funds rate is probably within the neutral range. Therefore, we should be mindful
of not going too far, especially when it would appear that growth is slowing to trend. The most
compelling reason for considering the move now is the continued drift upward in core inflation, but
even in this case, I think we need to be especially aware of the past increases in the funds rate. We
have yet to see their full effects on inflation.
The fourth-quarter growth was surprising; but at this point, as others have said, it does not
yet alter our long-term outlook. Like the staff, however, I revised upward my 2006 forecast
¼ percentage point and now expect that growth will be about 3¾ percent in 2006, about
½ percentage point above trend, and will return to trend in 2007. Turning to the inflation outlook, I
expect core CPI inflation to be about 2½ percent this year, as higher energy prices are passed
through to higher overall and core inflation. However, it is reasonable to expect that the increase
will be temporary, as others have said, with core inflation likely to fall back to 2¼ percent in 2007.
The reasons for this pattern have a familiar ring. Greater-than-trend growth reflects the lagged
effects of past monetary accommodation and generally supportive financial conditions, whereas the
prospective slowing growth reflects the removal of monetary accommodation and, in this instance,
higher energy prices.
Evidence from our District is consistent with an outlook of strong but slowing growth as
well. Manufacturing production and new orders rose solidly. Expectations for future production
remained high, and expectations for future orders actually surged. Hiring plans also rose strongly in
December and January. However, for the District as a whole, hiring announcements were only

January 31, 2006

50 of 106

slightly greater than layoff announcements. Finally, housing showed signs of leveling off, and
consumer spending was solid, though not spectacular, during the holiday season. In fact, a number
of our contacts said their holiday sales were below plan. Just quickly in the farm sector, there are
concerns being voiced for 2006 following a generally good year in 2005, and they were mostly that
drought may be reemerging in the District.
Wage pressures in the District remain mostly subdued, and increases in raw material costs
actually slowed somewhat. However, manufacturers continued to raise output prices in response to
past increases in input costs, and a substantial number said they were raising wages more than
normal for certain types of workers in short supply. Reports of retail prices said that increases were
down somewhat from the last meeting but still higher than they were just last summer.
Let me turn just briefly to the risks. I would submit that inflation risks are on the upside and
output risks have become more on the downside recently, not exactly the kinds of risk that are
friendly from a policy perspective. The outlook for core inflation is 2¼ to 2½ percent. This is
higher than I would prefer. Moreover, the potential for even higher energy prices makes core
inflation more likely to be higher rather than lower over the next several months. But at the same
time, the risks to output are on the downside. First, forward momentum has certainly diminished.
For example, real GDP grew about 2.6 percent during the last half of 2005, decidedly below trend.
In addition, while the fourth-quarter slowdown was probably temporary, it could also be signaling a
more fundamental slowdown. Finally, a possible increase in the term premium poses downside
risks to growth. You know the term premium is far below the historical average. If the decline
reverses faster than expected, both would be significantly weaker as shown by the Greenbook
alternative scenario. As I see things then falling out, the choices are obviously difficult, but I think
that the inflation risk for the time-being is the greater risk, and therefore I would be inclined to move

January 31, 2006

51 of 106

at this meeting. But we should have the odds no greater than 50-50 that more upward changes are
likely in the fed funds rate at the next meeting.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, although I have not served as long with you as some others
around this table, I have served among the longest with you, and I would like you to know it has
been a real privilege.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s break for coffee. Since our time is really quite
restricted, I would request that we come back in seven minutes. [Laughter]
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. David Stockton.
MR. STOCKTON. Mr. Chairman, I quickly consulted with my labor economist experts at
the coffee break about your question about the demographic effects on the workweek, and, indeed,
there is—and it’s incorporated in our forecast—a modest effect of the aging of the workforce on the
workweek, with older workers having shorter workweeks. Obviously, the longer-term trend has
been driven more by the shift in the composition of employment from manufacturing toward more
service-oriented industries, which have shorter workweeks, but there is a perceptible demographic
effect as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What strikes me from my conversations with my
contacts is the growing confidence that they do not see major risks on either side, that there are
reduced standard errors around their projections. Very few had comments or concerns about
inflation outside of energy, which, of course, is on everybody’s mind.
I’d like to make an analytical point that actually comes from my UPS contact. I think I
mentioned at an earlier meeting that UPS is moving its business off the mixed rail—the piggyback.

January 31, 2006

52 of 106

That move is a consequence of the fact that the railroads are unable to speed up delivery times,
which in turn is a consequence of the railroads’ decision that it is not worth the capital investment
that would be necessary for what for railroads is a relatively low-yielding business. UPS is also
working to maximize the return on its own capital. The company is very disciplined about adding
capital and is planning to price low-yielding business out of its network. That is, for the low-yield
products, they’re going to raise prices expecting that the business will go away. My contact at UPS
said that he thought that the strategy would not really be successful and that they will probably be
looking at substantial increases in capital spending in ’07, once they find that they have optimized
their existing plant, that the volume doesn’t go away when they try to raise the prices on it, or that
not enough of it goes away. And I think that this phenomenon might be more general in our
economy. Companies are very disciplined about their capital investment. But as the economy
continues to expand, they’re going to run out of ways to optimize the existing capital plant, and we
will see investment coming in stronger over the next couple of years. That’s an observation that
may have more general application.
I support the Greenbook’s forecast, plus or minus a quarter of a standard deviation.
[Laughter] Not worth worrying about. Instead, what I’ve been trying to do is to make lists—and
these could be much longer—of risks on the high side and the low side. On the high side, I would
point to commodity prices, which are high and have gone up a lot, and growing strength—as I just
commented—in business fixed investment. I mention high money growth, because I don’t think
that the rapid money growth is fully explained, and it certainly has frequently been a precursor of
higher inflation.
Some indicators on the other side—we talked about housing, the possible reversal of the
unusually low saving rate, the behavior of the yield curve, the risk of oil supply disturbances. Most

January 31, 2006

53 of 106

of oil has been demand-driven, but supply disturbances because of the problems in the Middle East
primarily—Africa as well—could certainly produce a significant downward shock on economic
activity and upward shock on prices. No doubt these lists could be amplified, and I think it’s
probably worth spending more time thinking through the risks and how to respond to various events
than it is trying to optimize the forecast and get that last quarter of standard deviation exactly right.
Mr. Chairman, many around the table have commented about their experience serving here.
I will, of course, echo those. I would like to put a little different angle on it. Of the people who
have had a major impact in my life, you are certainly one. I mark on the fingers of one hand the
people who have had extraordinary influence on me. You have influenced me mostly in my
professional life but also in many aspects of leadership that go beyond economics and policy in a
narrower sense. So I thank you for that. I am also looking forward to continuing to learn from you.
I understand that you have some books, at least in your head. And given my interest in making sure
we have clear communication, I have a suggestion for a title for your first book. And it is in line
with some books by your predecessors. So I suggest “The Joy of Central Banking.” [Laughter]
And I suggest that your second book be “More Joy of Central Banking.” [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. “How to Be a Joyous Central Banker, Even Though We
Don’t Have Hearts.” [Laughter] Can we end the speculation on the title? [Laughter] Thanks very
much, Bill. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with one anecdote about housing
activity in the District. I don’t know how representative this is nationwide, obviously, but there are
signs of slowing in both housing construction and, more dramatically, in sales recently. And this
winter in the Twin Cities, several hundred unionized construction workers are not working. Last
year 100 percent were. But they’re all expected to be back at work in the spring, and that suggests

January 31, 2006

54 of 106

to me—and this is more a question than a conclusion—that the ultimate correction in housing may
occur later and be more severe than I was earlier expecting.
As far as the national economy is concerned, like others, I am inclined to discount the fourth
quarter. I find the Greenbook story about the outlook reasonably convincing. I personally think that
we will see pretty good growth in both ’06 and ’07. I tend to rely, as you know, on the underlying
fundamentals and the resilience of the economy, and those things seem to me to be sound and in
place. And so I think the overall outlook is pretty good.
I do think that there was a disconnect in the fourth quarter between the supply or output side
and the demand side. If you look at the numbers for employment and hours, you would have
certainly come up with a stronger forecast. Now, you may plug in a negative productivity number.
That’s one way of reconciling it. Maybe the November and December employment data will get
revised down. I guess that’s another way of reconciling it. Perhaps some of the aggregate demand
components will ultimately be revised up a bit. But there does seem to be a disconnect there,
nothing that I find all that troubling, but something I think worth bearing in mind if we want to think
about the fourth quarter.
I think the key to the outlook and to policy going forward, though, is inflation. And I went
and looked at what has happened to the core PCE over the past eight or nine years. And the range
of increases in core PCE inflation over that period was about 1¼ to 2¼ percent, and I think the
average over the past eight or nine years was something like 1¾ percent. I don’t cite those numbers
just to prove that I can look them up. I cite them because I would characterize that whole period as
a period of low inflation, maybe something resembling price stability. And if I ask myself, “Is
inflation likely to break out on the high side of that range in the relatively near term?” my answer to

January 31, 2006

55 of 106

that is “no.” And I think most bond market participants, at least the way they are pricing things,
would also answer that question with a “no.”
Part of that is, of course, that we have been moving policy, and it seems to me that policy,
measured by the real federal funds rate, is now certainly in the ballpark where it needs to be. I
anticipate that we’ll move again today, as I think we should, in part to validate market expectations.
Is policy perfectly positioned within the ballpark? Well, I don’t know the answer to that, but I do
think it is well positioned within the ballpark, and I think we need to bear that in mind as we go
forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, in the interest of crispness, I’ve removed
a substantial tribute from my remarks. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am most appreciative. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I’d like the record to show that I think you’re pretty
terrific, too. [Laughter] And thinking in terms of probabilities, I think the risk that we decide in the
future that you’re even better than we think is higher than the alternative. [Laughter]
With that, the economy looks pretty good to us, perhaps a bit better than it did at the last
meeting. With the near-term monetary policy path that’s now priced into the markets, we think the
economy is likely to grow slightly above trend in ’06 and close to trend in ’07. We expect
underlying inflation to follow a path close to current levels before slowing to a rate closer to
1.5 percent for the core PCE sometime out there. Relative to the Greenbook, we’re a little softer on
growth in ’06 and a little stronger in ’07, but our inflation outlook is similar.
The uncertainty around this forecast still seems considerable, perhaps more than the market
has priced in. On the positive side, consumer and business confidence still seems pretty high, with

January 31, 2006

56 of 106

employment growth solid and compensation growth likely to pick up. We think that household
income growth is likely to be pretty strong. Investment may be strengthening, and it could surprise
us with more strength. The tone of the anecdotal to us seems more positive, less cautious than it has
been. And just to cite our Empire survey, the six-month-ahead numbers show a fair amount of
optimism. Overall, financial conditions, of course, still seem quite supportive of continued
expansion. Global growth has strengthened. And like the staff, the market seems to have looked
through the negative surprises in the fourth-quarter numbers and priced in a bit more, rather than
less, confidence about the strength of demand growth going forward.
On the darker side, we have the familiar concerns about potential adverse shocks, energy
supply disruptions, terrorism, et cetera. But even in the absence of these events, we face a fair
amount of uncertainty about key elements of the forecast. The prevailing expectation of a gradual
moderation in housing prices and a relatively small increase in the saving rate could prove too
optimistic. Private investment growth could slow further, productivity growth could disappoint, risk
premiums could rise sharply. And, of course, that could happen even in the absence of a major
deterioration in the growth or inflation outlook. But this, on balance, still leaves us with what looks
like a relatively balanced set of risks around what is still a quite favorable growth forecast.
The inflation outlook still merits some concern—I think modest concern—about upside risk.
Underlying inflation is still somewhat higher than we would be comfortable with over time. The
core indexes are running above levels said to define our preference over time. Other measures of
underlying inflation are running above the core rates. The behavior of inflation expectations at
longer horizons has been reassuringly stable in the face of the elevated headline numbers, but the
levels are still at the higher end of comfort. With the economy near potential, unit labor cost growth
should accelerate. And, of course, although profit margins still show ample room to absorb more

January 31, 2006

57 of 106

unit cost increases, their behavior suggests continued pricing power. The strength of global
demand, the continued rise in commodity prices, other input costs, and the latest increase in energy
prices all suggest a possibility of further upward pressure.
With this outlook and this set of risks, we believe some further tightening of monetary
policy is necessary with another small move today and a signal that some further tightening is
probable. We’re comfortable with how the market’s expectations have evolved over the past few
weeks and with the present forecast of perhaps one—maybe slightly more than one—move beyond
today. It’s hard, though, to understand why the market attaches so little uncertainty to monetary
policy in the second half of the year. And this underscores the fact that one of our communication
challenges ahead is to make sure we convey enough uncertainty about our view of the outlook and
its implications for monetary policy. In this regard, I want to compliment the recent innovations to
the Bluebook presentations and hope that they persist.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The surprise of the fourth-quarter GDP number
and the slightly elevated inflationary pressure have caused us to take, I think, a closer look at the
underlying strength of the economy. And to an extent it is reassuring—certainly, the strength in
industrial production and real personal consumption. However, the risks that we have seen before
remain and may, in fact, be slightly elevated. The potential risk of increased oil costs and the passthrough effect into underlying core inflation is at least slightly heightened, and with the flattening of
housing values, the potential effect on consumption remains slightly strong.
It is often easy for us at these meetings to say we’ll have a clearer understanding at the next
meeting of where we are; but although the next meeting answers this meeting’s questions, it also
raises new questions. However, in this instance, we may have more reason than not to make that

January 31, 2006

58 of 106

point. The January jobs number will be out on Friday. If the initial claims number has any
predictive power, we may see a strong report. I couldn’t help but notice the juxtaposition of the
initial claims chart next to the GDP number as an indication that it’s one that will be looked at
carefully. Also, given the magnitude of the change in the prior-period GDP, the revised GDP
number for the fourth quarter may be much different from the preliminary number. Also, between
now and the next meeting, our new Chairman will be making a semiannual presentation to the
Congress on the state of the economy, with an opportunity to be more definitive than we can
perhaps be at this meeting.
In conclusion, I suggest that we make the obvious move and raise our target ¼ point but not
be any more definitive or predictive than necessary in the accompanying statement. I support
President Yellen’s suggestion for flexibility in our description today. And I share with everybody
else the honor of having worked with you for these four years that I’ve been here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much, Governor. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Greenbook baseline presents a
relatively positive scenario. But as the 90 percent confidence interval given in the Greenbook
clearly indicates, there is considerable uncertainty around this baseline. In a theoretical world of
certainty equivalence, that range of uncertainty would not matter. But as you’ve taught us many
times, in the world of practical policymaking, how that uncertainty is resolved will matter
importantly for policy judgments.
As a mere cadet, if you will, sitting next to the monetary policy Yoda, [laughter] I will
attempt to look at some of these uncertainties and to understand how they may unfold in their
implications for policy. Yoda, of course, is a complimentary word in my household. [Laughter]
One particularly salient aspect of uncertainty relates to the way that inflation expectations are

January 31, 2006

59 of 106

influenced by energy prices. As we’ve seen recently, despite spiking oil prices in December, nearterm inflation expectations remained stable or edged even somewhat lower, reversing the run-up
that we saw in the fall. As the presentation this morning showed, preliminary January Michigan
survey results for median inflation expectations for the coming year ticked down, and median fiveand ten-year inflation expectations also moved lower. Rate spreads from TIPS also indicated
remarkably contained inflation expectations despite oil price shocks.
This stability is both remarkable and quite important, because, in my view at least, the
optimal course of monetary policy at this juncture depends critically on the fragility or stability of
inflation expectations in the presence of the oil price shock. I judge that, for now at least, this
important element of uncertainty supports a continued execution of the strategy we are following to
date, with no need to fear that we’re falling behind the curve, even as energy prices have spiked
again. Of course, with the slight rise in the near-term inflation outlook and, in fact, slight
deterioration in near-term inflation itself, prudence will require close monitoring of these variables
as we go forward. But thus far, I judge that the announced strategy is consistent with maintaining
our credibility.
Second, as we discussed earlier, there is great uncertainty about why long-term rates are low
and what the shape and level of the yield curve may imply for us. As we saw in yesterday’s Board
briefing, forward nominal rates fairly far out in time have moved down over the past year, both here
and abroad, and are low today by historical standards. As we know, long-term rates are low today
partly because inflation expectations are low. If this were the whole story, short-term rates would
not need to depart from the historical terms or norms in real terms. But while this is part of the
story, it isn’t the whole story. As we’ve already discussed, if the shape of the yield curve and low

January 31, 2006

60 of 106

rates both indicated that market participants expected some further economic weakness, then the
proper response would be to run a looser-than-average monetary policy.
But I agree, and I think most of us agree, with the staff assessment that the low real longterm interest rate and a flat yield curve are not precursors to a global softening and an expected drop
in rates but rather are due to an unusually low term premium. In my judgment, part of the reason
for that low term premium is an increased assessment on the part of global investors that the future
looks like an environment involving less risk than usual. This was borne out I think in Dino’s pie
charts earlier on and also in the global equity markets. I’d also say, based on various conversations
I’ve had with central bankers in January on the various committees that I attend and others I attend
with the Chairman, there is a general sense in the world of policy that this low-risk assessment is
approximately right. However, I continue to think that these lower rates reflect some forces that are
holding back investment demand globally. And, for the United States, I think they also reflect a
drag from the external sector. However, with corporate balance sheets in good shape and global
growth firming, I don’t expect a sudden reassessment of risk and a rise in the term premium to result
from these sources.
I do have some concern that we may see a snapback in term premiums from another source
that we’ve touched on a bit already, and that’s the third and final uncertainty I wish to look at, which
is the housing sector. Here I’d say that President Santomero’s comments in some sense preceded
and introduced mine. I don’t doubt that the housing market is slowing somewhat, but I do wonder
about the impact of a slowing of house prices and wealth extraction on household saving and
consumption. Here I pick up where Dave left off, which is that the models take a historical norm.
Let’s say we’re at about the 3 percent that Dave indicated. I think there’s possibly a greater risk, for
reasons that Dave has already indicated, that we may find a much stronger impact on the global

January 31, 2006

61 of 106

economy, certainly on the U.S. economy, based on a slowing of housing prices. And here, though I
recognize their economies are different, I am still somewhat troubled by the experience in the
United Kingdom, Australia, and the Netherlands, all of which had an unexpectedly large impact,
from a GDP standpoint, from a relatively slow flattening of house prices. I recognize that these
other economies are different from ours, but I’d also say that we’ve seen even in our own economy
some nonlinearities that have emerged—for example, as asset prices moved down relatively
rapidly—that might have surprised us in the past.
So what’s the implication of all of these uncertainties? I’d like to put three things on the
table for this meeting. First, I continue to believe, as I think the Greenbook or the Bluebook does,
that the equilibrium real rate has, in fact, moved down somewhat on average, to lower than it was,
let’s say, over the past ten years, with the exception of the recessionary periods of 2001 and 2002.
Second, I firmly believe, as do many of you, that we are well within the range of neutrality at this
stage. And, third, since I would say there’s a great deal of uncertainty here, I want to make sure that
what we say, both in word and in deed, reflects a great deal of flexibility. I heard Vice Chairman
Geithner suggest that we want to put out some words that say it’s probable that we’ll move at the
next meeting. I suggest that we be a little more nuanced and put out some words that suggest it’s at
least possible that we move at the next meeting.
Having said all of that, obviously, I, along with everyone else, think that what happens
going forward will be extraordinarily data-dependent. All the more reason for us to keep, if you
will, our powder dry and our options open. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The projections I submitted for this meeting
reflected expectations of an economy that probably is operating in level terms somewhere in the

January 31, 2006

62 of 106

neighborhood of its long-run, sustainable potential and will continue to do so over the next two
years with growth broadly in line with the growth of potential and inflation basically stable. My
forecasts for 2006 are very close to those I submitted last January and June. That’s partly a product
of innate stubbornness. [Laughter] But it also reflects the fact that 2005 came in largely as
expected—after allowance for hurricanes and an energy shock last year that elevated core inflation
and damped growth somewhat compared with our forecasts last January. This is encouraging in
that it suggests that we are not looking at major unexplained and unanticipated forces acting on the
economy.
At this point, our focus appropriately is on keeping inflation contained. I see several reasons
for optimism in this regard. One is the performance of core consumer prices and price measures,
which continue to suggest that the pass-through of higher energy prices will be limited. Core
inflation was roughly stable last year. It picked up a bit in the fourth quarter, but that was from
unusually low readings in the third quarter. Declining consumer inflation expectations in the most
recent Michigan survey, along with the failure of market-based inflation compensation readings to
respond significantly to the substantial run-up in oil prices and higher core readings over the
intermeeting period, just reinforce my assessment that any pass-through should be small and limited
in duration.
As we noted at the last meeting, perhaps the greater threat to sustained good inflation
performance comes from possible increases in pressures on resources. The critical question is
whether growth in output close to trend is a reasonable expectation with only modest further policy
firming, given the low level of long-term rates, reduced drag from energy prices, and a boost from
rebuilding. I thought it was a reasonable expectation, for a number of reasons. First, after
smoothing through the fluctuations caused by auto incentives and hurricanes, private domestic final

January 31, 2006

63 of 106

demand already showed signs of moderation last year. Growth in private domestic final sales
slowed from 4¼ percent in the first half of the year to 3 percent in the second half of the year, with
every element—consumption, business fixed investment, residential housing investment—
moderating. The staff estimates that about 0.3 of this was due to hurricane effects, but that still
leaves underlying private demand slowing to an annual rate of about 3¼ or 3½ percent. This
moderation did not reflect the full effects of our policy tightening, especially on the housing market.
Even well-anticipated increases in the short-term rates seem to be having a significant effect on
housing markets, which have become more dependent on adjustable rate mortgages to maintain
affordability. We are just beginning to see the anticipated slowdown in this sector.
With growth in consumption and sales constrained by a leveling-out of housing wealth,
businesses are unlikely to see the need to step up the pace at which they are adding to their capital
stock. As a consequence, investment growth could slow, at least slightly, over the next few years,
reflecting reduced impetus from the accelerator. Finally, although foreign economies are
strengthening some, foreign investment and consumption remain subdued relative to income. And
given our continuing outsized appetite for imports, net exports are unlikely to be putting added
impetus to demands on domestic production.
I think there are several upside and downside risks around this picture of growth near
potential, as a number of you pointed out. I agree that the housing market is the most likely source
of a shortfall in demand. I don’t think we can have much confidence about how the dynamics of
this market will play out now that it has begun to soften. My suspicion is that, as little bubbles in
the froth are popped, the risks are tilted more toward quite a sharp cooling off than toward a very
gradual ebbing of price increases and building activity. On the other side, it seems to me global
demand would be a major upside risk to growth and to price stability. The extraordinarily rapid rise

January 31, 2006

64 of 106

in commodity prices and upward movement in global equity prices may indicate a very fundamental
turnaround in foreign demand and attitudes beyond just a stepwise strengthening of growth. For
now, these remain risks that we’ll need to monitor.
In making my forecast, I assumed we would tighten at this meeting, and likely at the next as
well, to gain greater assurance that inflation will remain contained over time, consistent with my
forecast of a 1¾ percent increase in core prices in 2007. However, I do see action in March as
dependent on the readings we get in coming months. There is, as usual, considerable uncertainty
about the precise nature and magnitude of the risk to the outlook, but we’re dealing with an
economic picture that overall is remarkably good and expected to remain that way for the
foreseeable future.
Reflecting on this situation, among many, many aspects of the past, I end my remarks as I
began them: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When I was preparing for this meeting early last
week, I was feeling very comfortable with the forecast of good growth in 2006, in the mid-3 percent
range near potential, and a modest uptick in core inflation above 2 percent. As many of you have
already remarked, the GDP numbers on Friday made me slightly more pessimistic, both on growth
and on inflation. The surprise drop in government spending, I have full confidence will turn around.
Final sales fell, however, so that all the growth that occurred in the fourth quarter came from
inventory growth. Given that inventory–sales ratios continue to run at historically low levels,
though, inventories should continue to be a source of growth going forward. As many of you also
have noted, other indicators show much stronger performance. Initial unemployment claims, goods
orders, capacity utilization, and strong corporate balance sheets—all of them effectively say that we

January 31, 2006

65 of 106

have a strong foundation underneath this growth. The inflation numbers ticking up to 2.2 percent
gave me a bit of pause. We came through two good quarters, the second and third quarters, with
very low inflation; but again, the uptick shows how much variability we see around the inflation
numbers quarter to quarter and warrants attention.
The one area—and I want to second Dave Stockton’s remark—of main concern is the
housing market. Let me talk about it a little differently from some previous comments today.
When we look at the aggregate levels of debt that households have and relative prices, one of the
things as an old lender I worry about is the ability to service the debt and the discretionary spending
that households have. While 80 percent of mortgages are fixed rate, 20 percent are variable.
Starting in 2002, we saw a jump in ARMs, taking advantage of the very steep yield curve at the
time. We now are in a period when not only the fancy option ARMs, the exotic products of the past
eighteen months, but also the 3/1 ARMs and the five-year ARMS that became very popular in 2002
and 2003 are repricing.
If interest rates just hold where they are right now, we estimate that the monthly debt service
cost is going to go up by at least 50 percent on that 20 percent of mortgage portfolios. If you look at
the Greenbook, you’ll notice that the financial obligation ratio rose quite substantially in the past six
months. It is now back to the peaks of 2001 and 2002, and we have a lot of mortgages still to
reprice. We also know that some of these exotic mortgages don’t amortize, but they will kick in and
start amortization and that will also pull cash out of discretionary spending.
In an overall look at consumers, with housing and the cost of heating this winter rising,
you’re beginning to see a little caution in the borrowing numbers. The drop in home equity lines of
credit that I mentioned a meeting or two ago now has been sustained through the whole quarter. So
we have actually seen that home equity lines outstanding that have been drawn on have dropped.

January 31, 2006

66 of 106

Consumer credit as a whole dropped, excluding mortgage credit, and mortgage growth as a whole
slowed to just over 10 percent. So households are signaling that they’re pulling back on new
borrowing, not just in housing but in general. When you look at the ability of consumers to spend
discretionarily out of their monthly take-home pay, these are signals we need to look at. And the
rising fixed payments that they have is something, in looking at the tail of the distribution on
housing market risk, that I think is important for that segment of the population going forward.
The other sad thing is that this is our last meeting with the Chairman, and I just personally
also want to echo some of the comments of my colleagues around the table to thank you for your
leadership. I’ve been very impressed with the kind of atmosphere that I found when I joined during
your tenure as leader of this institution. The integrity with which everything is done, your emphasis
on the quality of ideas, and your continuing to search for new ways to look at information—because
the economy is dynamic—remind us that we have to watch for new things always evolving. The
collegiality with which you have led this organization has made it enjoyable for all of us to be here.
And finally, as an old risk manager, I was glad to feel right at home with your approach to monetary
policy. [Laughter] So thank you for your leadership. It has been a pleasure to have served with
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you so much. Vincent.
MR. REINHART.3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the material that
Carol Low handed out during the coffee break. Judging by the information derived
from money market futures plotted in the top panels of your first exhibit, this seems
likely to be another of those meetings in which the important part of the discussion is
about words, not the upcoming deed. As can be seen from the bars in the top left
panel, market participants put near a 100 percent probability on a ¼ point firming
today and high odds on a like-sized move at the March meeting. Both those
probabilities were marked up over the past seven weeks, partly on apparent increased
pressures on costs, what with oil and other commodity prices surging and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar weakening, and—unfortunately—on market
commentary that was taken as having an inside track on your policy choices. The
3

The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).

January 31, 2006

67 of 106

expected federal funds rate, plotted in black in the top right side, now moves
modestly above 4½ percent this spring before turning down late this year.
Market participants apparently have bought into the notion that, with inflation
impetus a bit more intense, the Committee will want the real federal funds rate, the
solid black line in the middle panel, more assuredly in a range that is not associated
with policy accommodation. What market participants do not seem to have bought
into is the idea that you’ll act like the hypothetical policymakers described in the
Bluebook. The paths for the nominal and real federal funds rates, derived from an
optimal control exercise using the version of the FRB/US model endowing
policymakers and financial market participants with perfect foresight, are shown in
the bottom panels. The solid and dotted lines are the policy prescriptions under
inflation goals of 1½ percent and 2 percent, respectively. With actual inflation and
the FRB/US measure of long-run expected inflation now running around 2 percent,
policymakers can hold the nominal funds rate steady and allow the real funds rate to
drift lower to achieve 2 percent core PCE inflation in the long run. To induce enough
resource slack to work toward a 1½ percent inflation goal, however, policymakers
would have to raise the nominal funds rate to about 5 percent.
Market participants see you steering between those two paths for a while—
probably for some combination of three reasons. The first two explain why—even if
your goal for inflation is 1½ percent—you might be less aggressive than in the
corresponding simulation. For one, market participants may see less near-term
pressures on inflation than in the Greenbook and its extension. For another, they may
believe you’d tolerate inflation toward the high end of that range, in part because of
the perception that you would be unwilling to create economic slack deliberately to
achieve a different outcome. Instead, they may think you are willing to wait for some
opportunity in the future, when a negative shock pulls inflation down. And the third
is a reason that—even if you were aiming for inflation of 2 percent—you might be
tighter than the corresponding simulation. In particular, market participants may
believe that your policy choice will be shaped by considerations about risks that
deterministic simulations cannot capture. For example, you might be satisfied with
inflation around current levels, if it were ensured, but be asymmetrically concerned
with regard to its being higher rather than lower. Thus, you might tighten more than
the 2 percent goal simulation as insurance that inflation does not move higher.
If, like market participants, you see yourselves operating in the range between the
two paths called for by the optimal control exercises, you most likely would be
willing to tighten ¼ point today and place high odds of doing so again in March. The
two chief wording issues that follow from that decision are listed at the top of
exhibit 2. First, how high are the odds you place on tightening at the March meeting?
In writing the Bluebook, we thought you’d want to preserve the current configuration
of financial market prices, which appears to be based on a 70–30 split on tightening
versus no action in six weeks. Thus, in the portion of the statement language of
alternative B listed in the bottom left, we offered the sentence, “The Committee
judges that some further policy firming may well be needed to keep the risks to the

January 31, 2006

68 of 106

attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in
balance.” We thought that this wording gives a strong presumption that policy will
tighten once more but not the certainty that makes many of you uncomfortable. From
what I’ve heard today, I would suggest tweaking that verb phrase to dial down the
market’s perception of future action by removing the word “well.”
The second question is, How strongly do you want to underscore that coming
decisions depend on incoming economic data? We thought that the last sentence of
the December statement, also repeated in the bottom left panel, provided sufficient
assurance on that score. Indeed, this layout seemed to have the attraction of
expressing a back-up strategy in which you would deviate from the anticipated policy
path if events dictate. We also thought that you’d want to make as few changes to the
language as possible today. An alternative is to reverse the order of the last two
sentences, as is done at the bottom right. “The Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to foster the attainment of both sustainable economic
growth and price stability. In these circumstances, the Committee judges that some
further policy firming may well be needed to keep the risks to those objectives
roughly in balance.” Note that the first sentence now describes the baseline
assumption, not a contingency plan. This wording is similar, but not identical, to
language circulated by President Poole. It shares his reordering of the sentences but
does not repeat the “measured policy firming” phrase on the logic that the Committee
may want to free up expectations about action in March. During the policy
discussion, it would be helpful if you would focus some of your remarks on the two
questions I have raised.
With the help of exhibit 3, I now turn to my standard procedure in closing to
hector the Committee on some point of governance. The issue, as I explained in my
memo of January 25, is that the statement released this afternoon will likely be only
partly covered by the Committee’s vote. The responses to the survey I sent around
earlier indicated significant support for voting on the entire statement but that a
minority was decidedly opposed. Those opposed are primarily concerned that
requiring members to agree on all the words in the statement may make it more
difficult to reach a consensus. In addition, the public may be confused if a member
dissents, not because of disapproval of the policy action but because of distaste for
the words characterizing the action. Moreover, FOMC participants arguably have
more leeway now to offer views to the public differing from those in the statement
than would be the case if the entire document had the Committee’s seal of approval.
Those favoring a formal vote on the entire statement hold that all its aspects,
including the description of the economy, are important in shaping market
expectations about the future path of policy. In that view, it may be a good thing that
the formal vote constrains how members subsequently describe the rationale for
policy action to the public, as it would send a more consistent message about the
prospects for policy.

January 31, 2006

69 of 106

These arguments suggest that FOMC participants may want to consider three
alternatives listed in the exhibit: (1) Vote on the entire statement and the directive.
(2) Vote on the directive and assessment of risks, as now. But to clarify ownership of
the remaining portions of the statement, the Committee could also vote to authorize
the Chairman to provide a rationale for that action. (3) Retain the status quo, perhaps
with the issue to be raised again at a later date under the next Chairman.
The two bottom panels present the formal vote for alternative B should you
prefer, respectively, option 1 or option 2. (The language for option 3, as always, is in
the Bluebook.) Students of this institution probably believe that the statement is
partly owned by the Committee and partly by the Chairman. For the rest, what is
issued at 2:15 p.m. on the day of decision is a Committee document. Thus, some
people would view option 1 as delimiting the Chairman’s authority, while others
would view option 2 as rolling back the Committee’s authority. It would seem best
that such suspicions not be harbored about the new Chairman by resolving this
governance issue today if option 2 appeals to you—that is, voting only on the interest
rate, not the rationale, portion of the statement and granting the Chairman an explicit
authority to craft the rest. If, instead, you prefer to vote on the entire statement, then I
would suggest putting off option 1 to another day—so as not to risk creating a
misimpression about your intent.
One such opportunity might be the March meeting. Ben Bernanke has asked me
to relay that he prefers that the next meeting run for two days—Monday and Tuesday,
March 27 and 28—so that you can discuss the best way to organize future Committee
discussions. The Secretariat will send around formal notice about the logistics of this
meeting as soon as possible, subject to a notation vote by this Committee naming a
new Chairman. Some supporting documents for the two-day meeting will then
circulate during the intermeeting period.
Your last exhibit repeats table 1. I should note that we changed the “smoothing”
language that few of you favored. Instead, the rationale portion opens, “Although
recent economic data have been uneven.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Vincent?
MR. LACKER. How do your inflation expectations evolve in your two simulations, and in
particular, how are they affected by policy? Is it just through the effect of resource slack on actual
inflation?
MR. REINHART. In these simulations, long-run inflation expectations evolve very
gradually based on the path of actual inflation. So what happens is in the 1½ percent simulation you

January 31, 2006

70 of 106

start off with inflation expectations of 2 percent, and you have to experience inflation below that to
work it down.
MR. LACKER. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else? Do we have copies of the statement? Could
you circulate them, please? I will be rather brief for a number of reasons, not the least of which is I
mostly agree with what has been said around this table and I just don’t want to duplicate it. I do
think that this is an extraordinary economy. If you look at the world data, the balances out there in
Europe and Asia and Japan—remember Japan is the second largest economy in the world, and we
used to forget that because it never moved and hence did not contribute to either expansion or
contraction. But it’s clearly now moved beyond its very serious difficulties and is likely to be a
positive force, as indeed much of Asia and now, more recently, Europe is beginning to be. So the
outlook out there is benevolent, but benevolence is not something that goes on forever.
So far I think it’s fairly clear that there’s consensus around the table that we’ll move 25 basis
points today. And I think that there is an awareness that we’re probably not all that far from where
we want to be, considering that our major focus was the removal of accommodation, which we had
purposefully put in place to bring the funds rate down to 1 percent over a protracted period. I think
that, at this particular point, whatever the Federal Reserve does henceforth, it is going to become
increasingly dependent on the data because we’re not in the position in which we had been for quite
a period of time of essentially saying what it is we plan to do and then proceeding to do it. We have
run the string. We have gotten to where we wanted to be, and now the data are going to determine
what largely is going to happen.
I don’t think there’s much debate on this particular statement relevant to what the March
actual action is going to be. I suspect that whatever the Committee does in March will depend very

January 31, 2006

71 of 106

marginally on what we say today and very significantly on the whole series of events that have to
work their way through over the next six weeks. And since we’re not very far from where we
would like to be, there’s no real problem here.
Therefore, I would venture that we move 25 basis points and that we adopt the language, the
critical part being “further policy firming may be needed.” This language in my judgment is
essentially consistent with the outlook as we can best evaluate it, and I would move, in the context
of what Vincent has been saying, both the statement and the action and would request that our
Secretary read the appropriate language.
MR. FERGUSON. Do you want to go around first?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I’m sorry. I’m trying to cut the discussion short. [Laughter]
MR. POOLE. Do you have someplace to go? [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but I’m looking at the clock.
MS. MINEHAN. The clock, I mean, it has stopped. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Let the record reflect that the Committee has thwarted
the attempt by the Chairman to change the process in a way that— [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually I thought it was elegantly done. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, I, too, think that we should move by
25 today, and I’m comfortable with the language as it’s modified here. I do think that it’s important
to note that the market judges the odds of March as probable. The Greenbook assumption is more
consistent with that and, as Janet said, some of the Bluebook filters we can use to look at things are
slightly more in that direction. But having said that, I think it’s fine to leave the statement with
“may,” and I don’t really know whether the market’s reaction to that statement would take out some
of the pricing now built in or leave it where it is. It’s hard to know.

January 31, 2006

72 of 106

I want to say one thing in response to Vince’s second question, although I’m not sure that
we need to spend much time on it. I think we should defer this decision until March. My own view
is that the actions the Committee takes are really not principally the changes in the fed funds rate we
announce or don’t announce at the meeting. They have a lot to do with how we characterize our
view of the path of output and inflation relative to our objectives, the risks around that, and what we
signal, if anything, about the monetary policy implications of that judgment. Having said that, I
think it is hard not to argue that the Committee needs to express a view when it votes on that basic
set of signals. I think it’s worth deferring that judgment, though, simply because we should talk
through a little more what it really means for our process and how we’re going to manage the
preparation and the discussion in a world where we’re more explicitly deciding what we’re going to
vote on. So my compliments to Vince for framing it the way he did, and I suggest we defer the
vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree on the second point that we should
postpone consideration of what we vote on for the reasons that the Vice Chairman just noted. I
support the increase in the federal funds rate today. I’m a little concerned, like the Vice Chairman,
that this “may” language could cause a bit of a rally in financial markets, but I think it reflects the
general tone around the table and is certainly close to my thinking. I think we’re more likely to
have to firm than not at the next meeting—the odds are 50–50 or greater—and this puts the market
on notice that that’s approximately what our thinking is. So I agree with that one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I support the recommendation in terms of the 25 basis points and also
the wording. I actually like “may” rather than “may well.” I think the data will in all likelihood be

January 31, 2006

73 of 106

a little stronger, which will buy us that “may” to “may well” as time evolves, but not necessarily. I
like the ordering as is presented here. So this fits very well into my view of where we should be.
On the last point, I’d like to compliment Vince for predicting that he will yet again be back talking
about it. [Laughter] I think that’s the right path. I think bringing it to everybody’s attention is a
good thing. But your third solution, which is somewhere in between, is actually the right answer.
How one fosters a consensus around that is tricky, and I’m glad I don’t have to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I support the increase of 25 basis points at this meeting. I would like to add a
third question to the two that Vince gave us at the top of exhibit 2. What language creates the best
basis for smooth transition of future language? Every time we make a change, it gets parsed,
examined, cut, read between the lines, and so forth. So part of my motivation in suggesting the
reversal of those two sentences was to make what I thought might be an easier transition in the
future. Clearly, it’s a very fine point, but that’s what we end up dealing with in order not to provide
any signals that we didn’t really intend.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Well, I support a 25 basis point move. I think President Poole has made a
good point. I wrote a note in support of it, but I can accept the language that’s here. Then, finally, I
am in full accord with the President of the Reserve Bank of New York’s articulation of the issue of
procedure, which I think we should defer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your recommendation of 25 basis
points. I rather like moving the operative forward-looking language to “may” as opposed to “may
well” because I think it frees the markets to look much more at the data, as they would do naturally

January 31, 2006

74 of 106

anyway. I do think it’s at least 50–50, as Governor Kohn said, maybe a little bit more, but I think
“may” covers us well enough for March.
On the procedural point, I obviously agree with the consensus in the room that we should
postpone this until the March meeting. I must express some uncertainty about how we vote on an
entire statement and directive as a group of nineteen. So I would have a tendency toward the status
quo, but that just may be because I’m inappropriately conservative and not appropriately
imaginative. So let me stop at that and move on to the next person.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I agree with your proposal. I’m very pleased with
taking the word “well” out just because I think the statement should be giving the market 50–50
odds rather than something greater than that as we look forward. And we are data dependent. So I
really prefer that. And I agree with postponing the discussion on procedure for the next meeting.
There’s much to be done, and I think in the transition we need to wait until then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find myself in agreement with, I guess,
everybody who has already spoken. The ¼ point increase seems appropriate to me. I’m
comfortable with the language as proposed, and I think we should defer the discussion of ownership
of the statement until March.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, am comfortable with your proposal to
move 25 basis points today. I am also comfortable with this language. I actually could have gone
with an even shorter formulation that was on page 22 of the Bluebook, which basically combined
rows four and five and didn’t make reference to the need to move further. But all things being

January 31, 2006

75 of 106

equal, taking “well” out probably goes a bit in that direction. So I’m comfortable with the way it is.
Fifty-fifty? I don’t know. I am not sure that it is a 50–50 chance, but maybe it is. So I am okay
with that.
On the ownership of the statement, what President Santomero said resonated with me. I
think there is a halfway path here, and the issue needs a little more conversation. I don’t think it’s
something we should decide now. So we should stay with the status quo.
I’d also like to raise some concern if Monday–Tuesday is going to become commonplace.
Monday is a hard day, particularly if you’re not going to give us the Greenbooks and the Bluebooks
until late the week before. I think the timing puts a lot of pressure on everybody that we could
alleviate by going with Tuesday–Wednesday.
MR. REINHART. The reason for Monday–Tuesday was that you probably already had
travel plans that got you into D.C. on Monday, whereas having to extend to Wednesday might pose
more of a hardship. But it was viewed as just for this meeting.
MS. MINEHAN. Okay. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, support your recommendation on the
25 basis point increase in our fed funds rate target. I, too, like the language as you proposed it.
Removing the word “well” in the statement gives us, I think, more of the flexibility that I said I
desired. And I, too, would like to defer the decision on what we vote on. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I’m comfortable with the
language. Some of the alternative language that has been suggested is attractive. I think we should
make as few changes today as we can, and this recommendation does that. I also support the Vice

January 31, 2006

76 of 106

Chairman’s recommendation to wait until another day to have a full discussion of the vote on the
statement. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also support fully your recommendation
with respect to the 25 basis point move and with respect to the language, and I agree with the Vice
Chairman’s comments that the discussion about what we should vote on is very important. It has all
become an aspect of policy, but there are a lot of details to discuss, and we should defer a decision
on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support both the 25 basis point increase and the
wording of “may,” and again, I think it would be good to defer the discussion about the implications
of the alternatives that Vince has laid out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, during your tenure the FOMC has been successful in
anchoring long-term inflation expectations that are appropriately at low levels, and I think we want
to make sure we maintain that legacy going forward. I continue to be concerned about the
possibility that inflation will move up and run above 2 percent for an extended period of time. So
I’m not certain how long we could experience core inflation of more than 2 percent without having
inflation expectations rise.
But I can agree with your recommendation on the statement. I think it does enable us to be
flexible going forward as to what we’re going to do and does allow for the possibility that we might
have to move higher than the Greenbook assumptions. And I agree on postponing the decision on
the broader question of what we vote on at the meetings. Finally, in the spirit of less is more, I just

January 31, 2006

77 of 106

want to thank you for your service to the Fed and thank you for your service to the nation and say it
has been a great privilege to work with you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support both the ¼ point increase and the
statement. I remind my colleagues that in the last two meetings we will have now removed the
terms “accommodative” and “measured,” and in combination, that’s a very significant move
forward. We have left ourselves at the point where I think we want to be, with the flexibility
moving forward to respond to the data as they come in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I support a ¼ point move today, Mr. Chairman, and I support the language
in this statement. I’d be ready to support today moving to voting for the whole statement consistent
with the global march of democracy, but it’s hard to be against further deliberation, especially
within the Federal Reserve System. So I’ll defer to my colleagues and agree to that course of
action. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I gather correctly there’s been no real interest in reversing the
paragraphs. So I think that we can go forward and, as I said before, you may read—[Laughter]
MS. DANKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In that the decision has been to go ahead with
the status quo in the same way as in the past, I will read the wording out of page 31 of the
Bluebook—the directive wording first and the risk assessment second, dropping the word “well.”
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
increasing the federal funds rate to an average of around 4½ percent.” And “The Committee judges

January 31, 2006

78 of 106

that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both
sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. In any event, the Committee
will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.”
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bies
Governor Ferguson
President Guynn
Governor Kohn
President Lacker
Governor Olson
President Pianalto
President Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I request the Federal Reserve Board to engage in addressing
the requests for changes in the discount rate.
[Recess]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Federal Reserve Board voted unanimously to accept the
discount rate requests of eleven Banks. As to the date of the next meeting, Vincent will send notice.
MR. REINHART. As soon as we have a new Chairman, which is subject to action by the
Senate, signature of the President, and a notation vote by this Committee, I will send a memo
around providing the time of the next meeting. As the agenda is not yet set, I am not quite sure
what time it will start.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING

