March 18, 2003

1 of 101

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
March 18, 2003

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 18, 2003, at
9:00 a.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Olson
Mr. Parry
Mr. Hoenig, Mses. Minehan and Pianalto, and Mr. Poole, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. McTeer, Santomero, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Mr. Connors, Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Howard, Hunter, Lindsey,
Struckmeyer, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Madigan, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Slifman and Oliner, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

March 18, 2003

2 of 101

Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Clouse, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Messrs. Fuhrer and Hakkio, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rasche, Rosenblum, and Sniderman,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
St. Louis, Dallas, and Cleveland respectively
Mr. Rudebusch, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

March 18, 2003

3 of 101

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
March 18, 2003
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to approve the minutes of our
January 28-29, 2003, meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
MR. PARRY. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Dino Kos.
MR. KOS. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the charts that were
distributed a short time ago. Since your last meeting, markets have been
characterized by a high degree of risk aversion—driven, first, by uncertainty about
the timing and extent of war in Iraq; second, by uncertainty about the underlying
condition of the U.S. and other global economies as growth forecasts were being
trimmed; and third, by data on the real economy that tended to disappoint market
expectations. During most of the intermeeting period, investors favored government
bonds; their yields declined to new lows in many cases, while equities fell sharply
and the dollar depreciated. In the last three or four trading sessions, however, many
of those trends were partially or fully reversed, and the price of oil has declined.
Some attribute these recent price moves to investors’ optimism about the outcome of
the war that now seems imminent. Others see the recent price moves as another
variation of uncertainty, only this time the response was to revert to a neutral posture
vis-à-vis their benchmarks.
The first page in the materials distributed shows U.S. and euro-area three-month
deposit rates. For most of the intermeeting period three-month cash rates were
relatively stable in the United States, as shown by the solid red line. However, threemonth deposit rates three, six, and nine months forward (the dashed red lines) began
to fall in early March, as the gloom deepened and the data deteriorated, especially
after the employment report of March 7. Surprisingly, forward rates snapped back
late last week and the three-month rate nine months forward is back to 1.5 percent,
near where it traded for most of the period. Part of that reversal may have been due
to technical trading factors, but the revival of equity prices and the growing sense that
your meeting today would not result in a change to the target funds rate also played a
role. European forward rates (the dashed green lines) continued to trade below the
cash rate, suggesting that markets expect further easing from the ECB. Many market
participants had expected a more aggressive 50 basis point cut at the March 6 meeting
of the ECB. The contemporaneous uptick in euro-area forward rates suggests that
those rates often remain influenced by their U.S. counterparts in the short run.

1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

March 18, 2003

4 of 101

In Japan, the announcement of a new governor of the Bank of Japan did not alter
expectations of persisting deflation. With Japanese short rates at zero and the
economic outlook unchanged, the BOJ’s continued infusions of liquidity and a search
for yield by investors have pushed funds out the yield curve. The ten-year Japanese
government bond yield hit a new low of 72 basis points on March 12; that compares
with a yield of 1.45 percent one year ago. In fact, the entire yield curve has been
pulled down by the weight of the BOJ’s infusions, as shown in the bottom panel.
While the BOJ’s so-called nontraditional monetary operations have successfully
brought down the JGB yield curve and corporate spreads apparently have followed,
still the amount of borrowing in the private sector and in the securities market is
limited, and prices on other assets such as equities and property continue to fall.
Turning to page 2, another way of looking at monetary conditions in major
economies is depicted there. The five graphs on that page show the main policy rates
(the blue lines) since December of 2002 for the United States, the euro area, the
United Kingdom, Australia, and Canada, along with the two-year swap rate for each
currency (the red lines). By early March the two-year swap rate was trading below
the short-term policy rate in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Australia,
suggesting that markets were expecting a weaker outlook and possibly some
monetary ease. In this country, the two-year swap rate fell 83 basis points from
December through early March, tracking the two-year note, which itself hit a record
low of 1.33 percent on March 10. In all four cases the swap rate moved sharply
higher last week—more than ¼ percentage point—as markets at least temporarily
were willing to consider that the glass was half full. Interestingly, Canada’s pattern
was quite different from the others. In Canada, swap rates began their turnaround at
year-end, and the Bank of Canada tightened policy 25 basis points on March 4.
Turning to page 3, the dollar continued to trade with a soggy tone for much of the
intermeeting period. Part of the dollar’s decline was attributed to weaker economic
data, which seem to have had a more pronounced effect on the U.S. currency than
weak data had on either the euro-area or Japanese markets and currencies. The
reason typically cited is the United States’ reliance on imported capital due to the
current account deficit. A second factor mentioned by some was the widening budget
deficit forecast, and a third concern was the financing of the war. Traders recall that
the United States was reimbursed for the vast portion of its expenses in the first Gulf
War, a factor that narrowed the current account deficit at that time and was thought to
have benefited the dollar. A similar benefit is not expected this time around.
Notwithstanding this sentiment, the dollar strengthened in the last week along
with most riskier dollar assets. The euro weakened sharply in the past week to about
$1.06 as we speak, and European equities rallied. Some attributed the euro’s
weakness to technical factors; others cited discord within Europe on both foreign
policy and economic performance issues. Still others pointed to the seemingly
increasing volume of bad news coming from European banking and insurance
businesses. To give one example, in recent days there have been calls by prominent

March 18, 2003

5 of 101

Germans for the government to prepare for the possibility of having to take over one
of the large German banks.
The yen’s exchange rate has been rather more subdued. The middle panel graphs
the dollar–yen exchange rate and shows (in gray) periods of Japanese intervention.
Although claiming to have no exchange rate target, the Japanese monetary authorities
have intervened consistently when the dollar–yen rate has been in the 116 to 118 area.
During the intermeeting period, the Japanese bought about $10.6 billion and
€700 million. That is in addition to the roughly $5.6 billion they bought in January.
So-called repatriation flows, which actually cover a wide variety of book-closing
maneuvers, tend to wear off by mid-March as the necessary transactions are
completed. With the onset of the new fiscal year and a new team installed at the
Bank of Japan, the market will be focusing intently on the policy choices by the
government and central bank officials to revive the economy.
Finally, the dollar also has been weak since last December against other
currencies, as shown in the bottom panel, although it has had a bit of a bounce in
recent days against those currencies as well. The British pound has benefited least
from the dollar’s weakness, perhaps in part because of the suspicion that the U.K.
economy is decelerating. But some observers have suggested that the economy may
experience some negative backwash from the government’s decisions regarding Iraq.
Turning to page 4 and moving back to U.S. fixed-income markets, corporate bond
issuance in January and February in both investment-grade and high-yield markets
was fairly strong, in contrast with the lower year-over-year levels we were seeing for
much of 2002. As shown in the top left panel, the investment-grade corporate spread
continued to trade below 175 basis points, which while rather high historically is a
significant improvement from October. Actually, perhaps the news here is that there
was no widening in the spread despite the uptick in supply and the weak equity
market. High-yield and emerging-market spreads also held fairly steady, as shown in
the top right panel, especially among selected emerging-market borrowers such as
Brazil, which has performed well since the election. Market commentary suggests
that, with investors craving higher yields, these asset classes offered a fairly attractive
risk–reward ratio at those spreads over Treasuries.
Volatilities in fixed-income markets have remained at somewhat elevated levels, as
shown in the middle panel. This panel graphs the implied volatility on options to enter into a
swap. The purple line graphs the volatility index of options of short-dated swaps, and the
blue line depicts that measure for intermediate-term swaps. These instruments are the
hedging tools of choice among large mortgage investors, and implied volatilities tend to rise
during periods of heightened refinancing activity. In recent weeks, the Mortgage Bankers
Association refi index hit a new high—a level much higher in fact than last autumn’s peak.
In that context it’s not surprising that implied volatilities among these instruments are high,
and it may be a surprise that they are not higher still.

March 18, 2003

6 of 101

The bottom panel graphs another aspect of the refinancing boom. The blue line is
an estimate of the duration of the mortgages in the mortgage-backed security
universe; the burgundy line is the yield on the ten-year note. These two do tend to
move together since one way for investors to hedge a shortening of portfolio duration
due to a refinancing wave is to buy Treasuries. Conversely, they hedge by selling
Treasuries when rates rise and duration extends. With the significant growth of the
mortgage market, hedging activities among these investors can—and often do—have
an impact on the Treasury market. Now, I should mention that one small aspect of
the recent heavy volume of refinancings is speculation that higher prepayments will
cause a mismatch among some large MBS holders unable to adjust their positions
quickly enough. In particular, some traders apparently thought that Fannie Mae
would report a much higher duration gap, as it did during last autumn’s prepayments
wave, and that this would imply large purchases of Treasuries and still lower interest
rates. In the event, Fannie Mae reported last week that its duration gap for February
had widened by one month, from minus four to minus five months, which was much
lower than the market had expected. And the gap stayed within Fannie’s desired
range of plus six to minus six months. Part of the reversal in the ten-year note last
week was apparently triggered by disappointment that this gap was not wider, which
caused some short covering. On the bright side, some have suggested that, with the
spotlight on GSEs, they are hedging a bit more conservatively to avoid the negative
publicity that Fannie Mae in particular garnered last September and October.
Let me turn to page 5 and a quick word on reserves. Several meetings ago I
mentioned that currency growth had slowed unexpectedly in late summer and early
autumn. The Desk responded by ceasing outright operations and shrinking our longterm repo book to $6 billion. As currency growth resumed, in the holiday period we
first increased the long-term repo book, and in the intermeeting period we resumed
our outright purchases for SOMA, as shown in the panel on page 5. During the
intermeeting period we acquired almost $11 billion of securities, or just $1 billion
short of the intermeeting leeway. Looking prospectively, we do not anticipate that
the onset of armed conflict will have any significant effect on the demand for excess
reserves or otherwise upset financing markets. In a review of banks’ behavior during
the 1991 Gulf War, there was no evidence that banks increased their demand for
excess reserves. However, analyzing that period is made more difficult because of
the sharp reduction in reserve requirements that became effective in December 1990,
a few weeks before the war began. Nonetheless, we will be on the lookout for any
signs that shifts in financing patterns or flows across asset markets might be upsetting
normal conditions in financing markets, and we will adjust our operations or
provision of excess reserves accordingly.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations. I will need a vote to approve
domestic operations, and I’d be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Dino? Governor Ferguson

March 18, 2003

7 of 101

MR. FERGUSON. Dino, on page 2 you’ve shown us both the two-year swap rate and
the policy rate for various countries. I’m trying to understand if there is any policy implication
or meaning in the relationships we see in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Australia
versus those in Canada and the United States. Obviously in those first three markets the twoyear swap rate has traded down, and at some points it fell below the target policy rate. In a
couple of cases, we’ve seen that the monetary authority made some policy adjustments. So how
should one think about that relationship, if at all, between the two-year swap rate and the policy
rate, particularly in the cases where the swap rate has traded occasionally below the policy rate?
MR. KOS. That’s a great question. The Committee spoke about the Canadian situation
last time as something of an outlier, and one can see that here as well. I think one way to view
this is that the market probably does consider the prospects for the United States and Canada as
somewhat better than for the euro area and the United Kingdom. The case of Australia is a bit
more interesting. I don’t know to what degree technical factors are involved there. The
Australian economy has performed extremely well, and perhaps the markets are sniffing out a
slowdown that’s not in the forecasts. At least most forecasts that I’ve seen for Australia don’t
show that its situation will become similar to that which the euro area and Japan are in now or
toward which many people think the United Kingdom is heading. So we might be getting an
inkling here that perhaps the market is indeed looking for a better performance prospectively in
the United States as they are for Canada.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any risk differentials between the two-year
swaps and the government or central bank rate? We’re looking at the shape of the yield curve.
MR. KOS. Yes, I could have used the two-year note, but that creates a different problem
of credit differentials among countries. So, I decided to take the two-year swap rate across all of

March 18, 2003

8 of 101

these countries. But I think we would see the same kind of pattern—although the level would be
different—if we used the two-year note. The numbers would be somewhat lower because of the
differential between the two-year note and the two-year swap rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, I’ve always presumed that the GSEs could
essentially construct whatever duration gap they wanted and that the only issue was the cost of
doing it. Since Freddie tends to have a much narrower gap than Fannie, is it correct to presume
that they are willing to pay the insurance premium to create that gap whereas Fannie is not?
MR. KOS. Yes, I think that’s a good interpretation, and I believe that’s the analysis that
most in the market have made. Interestingly though, one would have thought, that being the
case, that Freddie would be rewarded with a higher PE in its equities, but one doesn’t see that.
One could argue that they are being more prudent and are protecting against risk a little better,
but that is not showing up in the way investors are assessing their equities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, aren’t there other factors that determine the size of
the PE? I assume profitability is one. It doesn’t necessarily follow that the PE is not affected by
the duration gap.
MR. REINHART. The other obvious factor, Mr. Chairman, would be earnings growth.
A willingness to run your book with a little less insurance might also be associated with efforts
to expand the overall size of the balance sheet and to increase earnings. In fact, Fannie’s
earnings growth has been faster than Freddie’s.
MR. KOS. It has been faster because Fannie is willing to take more risk, which is your
point about how much insurance a GSE is willing to take out.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think what is really happening is that the
management of Freddie Mac—when one discusses this with their chairman it’s very clear— does

March 18, 2003

9 of 101

not want to take as much risk as Fannie does. In my view, however, the market is much too
inclined to see Fannie and Freddie as if they’re two identical companies and their PEs not being
the same is a market imperfection. Obviously there are various factors that can affect the PEs,
but I think it is the case that Freddie is more conservatively run and is not rewarded for it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So the bottom line is that that’s bad judgment on their
part?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think the bottom line is that it’s good judgment
on their part. It just shows that markets are not perfect after all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Dino, my question is on the Japanese government yield curves
shown on page 1. Would you interpret the decline in the yield curve over the last year as a
change in inflation or deflation expectations, or is it a change in liquidity premiums as a result of
the net supply of bonds and the demand for liquidity? Can you parse it between those two?
MR. KOS. I think it’s very difficult to parse. If you pushed me, I would probably say
that the market in the last year has become more inclined to think that deflation has become ever
more entrenched. Therefore, market participants tend to feel that the risk of being badly burned
in the near term by buying a ten-year bond is low, which I think is probably a mistake. So I’d
say it’s probably more price expectations than the demand for liquidity, but obviously it’s a very
difficult issue to parse.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do see the spread between the synthetic and the
benchmark ten-year issues going down significantly, which suggests that liquidity is improving.
MR. KOS. Yes, that’s an interesting point, and I’ve asked about that. One explanation
I’m hearing is that liquidity is improving, which it probably is. The other one is that we’re not

March 18, 2003

10 of 101

seeing much supply. Japanese corporations are still not borrowing, and investors are starved for
yield. One can buy a lot of government paper at a return of close to zero percent. So if one can
get some ten-year paper with a 2 percent handle, that looks pretty good—the risks
notwithstanding.
MR. BERNANKE. We don’t have any survey data or other information on long-term
deflation expectations?
MR. KOS. I don’t know of any. Karen, have you seen anything?
MS. JOHNSON. No, nothing that would go out far enough to answer the question.
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you.
MR. KOS. It is interesting in one sense, though, that the curve has been pulled down.
Interest rates are lower, and spreads have come in; yet the economy really does not seem to be
able to respond. So it does raise the question of whether a flat yield curve produces better
prospects for the economy.
MR. REINHART. The other point I’d make, Governor Bernanke, is that in the indexed
debt market in the United States, as the Chairman noted, the ten-year yield is down more than
1½ points over that same year. So we can’t rule out the possibility that what we’re seeing is a
shifting lower of world real interest rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s certainly the case with the TIPS. Further questions
for Dino? If not, Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I move approval of the domestic operations, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection, they are approved. We now move on
to the staff report. Dave Stockton and Karen Johnson.

March 18, 2003

11 of 101

MR. STOCKTON. We faced some rather considerable challenges in assembling
this forecast—the largest one, of course, being to find a way to be helpful to you in
setting monetary policy in a period when the probability of imminent military conflict
with Iraq has become very high. Early last fall, the Chairman commenced one of our
pre-FOMC briefing sessions by asking whether the Greenbook forecast was ignoring
the elephant in the room—the elephant being the potential for war. We responded
that we were well aware of that possibility. But we believed that a forecast
constructed to take explicit account of military conflict would focus attention on areas
about which we knew very little and would distract us from providing you with our
interpretation of incoming data and the underlying forces operating on the economy.
Still, we recognized then that, by incorporating developments in oil futures and
financial markets, our forecast was, in effect, reflecting the evolving likelihood of
military action in Iraq.
Well, in this forecast, the room has become very small and the elephant very
large. As you know, we opted for an approach that we think preserves maximum
continuity with recent forecasts. We have continued to take on board the path of oil
prices implied by futures markets, current readings in financial markets, and recent
measures of consumer sentiment. These indicators, of course, embody a probabilityweighted average of a wide range of possible outcomes, reflecting the collective
judgment of market participants and survey respondents. At this point, it seems safe
to presume that they place a very substantial weight on an imminent war. As events
unfold in the coming days and weeks, readings on many variables conditioning our
baseline forecast will shift, as outcomes currently embodied in that probabilityweighted distribution become more or less likely. Oil prices, equity values, and
sentiment are almost certainly going to deviate—perhaps substantially—from the
paths assumed in the forecast. We attempted to give you a sense in the Greenbook of
those factors on which we will be most focused and some rough quantitative
assessment of the sensitivity of the forecast to movements in those variables.
At this point, you probably need little convincing that we don’t know what will
happen in the weeks ahead with respect to conflict with Iraq or its economic
consequences. But, you may reasonably ask, what are the economic data and
financial market developments of the past seven weeks telling us about the underlying
condition of the U.S. economy as we head into this critical period? If anyone’s hopes
have risen momentarily that I will answer that question clearly, let me admit up front
that I cannot. A quick look at the top line of our forecast might suggest that we have
learned a great deal about the economy and that what we’ve learned has been
decidedly negative. After all, we’ve revised down projected growth in the first half of
this year to about 2¼ percent at an annual rate, about ½ percentage point less than in
our January forecast. But in point of fact, owing to an upward revision to growth in
the fourth quarter of last year, the level of real GDP is actually higher, on average, in
the first half of this year than in our last forecast. One of the key surprises in the
incoming data was that inventories were not as lean in the fourth quarter of last year
as we had thought. Higher inventory investment accounts for all the 1¼ percentage
point upward adjustment to the growth of real GDP last quarter; final sales were

March 18, 2003

12 of 101

about unrevised. With that stockbuilding already behind us, we see less upward
impetus to activity from this source in the first half of this year. Indeed, a smaller
contribution from non-auto inventories more than accounts for the downward revision
that we have made to our projection of activity in the first half of this year.
The recent data on spending, labor markets, and production have presented the
usual mixed bag. For the most part, the strength in spending that was apparent late
last year carried into January. To be sure, sales of new motor vehicles in January
dropped off from the very high level observed in December, but other consumer
outlays advanced at a rapid clip. Housing activity—both sales and construction—
jumped to very high levels, aided by good weather and very favorable financing
conditions. In the business sector, orders and shipments of capital goods in January
exceeded our expectations, with spending for high-tech equipment posting an
especially sharp rise. But the picture in February and into March was not nearly so
bright. Motor vehicle sales posted another steep decline last month. Snowstorms in
the East evidently clobbered sales in late February, but reports for early March
suggest that there has been only a modest bounceback so far. Faced with sagging
sales and mounting inventories, vehicle makers have announced significant cutbacks
in production in the second quarter—a sign that they, too, are concerned about some
underlying weakness in demand. Retail sales apart from motor vehicles declined last
month as well, and this morning’s housing starts release—which showed singlefamily starts off nearly 14 percent, to 1.3 million units in February—can be added to
the list of downbeat indicators for that month.
Readings on the labor market and industrial activity also worsened in February
and have shown little sign of improvement this month. We were especially struck by
the widespread weakness implied by last month’s labor market report. Private
payrolls contracted by 321,000 in February. No doubt, bad weather contributed to the
declines in construction employment, and the call-up of reservists likely crimped
payrolls more broadly. But try as we might, we could find no silver lining in
February’s employment situation. Our January forecast was built on the assumption
that employment would be about flat early this year; instead, job losses have averaged
about 100,000 over the past three months. Industrial production is also coming in
below our earlier expectations. Declines late last year now look to be larger than
previously estimated, and factory output is expected to eke out a much smaller gain
this quarter than we had projected in January. Although the declines in production
witnessed last fall seem to have abated, there appears to be little upward momentum
to manufacturing activity. That view is supported by the available purchasing
surveys, which have recently retraced earlier gains.
It is, of course, exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to determine whether this
most recent softening in the data reflects underlying weakness in the economy or the
intensifying effects of war-related fears and uncertainties. Virtually all our major
economic indicators at this point could be directly or indirectly influenced by actions
or expectations related to the possibility of war. Is consumer confidence low because
of higher war-related energy prices or because the labor market is so soft? Is the

March 18, 2003

13 of 101

labor market soft because firms are hesitant to hire in advance of an imminent war or
because product demand is weak? I don’t know of any way to confidently break into
that argument. Moreover, I don’t think this is a signal extraction problem faced
solely by the staff and other economic forecasters. I seriously doubt that households
and businesses can reliably disentangle underlying economic trends from effects
related to possible military conflict. Suffice it to say that, whatever the fundamental
causes, the staff sees the economy on a somewhat shallower trajectory than we had
earlier expected.
Moreover, a number of other factors led us to mark down a bit our projected
growth of real GDP over the next year and a half. For one, stock prices at the close of
the Greenbook were about 10 percent below those anticipated in our previous
forecast, and we lowered our projected path by a similar amount. The effect of lower
equity prices was only partly offset by the accompanying downward revision that we
have made to long-term interest rates. I should note, however, that the rise in equity
markets since we closed the forecast, if sustained, would, all else being equal, lead us
to add back in much of the final demand we had taken out of the forecast. Higher
current and projected oil prices, especially over the next few quarters, are expected to
take a larger bite out of household incomes than in the January projection. Perhaps
reflecting to some extent higher energy prices, consumer sentiment has weakened
noticeably since the end of last year. Consumers’ views of their own financial
conditions, broader business conditions, buying conditions, and the labor market
situation have all deteriorated noticeably in recent months. Sentiment has dropped by
more than can be explained by macroeconomic conditions, and in the forecast we
expect this unusual weakness in household attitudes and their effect on consumption
to fade only gradually over the next year and a half.
Not all of the key forces operating on the economy have been negative. Fiscal
policy, in particular, is providing more upward stimulus to activity than in our
previous projection. We have defense spending ramping up more sharply in this
forecast compared with the last. We have added about $20 billion to projected
defense spending in both 2003 and 2004. Separately, we have retained the package of
tax cuts assumed in the January forecast, though we have delayed its projected
implementation to the third quarter of this year. Meanwhile, tax receipts have been
coming in much lower than we had expected, largely reflecting another year of
unexpectedly large refunds. Smaller tax payments are providing a noticeable buffer
against weaker labor income in this forecast and help to sustain the projected growth
in consumer spending.
Despite the small net downward revision that we have made to the projection, we
continue to expect a gradual acceleration of activity in the second half of this year and
into 2004 for reasons that will sound quite familiar to you. Stimulative monetary and
fiscal policy contribute to the pickup, as does a gradual diminishment of the drag
from earlier declines in the stock market. Productivity growth shows no signs of
flagging and should feed gains in both household incomes and corporate profits.
Finally, we expect the unusual restraint on household and business spending, which

March 18, 2003

14 of 101

we are attributing in part to pessimism and uncertainty, to fade over the projection
interval. As has been the case for some time, this feature of the forecast must be
considered more art than science. Even as art, I’ll admit it’s closer to Jackson Pollock
than to Rembrandt. [Laughter] With slack in resource utilization persisting
throughout the forecast period, core inflation is expected to recede modestly in 2003
and 2004. Indeed, core PCE price inflation drops to 1 percent in the second half of
next year.
In working on this forecast, we—perhaps like many others in the economy—have
felt as if we were biding our time, waiting for events to unfold and the situation to
clarify itself. But how much clarification of economic circumstances can be
expected? Certainly, a quick and successful resolution of the conflict with Iraq could
be followed by a sharp decline in oil prices and a jump in equity values. Household
and business sentiment could improve swiftly and persistently. With just a short lag,
some high-frequency readings on the economy might provide evidence of followthrough to the real economy; initial claims, chain store sales, and reports from
automakers would provide the early evidence on that score. With luck, those
readings would be confirmed by broader monthly measures of spending, production,
and labor market conditions. While it is less pleasant to contemplate, circumstances
could clearly indicate a much less favorable outcome. The use of weapons of mass
destruction, substantial damage to the oil fields, or slow military progress could result
in sizable adverse reactions in oil and financial markets and a further souring of
sentiment. The consequences of these developments could be reflected clearly in the
flow of data on the real economy. In either event, a significant narrowing of
uncertainties would allow us to get a much better fix on macroeconomic conditions
and provide you with clearer direction on the appropriate setting of monetary policy.
But a third possibility seems eminently plausible—namely, that there will not be
in the months immediately ahead a dramatic shrinkage in the uncertainty surrounding
underlying economic conditions. There are a number of reasons for suspecting that
this might be the case. Under the best of circumstances, financial markets will be
volatile, and the data on the economy will be both noisy and often available with only
a frustrating lag. It could take months to detect the economic consequences of the
events that will unfold in the period ahead. Moreover, the best of circumstances may
not present themselves. Even if the military situation concludes as quickly and
successfully as it did in 1991, broader geopolitical risks may linger in a way that they
did not after the earlier Gulf War. The threat of terrorist responses may not decline
and could conceivably increase even in the wake of a successful military campaign.
As a consequence, the current hesitance to spend and hire may not diminish rapidly.
Moreover, there have been additional sources of geopolitical tension in recent
months—North Korea and Iran, to name just two. We will need to be watchful of
euphoric reactions in financial markets and among households and businesses. Those
initial readings may signal a more vigorous rebound from recent doldrums, but that
enthusiasm could prove unjustified over time by the underlying fundamentals. If so,
the favorable initial reaction signaled by asset prices and sentiment would fade.

March 18, 2003

15 of 101

Finally, there could be a real economic bounce following the successful
conclusion of a war. Some firms might act on spending and hiring plans that were
delayed by war fears. Households, too, may boost spending that had been deferred by
worries about war and the accompanying high levels of prices for gasoline and
heating fuel. Witnessing such a rebound, however, will provide no assurance that the
economy is moving onto a more persistently vigorous growth path. If the underlying
health of the economy remains lackluster, a temporary period of above-trend growth
could give way, yet again, to subpar performance. In effect, circumstances might be
similar to a year ago. As the worst case scenarios following the attacks of September
11 failed to materialize, we saw a rapid acceleration of activity that could not be
sustained by the underlying condition of the economy. I don’t want to exaggerate in
either direction here. Clearly, we’re likely to know a great deal more than we do now
should a swift and successful military action be completed in the period ahead. But I
suspect that, even in those circumstances, you will see only a partial lifting of the fog
of uncertainty that currently shrouds the economic outlook. Karen Johnson will now
continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. In putting together the baseline forecast for the rest of the
world, the staff in the International Finance Division grappled with the same issues
that confronted those forecasting the domestic economy, but spread over a wide range
of countries. With the outbreak of war perceived by many to be likely and soon, a
host of indicators and market variables abroad implicitly reflect the weighted average
of market expectations as to the timing of the onset of hostilities and the implications
of subsequent events for economic activity around the globe. Of course these
variables also reflect developments in the underlying economic fundamentals, which
no doubt have changed somewhat since we prepared the January forecast.
The clearest instance in which market expectations have provided answers to
critical questions that we otherwise were at a loss to answer is the assumed path for
oil prices in the forecast. As in the past, we have incorporated into the baseline
forecast the futures path for crude oil as observed in the market at the time the
Greenbook forecast was being finalized. That path starts with the price for West
Texas intermediate at an average value of $35.23 for the current quarter and has it
dropping more than $5.50 by the end of this year and nearly another $5.00 dollars by
the end of next year. Although some volatility in oil prices in the very short run is to
be expected, a sizable decline in global crude oil prices from current levels, starting
by midyear, is an essential factor in our baseline forecast for global growth. That
forecast has some continued near-term weakness giving way to growth at an annual
rate of about 3 percent on average in the second half of this year and 3½ percent next
year. The implications of less favorable developments with respect to oil prices vary
somewhat, depending on how long the price of oil remains elevated and whether a
given country is an oil exporter or importer. We reviewed the staff model’s
assessment of the effects of some alternatives in January during the chart show. A
sharp spike up in oil prices that persists for two quarters, what we termed the limited
embargo case, by itself implies negative effects this year on GDP growth in the major
foreign economies that range from negligible to a reduction of ¾ percentage point.

March 18, 2003

16 of 101

Alternatively, oil prices could fall further or faster than implied in the futures curve,
with positive effects on growth.
A second major factor underlying the forecast is the state of business and
consumer confidence that is incorporated in the forecast, but we cannot quantify these
variables in the way that we can for oil prices. In recent weeks, confidence has
reacted both to the changing prospects of the onset of war and to news about
economic fundamentals. As we reported in the Greenbook, consumer confidence
surveys have moved down further recently, particularly in Europe. We are also
looking for very sluggish or declining domestic demand in the euro area and Japan
during the first quarter. Nonetheless, our projection for an acceleration of activity
abroad over the forecast period includes a strengthening in domestic demand in many
countries that, in turn, is consistent with a moderate and sustained improvement in
confidence. A quick and pronounced move in confidence in either direction,
triggered by geopolitical events, could produce a significant deviation from our
baseline outlook. Sharply higher oil prices could well combine with a fall in
confidence. The version of such joint developments that I included in the January
chart show implied reductions in growth rates of 1 to 2 percentage points in the
foreign industrial countries this year. A positive bounce in sentiment abroad is a clear
upside risk to our forecast, and foreign real GDP has considerable scope in most
countries to grow faster without threatening capacity constraints or heightening price
pressures.
We have incorporated specific assumptions about monetary policy actions in the
foreign industrial countries, which support the recovery of economic activity in our
baseline view and are broadly consistent with market expectations for rates. We
expect that the ECB will lower its official rates another 50 basis points by midyear, as
falling oil prices, considerable slack in the economy, and strength in the exchange
value of the euro contribute to improvements in inflation performance. We have
assumed that the Bank of England will move rates down another 25 basis points later
this year as U.K. inflation also diminishes. In contrast, we see the Bank of Canada
keeping its official rate at its present level through the end of this year, as the
Canadian economy remains near potential and inflation declines from elevated rates
thanks to lower oil prices and some exchange rate appreciation.
Should developments surprise us and the markets and the outlook for activity
diverge from our baseline, there is some scope for monetary policy abroad to react.
Clearly, lower oil prices, stronger confidence, and more-positive prospects for growth
would imply stronger activity. Such a development might result in the major foreign
central banks choosing not to ease further. On the downside, persistently high oil
prices, even weaker confidence, and reduced growth prospects might elicit immediate
easing and more cumulative easing than we now assume. With rates now at
2.5 percent or higher in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Canada, the central
banks in these economies do have some room for maneuver on the downside. The
Bank of Japan, which we assume will keep rates at essentially zero throughout the
forecast period, has been caught up in the problems posed by the zero bound for some

March 18, 2003

17 of 101

time. The Swiss National Bank has recently reduced its target rate nearly to zero, so
it has little room to ease further using that tool.
Our crystal ball is least able to help us anticipate the reaction of the foreign
exchange value of the dollar to coming events—a circumstance in which we often
find ourselves. In the days just before the Greenbook forecast was completed, the
dollar reacted to downward pressure that appeared to relate, in part, to heightened
risks for war in the near term. We reacted to market developments by adjusting down
slightly our path for the real weighted-average broad dollar index. Since Greenbook
day, however, the nominal dollar has rebounded somewhat—with the broad index
rising more than ½ percent in nominal terms, apparently on news that action in Iraq is
imminent. I hesitate even to offer a guess as to which way the dollar will move in
reaction to future good news or bad news on events in Iraq. To the extent that the
dollar turns out stronger than we have projected, exports will be restrained and
imports encouraged. However, these partial effects could be offset by effects on
exports and imports from growth outcomes here and abroad that differ from the
baseline.
We received data for the U.S. balance of payments in the fourth quarter after the
Greenbook was completed. Those data confirm that the ex post components of the
financing of our current account deficit shifted during 2002. Private foreign net
purchases of U.S. securities slowed from their record pace in 2001, and foreign direct
investment inflows fell sharply. These smaller private inflows were offset by a drop
to zero in the appetite of U.S. investors for foreign securities. Balancing these
changes and the larger current account deficit was a sizable increase in foreign
official acquisition of dollar assets. These shifts reinforce in our minds the judgment
that market participants are unlikely to be willing to continue to add indefinitely to
their claims on the United States at current exchange rates. So we continue to put
into the forecast a slight downward tilt to the path for the real exchange value of the
dollar. However, we recognize that over the forecast period the dollar could in fact
rise at times, and even on balance, as the host of geopolitical and economic risks now
present in the global economy are resolved.
My final observation is that the projected recovery in U.S. output growth remains
among the most important factors underlying our baseline forecast for growth abroad.
We see various idiosyncratic economic fundamental factors in the individual foreign
economies as shaping our outlook and as conditioning the reaction abroad to nearterm geopolitical events. Nevertheless, any developments that would significantly
change the outlook for U.S. economic activity would have major repercussions
abroad. David and I will gladly try to answer your questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. I had a question, Mr. Chairman. But first I wanted to thank Karen
very much for the memo she sent out a couple of weeks ago. That was very helpful to me in

March 18, 2003

18 of 101

understanding some of the obstacles to adjustment overseas in particular, and it related to some
of the things you just said. My question, Dave, is about the tax cut assumption. I don’t know
what it means to say “other things being equal” these days, but you retained the assumption that
the tax cut will be passed. My sense is that the probability that it will not be enacted, or that it
will be pared down significantly, has risen recently. I just wondered what that might imply for
your forecast.
MR. STOCKTON. Obviously that remains a political forecast, and it’s an assumption
that I can’t say we hold with enormous conviction. I would point out that the magnitude of the
tax cut that we have built into this forecast is close to the figures around which the moderates in
the House and Senate are coalescing. That doesn’t necessarily add to its credibility; it merely
indicates that it is a magnitude that is still being discussed actively. I would point out that we
had built in a sizable fiscal stimulus package in December 2001, when the prospects for the
economy looked quite bleak. We took that out of our projection in January of last year, when the
political bubbling around that type of package had simmered down significantly. Then within
three weeks the Congress passed a stimulus package that was almost exactly what we had
projected originally. So it’s awfully hard to know what will happen on the fiscal side. I’m not
even sure how the progress of the war would add to or subtract from the probability that the
package would be implemented. I can see arguments on either side.
Now, in terms of its consequences for the projection, it’s a noticeable plus to disposable
income and therefore helps to sustain the growth in consumer spending. So it plays a very
important role in the second half pickup that we’re projecting. If we were to take that out of the
forecast, we would probably still be showing some underlying acceleration in activity, in part
because of these other imponderables such as an overall improvement in household and business

March 18, 2003

19 of 101

sentiment. But economic growth would be slower than in this forecast. I do think it’s an
important factor in supporting disposable income in the projection.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Dave, a common theme of many forecasts is that a gradual slowing of
consumer spending, especially for durables and residential investment, will be more than offset
by a pickup in business investment. Somewhat in contrast to that, the Greenbook forecasts
considerable strength in spending for durables and for residential investment. As a matter of
fact, such spending accelerates in the second half of the year, and expenditures for durable goods
grow 8 percent in 2004 with market rates, on Treasuries in particular, rising. I was wondering if
you could comment on why the projection shows that strength and if you think it might be fairly
optimistic.
MR. STOCKTON. There are a few reasons that we think that by 2004 we will see
reasonably robust gains in consumer durable spending. One is the overall interest rate
environment in this forecast, which I think is generally more favorable than in the consensus
forecast. We have built in no increase in the federal funds rate through the end of 2004 and we
have—
MR. PARRY. There is a mention of an increase in Treasury rates.
MR. STOCKTON. There’s a little drifting up in Treasury rates, which is offset in our
view by a compression of private spreads as the overall economy improves. Two, we’re
expecting the relative price of durable goods to continue to decline and to decline quite rapidly.
In essence, we think the user cost of purchasing those goods will be relatively low. Three, it’s
also a reflection of our estimate for potential output growth, which is still obviously to the high
side of the consensus forecast. I think that helps to sustain overall growth in household incomes

March 18, 2003

20 of 101

as well as in corporate profits and therefore provides some boost. So we believe there are logical
fundamentals for why consumer durables spending should increase. I must say on the housing
side that we also have very favorable mortgage interest rates. That could be a little on the
optimistic side in light of this morning’s data release and a few readings recently of just a bit
more softness there. I’m not so sure, had we had all of that information before we did our
forecast, that we would have been quite so optimistic on the housing investment side.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Dave, let me ask a question about the structural labor productivity chart.
In your forecast, the contribution from capital deepening stays relatively low going forward, and
yet the multifactor productivity numbers remain fairly strong. You also talked about the slump
in investment spending. What is your thinking on the multifactor aspects of productivity and
why it will stay so strong as we go forward?
MR. STOCKTON. Our basic thinking has been that one needs to resort to a supposition
of reasonably strong multifactor productivity to explain the incredible strength in labor
productivity that we’ve had over the past two years. If anything, our straightforward statistical
filtering models would want to put in more multifactor productivity growth than we’ve written
down in this forecast. Now, obviously this involves some fairly big risks. Maybe this
productivity improvement in the last year and a half will turn out to have been, in essence, some
significant cyclical rise in productivity, as firms are squeezing harder on their productive
facilities and on their workers to eke out more productivity gains. As you know, in the initial
phase of this more recent acceleration of productivity, that was generally the story that we
bought into. But we’ve been beaten down by the data quarter after quarter, suggesting that we

March 18, 2003

21 of 101

have to give a little weight in this forecast—and we have—to the possibility that multifactor
productivity has continued to improve. We have it at roughly 1½ percentage points, which by
the historical standards of the past 100 years is not an especially large figure.
MR. HOENIG. The only reason I was asking is that, with a holding back in investment
and therefore limited gains from new technology, I wondered whether we can continue to harvest
that. I don’t disagree with you because it’s hard to explain otherwise.
MR. STOCKTON. I think you’re right, though. Obviously, if whatever is holding back
investment spending were to persist longer than we have projected in this forecast, it would be
harder in some sense to embody technological improvements going forward. That could have
some follow-through effects on multifactor productivity as well.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought Dave and Karen did a fabulous
job, both in the written material and in the presentation, of covering in effect the entire
waterfront of risks and possibilities to consider as we sit here and try to determine how this
situation is going to turn out. I know I was impressed by the complexities involved in trying to
do it over the past couple of weeks. You certainly have indicated how varied the possibilities are
and how great the risks are—perhaps on both sides. That brings me to the question I would like
to pose.
Looking just at the Greenbook baseline forecast, absent the alternative simulations and
absent the really interesting discussion of ups and downs and ins and outs of oil prices and
whatnot, it seems to me that one would have to say—though I know you won’t say this—
[laughter] that the risks almost have to be on the downside of the Greenbook projection.

March 18, 2003

22 of 101

Everything has to go very well for that forecast to work out. The war has to be short, and it has
to be relatively cheap. Consumers and businesses have to leap right back into the saddle. Even
if everything works out so well that this forecast does materialize, then we still have a good deal
of excess capacity lingering on through 2004. Aren’t the risks on the downside?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, you’re right that I’m not going to concede that point
immediately. [Laughter] In fact, one of the things that we did in preparation for this forecast
was to look at some of what we call good case and bad case scenarios. As you know, our
forecast is not based on all the good things that would necessarily follow from a quick resolution
of the conflict because the probability distribution that the forecast is predicated upon includes
some negative outcomes. So suppose in the next few weeks we do have a swift and successful
completion of the military campaign. Oil prices could tumble and perhaps tumble considerably
in the near term—and even in the longer term based on what the futures markets are currently
expecting. We could get a much sharper and more immediate snapback in consumer and
business confidence. We have built in a gradual rebound in confidence. In the case of
households, the hit on confidence that we’ve seen doesn’t erode until sometime next year, and on
the business spending side that does not occur until the end of this year. Suppose that happened
more immediately. One could easily envision—maybe we’ve already seen it to some extent—a
pop in equity markets and some of the risks that were weighing on markets going away. We fed
those types of assumptions into the model, and it was easy to get an extra percentage point on
GDP by the end of 2004 and ½ percentage point less on the unemployment rate. So I think there
is a probability mass on the upside.
Now, there are some obvious and rather significant risks to the downside as well, and I
hope I hinted at them in my remarks. Certainly, one could envision all sorts of bad outcomes in

March 18, 2003

23 of 101

Iraq. But even putting aside those risks, a chunk of this forecast relies on an improvement in
investment spending—essentially whatever has been depressing investment spending goes away.
There is not a lot of science one can bring to bear on that, so there are downside risks associated
with that forecast. We saw a pattern of strength around the turn of the year followed by
weakness, but it is hard to do a signal extraction from that. The recent data have been quite soft,
and we see nothing yet in the data that hints at the acceleration in activity that we’re forecasting.
It looks to us as if the economy is just continuing to move along at this subpar baseline rate of
growth, but we don’t see many signs that things are falling apart either. So if you were hoping to
pin some of our forecast on developments that we actually are able to put our fingers on, we
can’t do that. It still involves more forecast than anything apparent in the direct economic
readings.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a question for David also on the risks
to the forecast. I notice that in your forecast the personal saving rate increases and then flattens
out during 2004. Historically, the saving rate is a couple of percentage points higher than that
rate. I had two questions on this. First, is that where you would expect it to settle on a longerterm basis? Second, how serious is the risk to the forecast that the saving rate will actually be
higher during this period?
MR. STOCKTON. Our best guess is that we still have a little way to go on the saving
rate, but not a lot further, in response to the deterioration that has occurred in household balance
sheets. We have models that put the saving rate anywhere between 5 and 7 percent in the long
run, but I think somewhere around 6 percent or just north of that is probably the right territory.

March 18, 2003

24 of 101

The question is how do we get there? Second, could we get there more rapidly than we have
projected? Obviously, the answer to the second question is “yes, we could.” But I do not see
that as much of a concern. Households have been subjected to a number of very significant
shocks over the last couple of years—the substantial decline in the stock market, the recession,
and the terrorist attacks—and none of them seemed to result in a pullback on the spending side, a
big increase in precautionary saving. The combination of all of those developments didn’t seem
to produce an unusual jump in the saving rate. Given the uncertainty that people are facing in
the events ahead of us, maybe we will see a pickup in the saving rate. But I don’t quite see that
happening exogenously. In many respects I’d say that consumption has followed our model
quite closely, which suggests a considerable lag in the adjustment of household spending to
deterioration in consumer balance sheets. So I think it’s a risk but not one that I’d put at the top
of the list of risks that we’re facing. But obviously, going forward, one could picture events that
could engender the kind of fear or concern on the part of households that could produce a higher
rate of precautionary saving. That matters a lot in our forecast. If we were to get a significant
step-up in the saving rate relative to our baseline forecast, that would weigh very heavily on the
outlook going forward.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a brief comment on that. There are a lot of news reports about
companies canceling their contributions to 401(k) plans as an economy move. That might lead
individuals to reduce their contributions, which would tend to bring the saving rate down. I
don’t know how extensive that is, but we certainly hear reports that many companies are moving
in that direction now.

March 18, 2003

25 of 101

MR. STOCKTON. We’ve heard those reports as well. I’m not quite sure how that
would net out or quantitatively how significant it would be at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If nobody else has questions or comments, who would like
to start the discussion? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For a while in January it looked as if
activity was strengthening moderately in our region, especially in the manufacturing sector. That
made us something of an outlier in the commentary in the Beige Book, but we fell back in line in
February. Our monthly index from our survey of the manufacturing and service sectors dropped
sharply for the most part last month. Some of that obviously was related to the heightened war
anxiety and concern about rising gasoline prices. The severe weather in February, particularly
around the Presidents’ Day weekend, hit our District especially hard and clearly played a
significant role in the apparent softening. That is good news, I guess, if it suggests that at least
some of the softening was transitory rather than persistent. Unemployment rates were below the
national level in several of our District states, but the rate in North Carolina, which is our largest
state, was at almost 7 percent in December—the latest month for which we have data—because
of the weakness in manufacturing there.
Not all of the news in our District is bad. There have been a few fairly substantial plant
expansions in our region, indicating at least some increase in business spending. As for housing
activity, the national report for this past month was weak. I don’t recall what the regional profile
was in that report, but we don’t see any significant weakening in housing activity in our District.
Also, let me mention one particular bright spot in the manufacturing sector. The Fifth District is
one of the world’s leading producers, if not the leading producer, of duct tape. [Laughter] That
industry is doing very well, thank you. We gained our duct tape prominence because the original

March 18, 2003

26 of 101

fiber used to give the tape strength was cotton. Jack Guynn’s people grew it, and we
manufactured it. So that’s a little Southern economic history lesson for you this morning at no
charge!
Turning to the national economy, I would describe the Greenbook forecast as easy to
love, all things considered, and I hope we get something that’s at least in the neighborhood of it.
The question, of course—there are a lot of questions, but this a key one—is whether we can
reasonably expect such a relatively favorable outcome with the funds rate at a sustained
1¼ percent level, as is assumed in the baseline forecast. Obviously, no one knows the answer to
that in the current highly uncertain situation but my own view is that the Greenbook forecast is
plausible. Clearly, the economy is struggling currently under the weight of all the uncertainty,
and the downside risks are obviously material. Nevertheless, in some contrast to my neighbor
Cathy here, I think it’s easy to exaggerate both the current weakness and the downside risks in
the outlook, considerable though they are. I certainly recognize that they are considerable. As
the Greenbook points out, a persistent increase in oil prices could lead to a significant slowing in
economy activity. But as we’ve said already this morning, futures markets are not expecting
that. If we don’t get a persistent increase in oil prices, I think that significantly reduces the
likelihood that the most recent weakness in labor markets and retail sales will cumulate and
worsen. Moreover, looking through the recent data, the prospect of continued robust trend
productivity growth should eventually produce some revival of investment and should support
commensurate growth in household spending. The stimulative monetary and fiscal policies that
are already in place both support the adjustment process. We’re already seeing at least some
revival of investment in some sections of the tech sector.

March 18, 2003

27 of 101

Finally, our credibility for low inflation means that neither rising actual inflation nor
rising inflation expectations pose much of a risk for the recovery. So I think we have a solid
underlying base for recovery. To be sure, we may experience some sort of disinflation if the
economy continues to adjust to the higher trend productivity growth. That could pose some
complications in the transition, and I think we need to monitor that carefully. Outright deflation
doesn’t appear to be a strong threat at this point. But I continue to think that this Committee
should be prepared to deal with the risk of deflation if unfavorable developments such as a
protracted war in Iraq or some negative shock or succession of negative shocks—like a series of
terrorist attacks, for example—force us closer to the zero bound. I’d like to come back to that
later for just about a minute when we have our policy go-around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our views regarding
the Second District, the national economy, and the international economy are all clouded by
uncertainties. So rather than sharing our confusion about those three subjects, I’d like to talk
about the uncertainty. What we do not know is the degree to which that uncertainty is really
geopolitical. As for a war against Iraq, the near certainty of quick military victory and the
aftermath of a more stable Middle East are the very positive hopes. Unfortunately, the more
conversations I have with people who know about the Middle East, the less certain they are of a
stable aftermath. I think it is almost certain that we’ll be very successful militarily. However,
there is not a single neighboring country of Iraq that can be deemed to be stable, so the shock of
a military attack against their neighbor could bring about very uncertain consequences either
sooner or later. Therefore, I believe that the geopolitical uncertainty is likely to remain.

March 18, 2003

28 of 101

In my view, a considerable amount of the uncertainty voiced by American business
leaders in the name of geopolitics is in fact a cover story for their concern about the direction of
the economy. They are not certain whether the consumer will hang in there as we hope he will.
They aren’t certain whether it is a good idea to make the business fixed investment decisions that
our forecasts call for. The effect on them of the Enron/Arthur Andersen/WorldCom debacles is
that it is much easier to avoid making decisions than to make them. If you as a business
executive make a decision, even if you happen to be right, the board of directors or shareholders
may deem you to be excessively risk oriented. If you make a decision and it turns out to be
wrong, those very same directors and shareholders can punish you severely. On the other hand,
if you do nothing, you appear to be studious and virtuous. Now, no economy can prosper and no
business can prosper if that degree of caution continues for any extended period of time. But it
doesn’t have to continue for very long to make the downside of our forecast turn out to be likely.
One thing that I think could militate against that is if the war is very successful very
quickly, as I think it will be, and if the adverse geopolitical aftermath is later rather than soon and
therefore the situation looks very good for a while. Then I think our President, with his rather
remarkable leadership skills, could turn those skills to the economy, and we could see a burst of
confidence stemming from the notion that somebody is really in charge. If you’ve been in
charge and have just won a war, that shows formidable leadership. I think that could well
happen, and obviously by mentioning it, I rather hope it does.
In the midst of all this uncertainty what does a prudent central banker do? It seems to me
that a prudent central banker thinks a lot, does nothing, talks as little as possible, and makes it
very clear that the central bank is very attentive and ready to take action when and if required.
Thank you.

March 18, 2003

29 of 101

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the Tenth District, as in other
regions, remains basically sluggish, though we have had a few signs of improvement on mixed
data since the last meeting. Retail sales have increased only slightly from the disappointing
holiday season, and commercial real estate is still mired in a very deep slump in our area. On the
positive side, though, manufacturing activity actually has strengthened a little since the last
meeting, and energy activity has picked up noticeably. Housing continues to provide support to
District activity, with solid sales of low-end homes making up for some slump in the high-end
part of that market. On the inflation front, wage and price pressures obviously remain pretty well
subdued.
In speaking with our directors and with a lot of business people throughout our District, I
consistently hear that businesses are reluctant to commit to new spending and hiring until the
uncertainty of the current situation with Iraq is resolved. This wait-and-see attitude also
describes consumer sentiment more and more as it relates to new spending. However, not to
overstate this uncertainty factor, I would also note that in Colorado, for example, attitudes are
distinctively pessimistic and very much unrelated to the war. Many people in that state see very
strong parallels between now and the slump that they went through in the 1980s, with a lot of
excess capacity and a lot of pessimism in play.
Let me talk a little more about manufacturing activity because it actually showed some
improvement on balance in February. Production and shipments rose above year-ago levels, and
new orders registered a fairly large increase—in fact one of the largest since early 2000. Firms
continue to express optimism about production and sales over the next six months once we get
through some of this immediate geopolitical uncertainty. However, employment and capital

March 18, 2003

30 of 101

spending has remained well below year-ago levels, and firms are keeping their inventories low in
case the higher sales they expect do not materialize. In our survey about attitudes among
manufacturers, it is a fact that as they look forward they are more optimistic, as they feel they
can get through this immediate crisis. So I think there is that element. But, again, I go back to
Colorado as evidence that other factors are operating as well.
Let me talk very quickly about the farm economy, which is actually expected to
strengthen in 2003. Farm income in terms of cash receipts is expected to improve, and farmers
also are going to continue to receive government payments. Commodity prices could fluctuate,
though, because we continue to have a fairly severe drought in the central and western plains of
our region, which is bringing a lot of its own uncertainty in the agricultural production sector.
Let me turn to the national scene. The broad contours of our economic outlook have
changed little since the last meeting. We still expect near-term weakness and medium-term
strength. Like the Greenbook, we expect growth to be about 2½ percent in the first half and then
to increase to 4 percent as we move forward, recognizing that the error bands around that kind of
forecast are fairly large. But the reason is—and I don’t think we should lose sight of it—that
monetary policy is still stimulative, fiscal policy is stimulative and could become more so, and
we have financial market conditions and a banking industry that are generally able to be
supportive of an expansion.
The factors behind the near-term weakness remain the same as at our last meeting. Oil
prices and geopolitical risks have fostered near-term restraint. As these risks and uncertainties
are lifted—perhaps in the next couple of weeks or months but maybe even in the next few
days—I think we’ll be able to assess how these elements of monetary policy and fiscal policy
might play out in the real economy. At least by waiting a little longer we should also be

March 18, 2003

31 of 101

allowing more light in the room to see by as we think about policy. So my suggestion would be
in line with the Vice Chairman’s—namely, that we might be well served to wait and watch as
more light is shed on the situation. It will put us in a better position to make decisions. As far as
how we couch our policy decision, I believe we should be very careful about making any
changes. I think we will have an interesting discussion in the policy portion of this meeting
about what we say in our press statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I suspect everybody will note before the
morning is over, it has proved particularly difficult to get our arms around what’s happening in
the economy generally. That’s certainly the case more specifically in our own District. The data
and the anecdotal evidence are contradictory in some respects, and the messages regarding the
impact of geopolitical uncertainty on corporate and consumer decisionmaking are not completely
clear. For example, last week we met with our Small Business, Agriculture, and Labor Advisory
Council and the rhetoric at best was somber, especially from the manufacturing sector. Even so,
we had a Florida architect in the group who said he was forced to turn away business and
recently had expanded his staff. The heads of a small accounting firm and a small engineering
firm reported difficulties hiring qualified accountants and engineers respectively. A computer
support and systems supplier indicated that business was good and that he has recently been
adding employees. And a pallet manufacturer indicated that demand had improved slightly. The
point is that how people were feeling and the realities of their business activities didn’t always
match. Of course, there’s always a danger in attempting to generalize from such anecdotes, but
our discussions in that group didn’t provide a clear indication of continued deterioration in the
economy.

March 18, 2003

32 of 101

We specifically asked our six boards of directors, which met last week and the week
before, to question their contacts about three related issues: the impact of geopolitical
uncertainty on hiring and investment; the amount of excess capacity that existed and how much
demand would have to pick up before hiring and investment would resume; and what was
happening in commercial real estate. The commercial real estate situation is the easiest to
summarize. Activity remains dead in Atlanta and many of our other major cities. Furthermore,
it is slowing or softening in those parts of our District that had been doing rather well last year,
mainly south Florida and Louisiana. As for the capacity issue, the firms that reported to our
directors are saying that demand would have to pick up between 10 and 20 percent before hiring
and investment would resume and their businesses would return to what they consider normal.
Finally, it’s clear that uncertainty is weighing more and more heavily on short-term investment
decisions. Businesses are also reporting a lack of profitability combined with soft demand, both
of which reflect a mix of fundamentals and fears that will have to be reversed before hiring and
investment accelerate.
I have several quick final comments about our region. First, residential housing remains
strong, but increasingly concerns are being expressed that pockets of overbuilding are appearing,
especially in the multifamily sector. Moreover, additional softness is showing up in the high-end
single-family market and in south Florida even in the middle-market segment. Second, we
recently received reports of a further slowdown in tourism, especially for the cruise industry out
of South Florida—even though they’ve begun offering some significant fare discounts. Third,
despite higher oil and gas prices, the Gulf of Mexico is essentially a dead sea as far as drilling
and exploration are concerned, reflecting uncertainty about the longer-term prospects for energy
prices. Fourth, higher fuel prices are reportedly having significant short-term effects on costs in

March 18, 2003

33 of 101

many industries. One of our directors, a trucking executive, reported on an industry study that
suggested that recent elevated diesel fuel prices, if they persist, would add about $12.9 billion in
costs this year that will have to be absorbed by shippers or their customers. Finally, higher
natural gas prices have led to the shutdown of several chemical plants in the Sixth District. My
conclusion from all this is that uncertainty is certainly having some impact on the economy in
our region, with activity a bit softer in some sectors than I reported at the last meeting. But
clearly there are some sectors—housing and health care to name a couple—that continue to do
just fine.
Sifting out the effects of uncertainty from fundamentals is no easier at the national level
than at the District level. Recent high-frequency data came in a bit weaker than I had hoped,
especially for labor markets and the auto sector. But how much of this is due to uncertainty is
not obvious to me. At the same time, the sources of strength in the economy remain reasonably
sound. Consumer spending is being maintained, and housing continues at a high level.
However, increasing concerns are being expressed about both. Moreover, investment activity
and inventory accumulation continue to lag. I’m not as optimistic as the Greenbook baseline
forecast on the pickup in investment spending. The prolonged investment slump scenario better
captures my own view and would suggest a somewhat slower growth forecast. I really don’t see
where the impetus to substantial new investment will come from in the short run. Despite the
increased signs of weakness, I continue to believe that substantial monetary stimulus remains in
place. That stimulus remains significant the longer we hold rates below what market participants
had initially expected. Downward movement in long-term interest rates indicates that our policy
stimulus continues to filter through the term structure. Further, should even parts of the

March 18, 2003

34 of 101

Administration’s fiscal stimulus package be passed, it would give us still additional positive
impetus to growth.
Having said all that, I believe we still face the same two questions we pondered last time.
First, how much of the slowdown is due to fundamentals, and how much is due to uncertainty?
Second, would a further cut in rates have an impact on the fundamentals? Sorting out these
issues is important because I start from the premise that an easing of monetary policy can’t
substantially affect uncertainty or its sources. Moreover, the fundamental problems I see in the
economy right now are more structural in nature, and those are not likely to be mitigated by
further rate cuts.
Also, I’m not as comfortable as I’d like to be with the way our models are capturing the
evolution of the fundamentals and their impact on the economy. My sense from talking to
business contacts is that in reality the fundamentals may not be as strong as the model forecasts
suggest. Because of the way models are structured, they may not capture the full structural
dislocations that exist in the economy now and how they are being resolved. For example, our
model may not fully incorporate the levels of debt held by both businesses and consumers and
the implied fixed nominal payments associated with those commitments. Further shocks that
hinder cash flows could generate more dislocations and thereby slow the progress to profitability.
In addition, I believe that uncertainty is feeding back into the economy, posing real costs that
will have lagging consequences even after the uncertainty is resolved. This is especially true in
several industries that were already experiencing structural adjustment processes. For example,
the current run-up in energy prices is certainly exacerbating an already difficult situation in the
airline, trucking, and chemical industries. I find it hard to believe that even a quick resolution of

March 18, 2003

35 of 101

the geopolitical uncertainties will enable many of these firms to bounce back as quickly as they
might have done had they not been stressed by the energy situation.
To end where I began, it seems to me that the extraordinary uncertainty we face today
makes it very difficult to get a good reading on the underlying fundamentals of the economy and
the really important questions as to the mix of cyclical and structural issues we’re dealing with.
While it is probably fair to say that short-term, downside risks have increased somewhat, it’s not
clear to me that this is the optimal time for another policy easing, though that may eventually be
appropriate. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic expansion in the West remained sluggish in the
recent weeks. District consumers reined in spending in February and early March, making
profitability a challenge for many retailers. A number of District auto dealers also faced more
difficult times as unit sales and profit margins fell. Rising gasoline prices apparently constrained
sales of SUVs, leaving several dealers with excess inventories. One contact noted that
manufacturers’ incentives are no longer enough to entice borrowers. Customers want dealer
discounts as well.
Like consumers, many firms also have hit the pause button, postponing investment and
hiring decisions until the future looks clearer. Some notable firms in the IT sector are actually
scaling back. Micron Technology of Boise, Applied Materials of Santa Clara, and Agilent of
Palo Alto recently announced plans to lay off 10 percent or more of their respective workforces.
A large San Francisco IT oriented investment firm said it will release up to 20 percent of its
workforce over the next several months.

March 18, 2003

36 of 101

State and local governments in the West have been handing out pink slips as well.
Several thousand California teachers received layoff warnings in recent weeks, joining the ranks
of park rangers, reserve fire fighters, and library staff. Elsewhere in the District, states are
looking at salary cuts and program reductions rather than layoffs to balance budgets.
California’s credit rating is now tied with Louisiana’s for last place after a round of downgrades
by major rating agencies. Although these downgrades increased states’ borrowing costs, our
estimates indicate that the increase will be small relative to the size of the budget and the budget
deficit. While state budgets have constrained government spending in the West, federal
increases for defense and homeland security expenditures have been a significant positive for the
District. The importance of defense dollars to the West can be seen at Boeing, where defenserelated business has helped offset declines in the commercial aircraft side. Boeing now employs
more people in the defense systems units than in commercial jets.
Turning to the national economy, recent data have been negative on balance. Given these
data and intermeeting financial developments, we have lowered our expectations of growth this
year, even after allowing for some further easing of monetary policy. We now expect that real
GDP will grow 3 percent this year versus 3½ percent last time. As a result, excess capacity rises
further over the next few quarters, which puts downward pressure on core inflation. The core
PCE price index is now forecast to go up by just 1¼ percent in 2004. Along with the weaker
forecast we have heightened concerns about the potential downside. The longer the economy
remains partially paralyzed by high energy prices and uncertainty, the more serious the downside
risks. Our forecast that the pace of output growth will pick up during this year depends on
business fixed investment rebounding before consumer spending falters. Recent data on retail
sales and auto sales have not been reassuring in this regard. And there is as yet no convincing

March 18, 2003

37 of 101

evidence that investment spending is ready to take up the slack. Of course, the situation in Iraq
is contributing to some extent to the recent deterioration in economic activity. However, it’s not
certain that a quick favorable outcome is imminent or that such a resolution would provide an
immediate boost to the economy that would remove the need for additional stimulus. Some in
the private sector have postponed hard-to-reverse investment and hiring decisions in the face of
uncertainty.
As in the Greenbook, our most likely scenario shows subpar growth and rising excess
capacity for the next year. Also, I agree with my colleague, President Minehan, about the risks.
While the risks on both sides are sizable, the downside risks to both inflation and output are of
much greater concern to me. In my view a significant easing of policy seems appropriate as a bit
more insurance that we could take against these downside risks. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in the Seventh District
has softened. Many of our contacts indicate that they saw some signs of improvement beginning
around the turn of the year and extending into the first half of February. However, activity has
deteriorated abruptly over the past few weeks. Clearly, consumers and businesses have become
increasingly cautious as international tensions have mounted. But a number of our contacts
doubt that the economy will grow robustly even after the situation in Iraq is resolved. Their
concerns seem to result from lackluster demand, excess capacity, and rising operating costs in
the context of little or no pricing power. But when we press them, they often have not been able
to identify any root cause for the weakness in demand other than the international situation. This
is somewhat similar to Bill McDonough’s comments earlier.

March 18, 2003

38 of 101

Housing is the only major sector in the District that still seems to be robust. Consumer
spending has generally remained weak. As we all know, light vehicle sales fell in February;
early reports in March suggest little improvement and, in the case of one of the Big Three,
further weakening. Automakers and dealers told us that they were expecting some sales
volatility from month to month, but they clearly were surprised by how soft sales were in late
February. The higher incentives were not working for the first time in quite a while. Some
portion of this decrease can be attributed to severe weather, which I’m happy to say did not find
its way into the Seventh Federal Reserve District. But many reported that they were seeing the
influence of heightened uncertainty, weak labor markets, and higher fuel costs on consumer
demand. Despite higher incentives, light vehicle inventories have risen above desired levels, and
firms are being forced to cut production in order to keep their inventories in line.
Outside of autos, District manufacturing has also slowed since our last meeting, with
most businesses continuing to take a wait-and-see attitude. Contacts both inside and outside
manufacturing have become increasingly concerned about rising input costs. Several of our
directors in Chicago and Detroit reported that increasing prices for energy, property and casualty
insurance, employee health care, and materials have boosted production costs significantly. The
combination of flat-to-declining demand, significantly higher costs, and fierce competition is
pressuring profit margins. In this environment, many businesses continue to delay hiring. The
phrase we keep hearing is “hiring paralysis.” We’ve also heard reports that a number of large
companies, in addition to the ones that Bob Parry just mentioned, are planning another round of
layoffs. Both Kelley and Manpower reported that their year-over-year growth rates have trailed
off significantly in recent months. One firm did see a pickup in temporary hires in areas where
military reservists were called up, but the effect was small.

March 18, 2003

39 of 101

Turning to the national outlook, the macroeconomic picture is even more uncertain than it
was at our last meeting. Given the uncertainty about Iraq in recent weeks, many businesses no
doubt delayed major spending decisions. Why not wait another few weeks to see how events
turn out? It’s likely that such thinking contributed to the weak hiring we saw in February. As I
noted earlier, our contacts say that activity has slowed even more since the labor market
reference week. In addition, although oil prices have not yet reached extremely disruptive levels,
the prospect of further increases is an important downside risk to the economy. As I mentioned
earlier, many of our contacts say that demand is being held back by factors other than
geopolitical risks, and this raises the possibility that even if the situation in Iraq is resolved
quickly, we could be in for a period of prolonged sluggishness. However, at this point there is
not much evidence that the weakness goes beyond Iraq. Although our contacts are very
concerned, they’ve offered few other specific rationales for the continuing sluggishness. As
David said, they’re having difficulty disentangling the reasons for the weakness. Moreover, the
foundation appears in place for a pickup in growth—for example, accommodative monetary
policy, lean inventories, and of course strong productivity growth.
Accordingly, if the Iraq situation is resolved quickly, we expect to see activity accelerate
later this year, although growth for the year will still fall short of potential. Of course, as pointed
out in the Greenbook simulations, which I thought were excellent, businesses and households
could respond in a variety of ways as geopolitical events unfold. So I guess it would be an
understatement to say that the degree of near-term uncertainty surrounding the outlook is
unusually high.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.

March 18, 2003

40 of 101

MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What we hear repeatedly around the District
are phrases such as “muddling along,” “on hold,” and “wait and see.” Bank loan demand is flat.
It’s very difficult to know—I don’t think anybody can tell—how much of what we’ve been
observing is a consequence of war fears and how much of it reflects underlying uncertainties.
I’ve been pressing my contacts about their capital spending plans and in particular trying to find
out if people are thinking ahead to the expiration of the tax incentives in September of next year.
In general, people comment that they are not taking that into account yet, and capital spending is
flat. My UPS contact says that UPS capital expenditures are for repairing or replacing
equipment as necessary but there is no growth in the company’s capital expenditures spending.
However, my FedEx contact said that FedEx does plan to buy trucks very aggressively to take
advantage of the investment incentives. He expects that perhaps 5 to10 percent of FedEx capital
outlays in 2004 will reflect spending being moved from 2005 into 2004 to take advantage of
those incentives.
I believe there is a way to think about the national picture that may be useful. Think
back, for example, to the middle of last week when the Greenbook was being put to bed, which
was before the Thursday stock market rally. Let me put this in a very overstated, extreme way in
order to make a point. If we view a lot of the data as reflecting the means of a fairly wide
distribution, then maybe there’s a 50 percent probability of a really good outcome—call that a
10—and a 50 percent probability of a very weak outcome, flat or something like that. Call that
weak outcome a zero. The mean is 5, but in fact there’s not much probability weight on 5 as the
actual outcome; it’s spread out at these extremes, and that is a very unusual situation. Now, what
we’ve seen just in the last few days is a quite substantial surge in equity prices, a drop in the
price of oil, and a big increase in the value of the dollar—a large one-day move yesterday that is

March 18, 2003

41 of 101

very atypical. Those developments may well indicate that people are now putting more weight
on the outcome we called 10 and less weight on the outcome we called zero. If this way of
thinking about the situation is useful, it means—given that in coming weeks we will know more
about whether the outcome is likely to be closer to the 10 or the zero—that perhaps the best
course for us at this point is not to try to guess. If we guess wrong, the action we took based on
that guess will not have been very appropriate. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would describe the District economy as
stable, and I do think that’s probably the right term. There doesn’t seem to be any appreciable
deterioration at this point, but at the same time there’s little net growth. Employment for the
most part is flat, although at the far western and eastern ends of the District we do have
somewhat more favorable reports. But those are relatively thinly populated areas, with relatively
small economies. If one talks to our directors and other business people about their hiring plans,
fundamentally they don’t have any, which is to say that they’re not intending to add to their
employment levels anytime soon. There is still a lot of optimism surrounding the housing sector,
but I have the sense that in at least some of the larger markets the builders now have gotten
ahead of demand, and that will obviously have implications for activity as time goes on.
Consumer spending ex-autos appears to be close to flat, and of course, auto sales have been
softer recently as reflected in the national numbers.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I would make several maybe semi-random
points. First of all, the downward adjustment to the Greenbook forecast for real growth in the
current and subsequent quarter looks right to me. I think that’s consistent with the tenor of the
incoming national data and is certainly congruent with the anecdotes that I’ve been picking up as

March 18, 2003

42 of 101

well. At the same time I don’t have the sense that the longer-term outlook in the Greenbook has
changed any as we get to later this year and into 2004. I also think that’s appropriate. I haven’t
changed my longer-run view. To be sure, there’s a tremendous amount of uncertainty. But those
of us who’ve been at this for a while also know that there’s a great tendency toward getting
whipsawed if one puts a lot of emphasis on the last observation or two and not so much on the
evidence regarding underlying fundamentals. I think the fundamentals underpinning the longerrun outlook, which looks pretty favorable to me, are still in place. I won’t go through the entire
litany, but I will point to the productivity numbers that some people have already cited and to the
continued growth in disposable income.
I do believe, and this is the view in the Greenbook as well, that employment is going to
be slow to pick up. We saw that following the 1990-91 recession. But my reason for expecting
that is not just historical precedent. For businesses there’s a lot of pressure on the top line and on
the bottom line. In that environment, adding to employment is just not a change that’s going to
come very quickly. Further, I do suspect that the near-term risks to the economy are probably on
the downside. That’s a suspicion, not really a conviction. But whether it’s right or not, I think
we’re already positioned for that possibility. Policy has reacted, and interest rates are clearly
low. I’m not sure that we’ll necessarily get a great deal of clarification regarding the outlook
even if the conflict with Iraq goes very well. I’d like to think we would. But there are a lot of
other problems around the world, some of which could even be exacerbated depending on how
the situation in Iraq plays out. Finally, in my view this is the time to avoid over-guessing and
acting as if we know more than we do. There’s a tremendous amount of uncertainty, and it’s
probably going to pay to be patient and cautious and see how things unfold.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.

March 18, 2003

43 of 101

MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since our last meeting, growth in
economic activity in the Third District has faltered. At least part of this is due to uncertainty
over the timing, duration, and magnitude of the war, as many others have said. It’s likely that
when this uncertainty is resolved we’ll see stronger growth, but our survey evidence suggests
that economic activity might not necessarily rebound quickly after military action in Iraq.
Manufacturing in our area has turned down over the last two months. The general activity index
of our business outlook survey fell from 2.3 in February to minus 8 in our March survey to be
released on Thursday. That is the lowest reading since December 2001. New orders also
declined in March, and shipments were flat.
A special question in our February survey provides some evidence on how soon
economic activity might rebound after geopolitical uncertainty is resolved. We asked our survey
respondents to tell us whether their hiring and spending plans this year were adversely affected
by geopolitical uncertainty, weak demand, or something else. Respondents could choose more
than one factor. About 40 percent of respondents said that geopolitical uncertainties were
affecting their hiring and spending plans this year, but nearly 60 percent said that lack of demand
was having an effect. Of course, the cause of the lack of demand may well be geopolitical risks.
It’s difficult to separate the two. Nonetheless, this seems to indicate concerns about the state of
the economy that may go beyond the effects of the current Gulf conflict. Firms in our survey did
not appear to be poised to resume spending upon the resolution of geopolitical uncertainty. Only
10 percent plan to begin hiring and 8 percent plan to resume investment as soon as uncertainty is
resolved. But over 40 percent plan to wait at least six months or have no plans to increase hiring
or capital spending upon resolution of uncertainty. Responses to the special question indicate
that, relative to their plans at the start of the year, about a third of the firms have delayed adding

March 18, 2003

44 of 101

workers to their payroll. Almost one-half of the firms have delayed increasing their capital
spending. These results are consistent with most forecasts, which expect growth to remain
subdued until the second half of the year.
Activity in other sectors of the regional economy has also eased since our last meeting.
Consumer spending has slowed; auto sales and retail sales of general merchandise declined in
February. The snowstorm undoubtedly had an impact on this. I wish the snow had gone to
Chicago, but that’s another story.
MR. MOSKOW. No thanks!
MR. SANTOMERO. Nevertheless, our retailers tell us that, even before the storm, sales
momentum was slowing. Store traffic has been down since January, and merchants generally
indicate that consumers are limiting discretionary purchases except for home-related goods.
Commercial and residential construction activity has eased, although demand for homes has
continued strong. Quoted rates for commercial space have been fairly stable in recent months,
but effective rates have fallen. In addition, to attract tenants, landlords are now willing to lease
space for a shorter duration. While the outlook of those in the region’s business community
remains positive, no one is expecting a strong rebound. This is similar to the view expressed by
our business contacts at the last meeting. However, my sense is that the tone has turned more
negative. Perhaps this reflects merely the proximity of military action; perhaps it reflects the
realization that we haven’t seen much positive momentum and that certain sectors, in particular
manufacturing, have deteriorated.
Similar to the District, the national economic recovery has been held back because of
concerns about geopolitical uncertainty and most recently because of bad weather. How large
the effect is of these special factors is difficult to determine. The data we’ve received since our

March 18, 2003

45 of 101

last meeting have been on the weak side. Even excluding the special factors of the snowstorm
and the call-up of reservists, the February employment report was much weaker than expected,
with sizable and widespread job losses. It is too soon to determine whether the increase in
capital spending orders we saw in January will portend the beginning of a period of stronger
economic growth. Given the continued level of excess capacity, it would be hard to conclude
that capital spending this year will be stronger than the moderate rate shown in the forecast.
There are indications that the growth of consumer spending is beginning to slow. This might
reflect the events involving Iraq, but it also might reflect concerns over job prospects.
At this point, it might be useful for us to recognize again the difference between risk and
uncertainty. With risk, as we know, one can assign probabilities to the list of outcomes and act
appropriately given the distribution. With uncertainty, it is difficult to assign probabilities to
outcomes. Moreover, it is difficult even to describe all the possible outcomes themselves.
Generally firms and consumers have developed ways of handling risk. Uncertainty is much
harder to cope with. It tends to paralyze decisionmaking. Today we are operating in a world of
increased uncertainty. The result has been the postponement of many economic decisions—and
by extension the economic recovery. A short-lived and successful war in Iraq will resolve some
of the uncertainty—not all of it, though, since winning the peace will be much tougher than
winning the war and there are other problems, as we have noted around this table today. We
won’t have much new data on the real side, given the lags in the data. But we will have oil
prices and financial markets as indicators to look at, as well as anecdotal evidence we glean from
our business contacts. From these we should be able to tell relatively quickly whether a
resolution of geopolitical uncertainty will result in new vitality for our real economy or at least if
it was the main drag delaying the recovery.

March 18, 2003

46 of 101

Thus, my reading of the data suggests that the economic recovery has slowed somewhat
since our last meeting. But until there’s some resolution of uncertainty, I believe there is little
reason to expect that a change in our already accommodative policy stance would have much
effect. It might not even be noticed in the present circumstances. Our future path should be
clearer once some of the uncertainties surrounding the nature of military action in Iraq are
resolved. At that point, the Committee may wish to act. We need not wait until our next
regularly scheduled meeting in May. But at this time, in my judgment, any action would be
premature. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the last couple of meetings I’ve
tempered my remarks about the New England economy with references to a light at the end of
the tunnel, however dim. This had been seen in confidence indicators, in a leading index of the
Massachusetts economy, and in many anecdotal references. I hesitate to say that the light has
gone out, but the most significant change in New England between this meeting and the last one
is that nobody talks about that light anymore.
The data suggest that recovery may be further away than had been expected. Many areas
of the New England economy either weakened recently or are showing no signs of growth.
Month-to-month job losses accelerated in December, and benchmark revisions to employment
data that will be released later this month are likely to move employment totals down further.
Massachusetts has been losing jobs steadily while other states are resuming a downward trend.
Moreover, long-term unemployment is an increasing problem. A recent analysis tells us that, in
our region, the number unemployed for over six months was about five times greater in 2002
than in 2000; that number doubled for the nation as a whole. Consumer confidence tracked the

March 18, 2003

47 of 101

move downward that was evident in the national data. Business confidence, which had seen
small increases in late 2002 and in January, dropped in February to levels last seen in late 2001.
Future conditions data dropped below 50, indicating that survey respondents no longer foresee
positive conditions within six months. Similarly, an index of leading indicators prepared by
University of Massachusetts economists—which had been predicting some growth by midyear—
turned negative, suggesting that the Massachusetts economy will shrink about 1 percent rather
than grow. Finally, confidence among New England technology executives plummeted in the
last quarter of 2002, as reported by a local survey. These executives had experienced some
growth in their businesses early in the year, but prospects dimmed by year-end, particularly in
the telecommunications and software sectors. Commercial real estate markets apparently
softened even further around the turn of the year. Office vacancies rose both in downtown
Boston and in the suburbs, but we’re told that reported vacancy data apparently do not even
come close to capturing the extent of available space. Observers say that, even in the slowdown
of the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Boston market did not experience two years back-to-back
of negative absorption. Contacts now predict that 2003 will be the third consecutive year that
has occurred.
We spent some time trying to sort out what is perhaps the unsortable—whether
geopolitical uncertainty or underlying economic fundamentals are the cause of the ever softer
patch in New England’s economic activity. Not surprisingly, this is really hard to determine.
Our Beige Book, advisory council, and other contacts note that geopolitical uncertainty is clearly
having some effect but that it’s hard to quantify. The one channel that seemed most clearly
affected was consumer behavior. But most contacts also argued that, while the military situation
in Iraq and other geopolitical concerns were an issue at the margin, the economy would not be

March 18, 2003

48 of 101

showing solid growth even in the absence of war. Other factors, such as excess capacity in a
variety of industries and a murky picture for the high-tech sector, have contributed strongly to
economic weakness. Furthermore, while one would expect that war-related spending in military
intensive New England might have a positive effect, no significant effect has yet been reported.
The comment was made that, if your business was not involved in the mobilization effort, the
effect of military spending was actually negative in that steps were being taken to offset
mobilization costs wherever possible.
Finally, I can’t leave the subject of New England without some mention of the deepening
state fiscal crises, especially in Massachusetts and Maine. The drop in employment and a bleak
outlook for many businesses suggest that cuts now projected by the states to achieve fiscal
balance may not be sufficient and that their effects may reverberate on the regional economy.
Indeed, a month ago we thought Massachusetts tax revenue was likely to grow at just under
3 percent in fiscal 2004, which matched the projections of the new state administration. It now
appears that a scenario of no revenue increase has a greater probability. One area of the state’s
economy that so far has not experienced much of a downturn is the health care sector, which
accounts for 10 to 15 percent of the local economy. That could change. Further cuts in state
funding for Medicaid and the related loss of federal matching funds would eliminate the positive
margins hospitals overall have been experiencing and would send a number of institutions into
negative territory. Obviously, this will come back to haunt in the form of higher medical
insurance costs already noted as a serious concern by regional businesses, large and small.
On the national scene, incoming data most recently have been disappointing. Labor
market conditions seem to have deteriorated. Consumer spending on housing has held up, but
spending in other areas—on autos in particular—is lackluster. One of our directors has a

March 18, 2003

49 of 101

company that is involved in providing audio equipment for high-end cars. Throughout most of
the 2002 period he has seen resilience in his forecast three and six months out. Obviously, he
has to get forecasts directly from the automakers. In February that resilience came to an end, and
the forecast looking forward dropped significantly. His experience over thirty years or so in the
industry suggests that this is a unique break with the past, and it portends quite a bit of softness
going forward in projections of auto sales. Of course, it’s hard to separate the effects of the
mobilization of reservists and the blizzard that occurred in the New England area, and all down
the East Coast as well, on the critical Presidents’ Day weekend. But overall, the data are not
particularly encouraging in my view. Of course the real question facing us now is not what is
happening currently, because it’s hard to sort that out, but what is likely to happen over the rest
of the year. In some ways that is even harder to disentangle.
I have to say, as I said earlier, that I think the baseline forecast in the Greenbook is about
as optimistic a case as can be made. In that forecast the war is short and relatively cheap.
Uncertainty about geopolitical events drops markedly, taking with it much of the economic
restraint we’re currently experiencing. Consumer spending and residential investment rebound
solidly. Oil prices drop rapidly through the year. Productivity is well maintained. Key parts of
the Administration’s tax package are passed. Interest rates remain low. Equity markets show
steady positive improvement; and by year-end, business profits and investment spending are on
track for double-digit growth in 2004. Frankly, I think the risks to this forecast have to lie on the
downside.
The degree to which both business spending and consumer spending rebound in the last
half of this year is debatable, and I think it’s debatable not just because of oil prices. I do wonder
about the effect of developments in Venezuela and Nigeria and about the excess capacity or lack

March 18, 2003

50 of 101

thereof in Saudi Arabia and other places around the Gulf. I wonder whether oil prices will drop
as fast as they do in the forecast and stay low. Is that expectation realizable? With regard to
auto sales, the projections in the Greenbook seem particularly robust, going from the current
pace of 15½ million to 16 million to 17 million plus in the second half of the year. Moreover,
it’s by no means clear that the Administration’s tax plan will be passed in any form. Finally, the
strength of housing in the forecast is remarkable as well. The projection of 2 million starts by
early 2004 suggests a housing boom comparable to that in the early to mid-1980s, when arguably
the demographics were quite different.
Lots of things have to go really well in a very short time for the Greenbook forecast to be
realized. Indeed, it’s more optimistic about both growth and inflation—particularly by 2004—
than most other forecasts, including our own in Boston, for whatever that’s worth. Clearly the
Greenbook staff, outside forecasters, and we in Boston face a greater-than-normal degree of
uncertainty. But I’m uncomfortable with a baseline that seems to resolve most questions on the
optimistic side. Even if we were to take the Greenbook forecast as the most likely outcome,
where does that leave us as we move from 2003 to 2004? The Greenbook is explicit about this.
Excess capacity persists with the unemployment rate at 5½ percent and output about
¾ percentage point below potential. The only alternative scenario that changes that picture
involves a 50 basis point reduction in rates.
What should we do about this? High levels of uncertainty clearly call for caution. It is
arguable that an easing in policy right now won’t affect business investment and that the decline
in ten-year Treasury yields, if sustained for any time, should act to keep the residential and
mortgage refinancing markets alive. However, given the uncertainty—and I would argue the
longer-term undesirability—of additional fiscal policy stimulus, monetary policy is the only tool

March 18, 2003

51 of 101

left to support an economy that may face fundamental problems. The conservative, prudent
central banker in me agrees with Vice Chair McDonough that, given current levels of uncertainty
and the imminent war, the right thing to do may be to say little, stay put, and keep our powder
dry. But I am concerned about how long it really will be prudent to continue in this posture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m not sure I can follow that gloomy
assessment and alleviate it very much. Like others around the table, I’ve focused on our struggle
to sort out the restraining near-term effects of the war concerns from the more fundamental
factors affecting of the economy. Unfortunately, the picture became even murkier over the
intermeeting period. I do think we need to remember that the January data on consumption and
especially on investment raised hopes that the anticipated strengthening in demand was under
way before the economy seemed to hit a wall in February. We are dealing with what is
fortunately a most unusual, extraordinary situation—with the country on the brink of a longanticipated war. What is also unusual is that this war could be deflationary rather than
inflationary as the vast majority of the wars through history have been. That’s because the usual
pressures on resources from fighting the war could be outweighed by the negative effects on
private demand of a disruption to oil supplies and of heightened uncertainty. But it may well be
that the maximum deflationary impact is occurring in the lead-up to the war rather than the war
itself. It’s in the anticipation stage that uncertainty is greatest and that markets price in some
odds on major oil field disruptions. Surely, these sorts of considerations along with some very
nasty weather, at least along the East Coast—it’s always nasty in Chicago. [Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. I don’t think I’m going to mention the weather again!

March 18, 2003

52 of 101

MR. KOHN. You folks in Chicago wouldn’t even have noticed it if you had had this
storm! Seasonally adjusted, it’s always spring in Chicago. Very nasty weather along the East
Coast had a major effect on the data for employment, production, and sales in February. The rise
in energy prices since late last year, reflected in gasoline and home heating expenses,
undoubtedly sapped consumer spending directly. Moreover, the higher gasoline prices and
uncertainty about future gasoline prices may have played a role in weakening auto sales,
especially if that uncertainty caused people to postpone decisions.
Governor Bernanke noted at the last meeting that, the closer the event with uncertain
outcomes, the higher the hurdle rate for investment. It’s not surprising that many different kinds
of business commitments—hiring as well as spending on capital goods—were pushed back. It
strikes me that today’s housing data may suggest that decisions on home purchases and housing
investment could be affected as well by the heightened uncertainty. Certainly this uncertainty is
reflected in equity markets, where the equity premium—a key element in what is in effect a
hurdle rate for buying the existing capital stock—has risen sharply. Undoubtedly as
uncertainties abate, the markets will improve—as we’ve already seen in the last few days—and
this improvement will allow stronger fundamentals to show through.
Nonetheless, we don’t know how strong the fundamentals are. We can’t completely
dismiss the possibility that the February data were also signaling a less robust strengthening in
demand than we had anticipated. That’s certainly the way the credit markets seemed to interpret
the new information, especially the February employment report. Interest rates were marked
down across the yield curve, with declines in forward rates in the five-to-seven-year range
accounting for the largest decreases. A portion of the earlier drop in equity prices seemed to

March 18, 2003

53 of 101

reflect not only higher equity premiums but downward revisions to earnings and revenue
forecasts, which were probably only tangentially related to war fears.
At this point, however, it is simply not possible to sort out the relative strength of the
various influences on the economy or financial markets. The staff based its forecast on the
current structure of prices and rates and financial markets because it was the only sensible
default mode. The lower equity prices, in particular, played a role in weakening the forecast a
touch. But those prices and rates, as Dave pointed out, reflect the means of some very skewed
and strangely dispersed distributions. All we know for sure is that, as the situation unfolds and
various outcomes get more or less probability weight, those prices and rates will change—and
possibly by quite a lot as we’ve seen in the last few days. Moreover, a good part of that
unfolding will occur relatively soon, and a reasonable presumption is that the forecast will
change too, perhaps significantly.
Personally, I suspect that our next action is more likely to be an easing than a tightening.
I base that on the possibility that at least a little of the February weakness reflected continued
underlying softness and broader business uncertainty and on the possibility that geopolitical risk
could continue to weigh on oil prices, sentiment, and spending for a while. I combine these
possibilities, however small, with the notion that at this stage of the economic cycle—with a
sizable output gap and low and declining inflation—the consequences from inadvertently having
policy a little too tight would be far more adverse than the consequences from having it a little
too easy. But I don’t have any real conviction about the next policy action. We’ll have more
information about unfolding events and their potential effects soon. Over the near term, much of
that information will come from reactions in financial and oil markets, as underlying trends in
spending will only slowly reveal themselves. These markets will be noisy. Undoubtedly they’ll

March 18, 2003

54 of 101

overreact, driven by hopes and fears as much as by a clear-eyed reading of the course of the
economy, so extracting the important signals could be difficult. But given my lack of conviction
about the future and my sense that market signals will be important and over time helpful, I think
the Federal Reserve should not be trying to steer markets at this point. Like many others who
have already commented, I think it’s time to admit our ignorance, get out of the way, and let
events and their reactions unfold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that we shall adjourn for coffee.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Not much new and significant is going on in
the Eleventh District economy. Personal income is growing but not fast enough to raise living
standards. Employment finally is growing again but at rates so anemic that it feels like
contraction. Other indicators have crossed the threshold into expansion but not by much. I
would like to be able to conclude that the data signify the end of the downturn in our region and
might even be the start of a recovery, but I’m not convinced. Last Friday and Saturday I met
with the fine people from the Louisiana Bankers Association, and just before that I met with our
board of directors and our Advisory Council on Small Business and Agriculture. The views
expressed in the latter two groups were considerably more negative than the last time they met.
The mood of both meetings can be summarized by the opening remarks of one of my directors,
to wit: “With recoveries like this, who needs recessions!”
Single-family housing has been holding up, particularly at the lower and moderate price
points. One director felt that mortgage rates could rise by a percentage point or so, maybe even
2 points, from the current very low levels without having a strongly negative effect on housing

March 18, 2003

55 of 101

demand. In her words, “Mortgage rates provide the nicotine to the housing industry, but job
growth is the real source of nutrition.” Her point was that without some improvement in job
growth, the effect of lower interest rates likely will wear off.
On the high-tech side, our director from a major semiconductor manufacturer indicated
that the order-to-shipment ratio in the chip industry had finally risen above 1 for the first time in
two years. Recovery has now hit every sector of the industry except wired telecom; but of all the
markets they serve, the United States is the weakest. Those in the industry are waiting on the
sidelines until they can get a better handle on market demand. In the meantime, prices are under
extreme downward pressure. She’s looking for single-digit growth in the next year or two. With
no increase in capital spending and therefore no pickup in supply, she hopes that some increased
pricing power will be restored in late 2004.
We had several reports from directors who were quite knowledgeable about the energy
business. There was some discussion about how much of a war premium is built into current oil
prices. The uncertainty on the premium involves questions in at least two areas. First, is there
really surplus capacity in the Middle East? It has never been tested. Second, how much
infrastructure damage will be done in Iraq? One director noted that oil infrastructure is fairly
hard to destroy. The big question raised by a couple of directors was Venezuela, a country that
was characterized as being on the brink of disintegrating into civil war or anarchy. Venezuelan
oil has a big impact on U.S. gasoline prices. The government has fired half the oil company’s
middle management and replaced them with cronies and military people reported to be not too
competent when it comes to the basic logistics of moving oil to market. Significant gasoline
shortages already exist within Venezuela, and it’s likely that oil production is running at less than
half the claimed rate. Both the country and its oil production could be on the verge of total

March 18, 2003

56 of 101

breakdown. Around Houston the talk is beginning to be about a return to $30 a barrel for oil
after Iraq is settled rather than the $24 price that had been anticipated a couple of months ago.
Concerns were also expressed about natural gas. If prices were to remain in the area of
$6 it would suggest that we have a shortage bordering on scarcity. If businesses come to believe
that gas prices will remain at those elevated levels, they will shut their plants and sell the gas
they’ve contracted for. Our petrochemical plants are aging facilities that were built on the basis
of $.50 gas not $5 plus gas. These plants could shut down, and their output could go overseas.
The tone of our small business council was similarly downbeat. I got the distinct
impression that many of these business people and their peers are just barely hanging in there.
Also, there seems to be a lot of disguised unemployment and underemployment. Two of the
small business representatives on our council indicated that current conditions are the worst they
have ever seen, and both of them have been in business in the Dallas area for over thirty years.
When we pressed them on whether things were really worse than during the Texas depression in
the late 1980s they both without hesitation said “yes.” They lived through those tough times, yet
they feel that today’s fundamentals are worse. I hope this view is a function of hazy memory.
I’ve seen that before when the economy is going through the destruction phase of creative
destruction and when it’s too soon to discern the creative part.
Turning to the national economy, I must say that, given the economic and non-economic
uncertainties we face, the staff baseline forecast seems plausible in its broad contours. I
especially appreciated the choice of alternative simulations. I count myself to be among those
who believe that the disinflation forces of the last decade will continue to prevail over the forces
acting to push up the rate of inflation. As a result, I found myself drawn toward the Greenbook
simulations involving a lower funds rate or the adoption of a market-based funds rate. While

March 18, 2003

57 of 101

being drawn in that direction, I’m not ready to support a reduction in the fed funds rate at this
meeting. Given all the fog and the dust out there and the sand being stirred up by the threat of
war, the public and the markets would have difficulty interpreting any change in our policy
stance at this time. While I believe that the downside risks prevail, this is probably not a good
time to try to do anything about it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After starting the year off strongly, the
economy seems to have taken another stumble in February. The list of disappointing economic
reports since our last meeting is long: the jobs report, consumer confidence, retail sales, auto
production, industrial production, earnings forecasts, state and local budgets, and now housing
starts. The Greenbook authors have taken ½ point off the growth forecast for both the first and
second halves of the year. Blue Chip forecasts also have been lowered. Foreign growth has
been written down. Of course, the uncertainty about the military situation is or could be at the
root of all of this. Forecasts these days seem to hinge on a few critical exogenous assumptions,
with everything else being endogenous. In today’s situation, for example, I can imagine two
vastly different scenarios all starting from one or two changed assumptions.
One I’ll call the “green” scenario after the Greenbook and Greenspan. [Laughter] I’m
going to replay Cathy’s comments a bit here but a little muted. Lifting away the military
uncertainty, the Greenbook base case is actually rather optimistic. Oil prices are high now but
drop down in that forecast in line with futures markets. The stock market is at least in neutral.
Fiscal policy is very expansionary. Consumption is reasonably strong with saving rates staying
low to normal. High-tech investment is already slated to grow in the first half of the year, and
the rest of investment soon follows. The output gap rises for a while and then starts dropping

March 18, 2003

58 of 101

pretty sharply. If one splices onto this a more ebullient stock market, which we may already
have seen some of, it’s easy to imagine a fairly bullish scenario—one in which further policy
action is probably not required and, indeed, may even have to be reversed at some point.
At the same time, I can change one or two assumptions and get an altogether different
scenario. Oil prices in fact don’t come down, perhaps because of the damage to the oil wells in
Iraq combined with Venezuela not returning to full production and the apparently low level of
inventories. Natural gas prices stay high and keep electricity prices high. For whatever reason,
the stock market stumbles yet again, and wealth values don’t recover. Saving rates rise more
than forecast, and the lessened accelerator effect limits the growth of investment in the context of
continuing capital overhang. Budget deficits soar, and fiscal expansion is limited. The dollar
falls and hurts the economies of Europe, Latin America, and Japan without doing ours much
good. Monetary policy makers in these other countries are hamstrung either by real constraints
or imagined constraints.
The differences between these two scenarios are not all that large—hinging on a few
exogenous assumptions about oil prices, stock prices, and confidence in general. At this point
we really can’t forecast these critical magnitudes very well, and it makes sense to sit on the
sidelines for a while. It is quite possible that the critical magnitudes will become much clearer in
a short time and we will be in a better position to act. But as Dave Stockton suggested, it’s also
quite possible that the critical magnitudes will not clear up very rapidly and we will have to go
back to making policy under extreme uncertainty. The best approach then may not be to wait
until all significant uncertainties have clarified, but I leave those puzzles until another day.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.

March 18, 2003

59 of 101

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic conditions in the Fourth
District appear to be broadly consistent with those in the rest of the nation. Two sentences in the
Beige Book national summary describe our situation very well—namely that growth in economic
activity remained subdued in January and February and that geopolitical and economic
uncertainties are constraining business and consumer spending and tempering near-term
expectations. I think the staff did an excellent job in reporting, analyzing, and synthesizing the
data that have come in since our last meeting. The staff concluded that the economy is likely to
be weaker in the near term, yet real GDP growth and inflation next year are expected to be about
the same as was forecast at our last meeting, indicating the largely transient nature of the
additional softness. I generally agree with that forecast, although how I arrive at the GDP figures
is slightly different.
I’d like to focus my comments this morning on some of this near-term weakness and its
potential implications. First, the March 7 release of the February labor market data does seem to
have powerfully affected market sentiment about the economy. All of us are aware that last
month’s weather distorted economic activity, and our Beige Book contacts across a wide range
of retail sectors reported that the winter storms did affect their sales. Even if we knew how to
account for the weather, we probably still would conclude that labor markets weakened in
February. But it’s hard to know how much of that report is idiosyncratic, as can often happen
with one month’s data.
One of my directors, whose firm supplies materials nationally to the homebuilding
market, reported that she saw a significant decrease in orders in February. But as rapidly as
orders had declined in February, they bounced back in early March. Overall I don’t get a sense
from our directors or advisory council members and other contacts in the District that conditions

March 18, 2003

60 of 101

have changed fundamentally in the past few months. But, like President Santomero, I detect a
significantly more negative tone in their comments.
The economy is still expanding, and it is expected to do so, albeit at a very moderate
pace. Housing has continued to be strong, and the bankers in my District say that it’s going to
continue to be strong. Business investment is weak, and it is expected to remain weak according
to business people in my District. I’ve had many conversations with contacts throughout the
District about how credit availability, the geopolitical risks, and capacity utilization are affecting
the pace of their capital spending. Bankers report that they are very liquid and anxious to lend.
In fact, they note in a more short-term perspective that they finally have started to receive
inquiries from their business customers. Customers have increased their credit lines but are not
using those lines, which tells me at least that they’re gearing up for some use of them down the
road but not until the Iraq situation is resolved. Within the last week alone, two of my business
contacts informed me that their firms had turned away sizable orders because to fill those orders
they would have to add to capacity and, with the uncertainty that we face, they weren’t willing to
do that. In ordinary times, those investments would have been made.
So, as I commented at the last meeting, I still am concerned about the outlook for a
snapback in BFI given the current low levels of capacity utilization. Our research department
did some statistical work to examine the relationship between capacity utilization and business
fixed investment. We found that both the level and the change in capacity utilization strongly
lead business investment, again suggesting that we shouldn’t expect a pickup in BFI until some
of the excess capacity gets absorbed. From our Beige Book contacts we hear a consistent story,
namely that they are not willing to add to their capacity. Many of them still have a lot of idle
capacity and aren’t planning any additional capital spending even to bring that idle capacity back

March 18, 2003

61 of 101

on line. This does not mean that we won’t see any spending on plant and equipment or software
but rather that the upward trajectory is not going to be as steep as we’d like to see. Interestingly,
I think the caution about capital spending fits into the Greenbook projection of strong
productivity growth. I say that because the CEOs I talk to are telling me that, even though they
are paying very close attention to payrolls and to capital spending—they’re not hiring and
they’re not spending—they are still innovating. These efforts show up in the healthy rate of
multifactor productivity growth as we see in the Greenbook.
In summary, I am discouraged by the lack of progress in the expansion thus far, but I
believe that some of it is clearly due to the unsettled risks of war and terrorism. Obviously, the
potential for war is a very dark cloud overhead—and not that far overhead perhaps. Although
this cloud is restraining economic activity now, I do believe that its successful dissolution will
result in a continued economic expansion. So as the Vice Chair and others have indicated today,
this is a time for the central bank to be patient, to watch developments unfold, and especially to
see how the economy looks once this dark cloud of uncertainty dissipates. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the last meeting we have witnessed
a striking example of the differences between risk and uncertainty, with the latter being an
important factor in the private sector’s economic decisionmaking. The economy appeared to
have picked up its pace of growth in January and then suffered a setback by flattening a bit in
February. The toll of uncertainty on consumers showed through in drops in confidence and also
in a slowing of consumer purchases of big-ticket items. Businesses mirrored consumers by
slowing their orders of new equipment, cutting production, and delaying hiring. Finally,

March 18, 2003

62 of 101

financial market participants appear to be highly uncertain about future stock returns and are
highly averse to that uncertainty. These factors evidenced themselves in a decline in stock prices
that drove the equity risk premium to the highest level in more than a decade while, at the same
time, purchases of corporate bonds drove yield spreads on those assets down further. These
financial market developments are most unusual in my eyes in that they reflect a fundamental
tension and inconsistency in risk appetites across assets pools that look to the same source of
earnings—corporate earnings—for the underlying cash flow to support asset valuations.
Now, as we all know, this uncertainty broke a bit last week and a little more with the
President’s speech yesterday. What we’ve seen then is that stock prices soared, the dollar rallied,
government bond prices fell, and oil and gold prices slid. As a central bank, presumably we
should put a great deal of weight on financial market and commodity market input. But in this
case one can only hope that the optimism about a benign outcome to both the war and the peace
that’s embodied in these changes in asset prices becomes a reality.
When put in an international context, as Dino pointed out earlier this morning, it is clear
that financial market participants still seem to see the U.S. economy as—if I can say it this
way—one of the least ugly economies on the horizon. Perhaps they’re looking to our longerterm fundamentals, which I would say are basically sound. Fiscal policy is already
accommodative, monetary policy is by many measures still supportive of growth, the dollar has
weakened a bit on net, and productivity continues to increase. Because of the uncertainty we
have witnessed, it is difficult if not impossible to get a firm view of the forces driving recent
economic developments. It is true that we were shocked not just by geopolitical concerns, which
mounted steadily, but also by severe weather, which played through to higher gasoline and
heating oil prices. However, some of the weakness may also reflect more fundamental

March 18, 2003

63 of 101

difficulties that the economy is having in recovering from the recession. The Greenbook reflects
the forecaster’s dilemma by presenting what is described as a “mean” forecast, thereby I think
putting equal weight on a range of possible outcomes. I do not see this as a cop-out at all but
rather an honest reflection of the fact that nobody can declare with certainty which forces, either
transitory or more fundamental, will shape the intermediate term. As others have already
indicated, in these circumstances a prudent central bank certainty wants to do no harm. That is
best accomplished, I believe, by reflecting honestly the imponderables that the immediate future
holds and also by waiting for greater clarity to return. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. In talking with bankers within the last week or so, I think the vantage
points of two in particular were of interest. One indicated that at his bank, one of the largest
consumer lenders in the country, the volume and credit quality they have been experiencing
recently is consistent with upward pressures on prices and yet they don’t sense any pricing
pressures. The fact that they are a major credit card issuer and have a significant range of
consumer loan products has historically given them a window through which they have been able
to predict retail sales quite well, and that was the vantage point he was talking about. In contrast,
on the commercial loan side he had two observations. One is that there is nothing in the pipeline.
But two, which is of considerable interest, is that the credit quality of their loan portfolio has
improved. If you follow the Call Report data, you would know that credit quality even on
commercial portfolios had been declining up through the end of last year; but in this banker’s
judgment, it has leveled out and maybe even improved. So we see the contrasting effects of
banks having experienced improved credit quality yet no loan demand, which may in fact

March 18, 2003

64 of 101

corroborate Governor Bernanke’s thesis that the closer we get to the event, the higher the hurdle
rate.
The second report is from a bank that is a major commercial lender and also a major
securities servicer. That bank had exactly the same experience with respect to the commercial
loan portfolio but also had what it described as paralysis with respect to equity activity—no
cross-border activity and no IPOs. The underwritings tend to be coming primarily from the
municipal sector. The description we’ve heard this morning is of an atmosphere of uncertainty,
some portion of which is geopolitical. This banker would characterize it somewhat differently.
He would describe it as paralysis of which the dominant reason is geopolitical risk, recognizing
that there may well be other risks also.
One other note of caution from my contacts is that banks are now recognizing and
starting to feel how expensive liquidity can be. As a result, we’re seeing evidence of banks
reaching for yield. There has been a firming of the secondary market for commercial loans, for
example, and new interest in the B tranche of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). We also
see banks reaching out on the term of their loans and investments to achieve higher rates of
return, something Dino suggested was occurring and that I think President Pianalto hinted at as
well. All in all, it is certainly a time of great uncertainty and therefore, as President Guynn and
others have said, perhaps not a circumstance that can most directly be addressed through
monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. I also wanted to talk a little about the financial sector, including banks, and
contrast that with what we see happening in the real sector. The Bluebook pointed out that
commercial banks in the United States had record earnings in 2002. And they had record

March 18, 2003

65 of 101

earnings in 2001. We had back-to-back years of record earnings in the commercial banking
system during a recession period and a relatively slow recovery—a period when interest rates
have hit forty-year lows and one characterized by unusual liquidity circumstances as funds came
back into the banking system. I think one of the things we’re finding is that, while it is difficult
to operate in an environment of uncertainty, banks really have learned to manage risks well. The
asset–liability management processes that banks initiated in the 1980s and fine-tuned in the
1990s clearly show that they can go through a major interest rate cycle and as a whole improve
their earnings. Net interest margins in fact actually widened last year.
On the credit side, we also saw banks managing credit very well. If we look at the 2002
numbers, the loan-loss provision as a percentage of the return on assets was basically flat
compared with the previous year. So again, banks are doing a much better job at managing
credit risks. What is also remarkable about these bank earnings is that they were achieved
through a record return on assets. It wasn’t done through financial leverage. Banks in fact
deleveraged last year, so it wasn’t a record year for return on equity. Banks achieved record
earnings through stronger fundamentals as well as better risk management.
If we look at the broader financial markets, especially since our last meeting, we see that
some of the volatility and excessive credit spreads we’ve observed in the last year or so have
continued to improve. As was mentioned earlier, while debt spreads are wider than historically,
the spreads have moved in. Much like what we’re hearing from bank credit officers, the credit
market folks are also saying that to some extent the uncertainty part of the debt spreads has been
removed. What upset everybody at the end of 2001 and 2002 was that prime credits were going
immediately to bankruptcy and that was happening because of what I love to call “operational
risks.” Credit was not the real issue. These bankruptcies were due to accounting scandals and

March 18, 2003

66 of 101

management fraud. Companies that deteriorated over time, like K-Mart, were handled in the
traditional way. But it was the uncertainty about what was going on with regard to these other
factors that contributed to the widening of debt spreads in the investment-grade market. That
seems to be coming down now, since we haven’t had any material events of that type in the last
several months.
Companies are restructuring. We know they’ve lengthened from commercial paper to
longer-term debt. Their corporate cash flow has also been improving, unfortunately in part
because they are not making capital investments. Consumers continue to refinance and
restructure their debt. The staff has shown us that household debt service is actually down from
where it was a couple of years ago. So household finances are in good shape. If the banking
sector, corporate balance sheets, household finances, and debt markets are stronger—and equity
markets we know at least have shifted to neutral—what really is happening? Again we get a
“disconnect” between the improvement of the financial sector and the weakness in the real
sector.
After our FOMC meeting in January I was optimistic, as the news continued to be very,
very strong. Then as the February data came out, as many of you have remarked already,
suddenly we began to question what was happening. Was it the snowstorms? After all, even an
old Southerner like myself actually had to go out and buy a pair of boots! I thought that would
have helped the retail sales in February, but it didn’t! High heating oil and natural gas costs also
took a toll on people’s spending. But as we’ve talked about, the uncertainty regarding what is
going on in Iraq and maybe other countries appears to be preying both on consumers and
businesses. Because it is very hard to evaluate risks and to make decisions in a period of high
uncertainty, the decisionmaking that affects real economic activity and creates jobs and growth

March 18, 2003

67 of 101

in our resources has slowed to almost a halt. So until we really know more about the situation in
Iraq, I’m not sure what we can do to deal with the uncertainty through monetary policy. The
concerns involve not only the war but also, as many of you have mentioned already, the
aftermath of the war. Unlike the situation in Kuwait, we are not going to be reinstalling the
government; we have to help create a successor government. Therefore, I think the uncertainty
is going to continue for some time. Because of the nature of the uncertainty, I’m uncomfortable
making any change right now in the direction of policy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As many have noted, we’re currently in
a period of maximum uncertainty, with the result that the economy is almost in a state of
suspended animation. Until the world situation clarifies, the hurdle rate for investment or any
major commitment will be very high, as some of my colleagues have noted. By the same token,
any action we would take on rates today would be largely inframarginal.
I continue to believe that the economy has substantial fundamental and financial
strengths. There is also a lot of accumulated slack in the economy because we’ve had essentially
no employment gains for about two years. Therefore, I think there’s a good chance that a
reasonably successful resolution of the Iraqi situation will lead to strong growth in the second
half of this year and in 2004. But in deference to President Minehan, I also agree that some
alternative, more negative scenarios are possible. Here are two.
The first is what I call the “fear of fear itself” scenario—continuing pessimism. There
might be a less than satisfactory outcome to the war or continuing fear of terrorism, in which
case consumer confidence and self-confirming doubts might lead to slow growth in investment
and consumer spending. I think that’s a real possibility and one that we need to keep in mind.

March 18, 2003

68 of 101

A second possibility, which is perhaps complementary to that, would be a weak profits
scenario. Firms could find that their international markets are very weak, and they could
continue to suffer from high energy costs and high costs for insurance and pensions. That
combined with structural issues in a number of major industries and perhaps a lack of
technological opportunities—or opportunities that are less good than hoped for—might result in
profits that are not strong. That in turn would lead to weaker stock market valuations and less
investment than we’re hoping for. So those are two possible scenarios. Given the amount of
slack in the economy, I think either of those situations, if they were to materialize, would be
amenable to continued stimulation from both monetary and fiscal policy.
Let me say a word about timing. Over the intermeeting period there is, of course, the
possibility that the current very high level of uncertainty will be resolved one way or the other.
On the one hand, we could get very good results in Iraq with strong financial market reactions, a
boost in consumer confidence, strong anecdotal reports, and so on. That would support the case
for waiting and watching with the hope that the strong recovery would commence. On the other
hand, we might get the other tail of the distribution of possible outcomes—bad results in Iraq and
much concern at home, and negative financial market responses to that. But I want to echo what
David Stockton and several others have pointed out—namely that there is a large middle area of
the distribution that we might be facing at the next meeting. There may still be considerable
uncertainty about the state of the economy going forward and whether or not the scenario in the
Greenbook will in fact be realized. I would like to caution against the situation where we are
continually waiting for uncertainty to be resolved before taking action. That situation could go
on indefinitely. If the economy is still struggling and if there is no significant improvement or

March 18, 2003

69 of 101

evidence of increasing strength by our next meeting, I hope we will at least consider the case for
easing policy at that time. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Mr. Reinhart.
MR. REINHART. 2 Mr. Chairman, Carol will be distributing some materials
that I’ll be referring to. With events moving quickly, I thought it best to start with
the snapshot in exhibit 1 of market participants’ current thinking about the decision
you will announce this afternoon. As shown in the top panel, at ten o’clock this
morning the April federal funds rate futures contract traded 9 basis points below the
current 1¼ percent intended level, consistent with a one-in-three chance of a
quarter-point easing. Survey responses collected Friday (the middle left panel)
indicate that the majority of investors believe that you will depict the balance of
risks as tilted toward economic weakness, a shift in sentiment (the middle right
panel) that followed the release of a surprising contraction in payroll employment.
You might not want to bank too much on these readings, though, in that
expectations have been changeable of late and are now quite diffuse, as shown in
the bottom panel in the implied probability distribution of where the funds rate will
be in six months. Note both that the left tail of this probability distribution is
bunched at quite low levels of the funds rate and that one-fifth of the mass rests
above the current intended rate.
Among the market participants who are counting on policy easing, recent
readings on the labor market—both the February employment report and the high
level of initial claims—seem to weigh importantly in their thinking. Moreover,
with equity wealth once again lower and consumers appearing less confident, the
expansion of aggregate demand seems to be on a slower track than we had
anticipated earlier. The declines in estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds
rate, plotted in your next exhibit, summarize that downward reassessment of
spending relative to potential output. Indeed, by these measures, maintaining the
current stance of policy would imply some tightening of the real funds rate gap
relative to what you viewed as appropriate with your easing on November 6. Note
also that this assessment is not just a characteristic of the staff’s outlook and
empirical models (the shaded region), in that the reading of the equilibrium rate
derived from the indexed debt market (the thin line) also turned down. With
inflation also inching lower in the projection, the Committee might view the cost of
another 25 or 50 basis point easing as small given the stability of long-run inflation
expectations (the bottom panel) relative to the benefits of some stimulus to
aggregate demand.
For all the focus on weakness in hiring and in confidence over the intermeeting
period, other data have been mixed and on net have led the staff to increase the
level of real GDP in this quarter and the next compared with the baseline presented
in January. Indeed, as shown in exhibit 3, two- and ten-year Treasury yields
2

The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

March 18, 2003

70 of 101

actually rose in the half-hour windows surrounding the key data releases
represented by bars in the top left panel. That is, as the tally at the right indicates,
the reaction to macroeconomic news cannot account for the net movement in rates
since January 29.
The sharp and sudden movement in asset prices at times over the past few
weeks on rumors of war may reveal the extent to which the current configuration of
financial market quotes is only loosely tethered to economic fundamentals. It
seems that uncertainties about war and the economy are leading spenders and
investors to defer commitments, but we have no way of parsing the relative
importance of those two sources of doubt. Market prices, though, appear consistent
with the overall amount of uncertainty abating over time. If not, it is hard to
understand why, as shown in the two middle panels, risk spreads on corporate
bonds narrowed over the intermeeting period—as Governor Bies mentioned—or
why options on swap forward rates and oil prices imply that volatilities are expected
to move lower, as shown in the bottom panels.
Given this prevailing uncertainty and skittishness in the marketplace, the
Committee might be especially unsure as to how investors would react to policy
ease at this juncture. Going back to the transcripts from the onset of the Gulf War
in 1991, more than a few members doubted the efficacy of monetary policy action
in spurring spending when global events were in the driver’s seat. As the
discussion about policy gradualism at the last meeting underscored, such
uncertainties about the policy multiplier, all else being equal, would probably
incline you to attenuate action, perhaps to the point of keeping policy on hold at this
meeting. With conflict in Iraq seemingly at hand, this is one of the few times it
could be said that some aspects of uncertainty will lift with the passage of time—
although to what degree and how soon are not obvious at this point.
Deferring action might also be seen as having the advantage of allowing the
Committee to calibrate its action more precisely as additional information about
geopolitical developments emerges. Indeed, the Committee might want to be able
to use a significant portion of the current 125 basis points of room above the zero
bound in a timely fashion if events turn sufficiently adverse. While research
generally counsels that the presence of the zero bound makes acting preemptively
superior to arguments about “keeping your powder dry,” that body of work
measures time in quarters. With war seeming about to begin, you may be
measuring time in days or weeks, and it is difficult to imagine that a short delay
would leave a discernible imprint on economic activity. But the Committee might
view those darker possibilities as quite remote. Rather, the Committee may be
reading the substantial rally in financial markets when coalition troops commenced
the Gulf War in 1991 as the more likely outcome. If it is mainly worries about the
world that are making households and businesses hesitant to spend, then the
successful prosecution of war against Iraq should resolve some of their doubts and
provide important stimulus to spending. That said, the current situation may not be
nearly as neat as in 1991 in that concerns about geopolitical tensions might not be

March 18, 2003

71 of 101

punctured by decisive military victory, given questions about the formation of a
new government in Iraq, the prospect for terrorist actions, and adverse
developments in other trouble spots. If that seems farfetched, I’d remind you that
we are once again at code “orange,” indicating heightened risks at home.
Your last exhibit, besides providing a rationale for keeping policy on hold,
addresses the issue of the balance of risks assessment. If the Committee believes
that the cloud of war worries will soon dissipate to reveal an economy that is
fundamentally sound, then it should indicate so by retaining its risk assessment as
balanced with respect to both of its goals (the top left panel). The Committee might
also opt for a balanced risk assessment if it feared that a change would convey more
conviction to market participants about the outlook than it actually had. If instead,
more weight were given to the downbeat economic data of late and the forecast that
inflation would move lower still from its already low level, the Committee might
favor a risk assessment weighted toward economic weakness (the top right panel).
According to the survey evidence, this outcome best matches investor expectations,
suggesting that it should be preferred if the goal is not to test the market’s resilience
to surprise. Still, such a shift might be read by the broader public as suggesting that
the near-term outlook was weaker than feared, a message that might be problematic
in a nation on a war footing. In fact, the public’s focus has shifted to a different
stage, and in light of the unusual uncertainties, what the Committee does and says
today is unlikely to be extrapolated too far into the future.
The broader problem the Committee faces is whether it can usefully
characterize the balance of risks in an environment of such diffuse uncertainty.
This is territory that Frank Knight trod eighty-seven years ago. As he noted then
and as is repeated in the middle panel, “we can only appeal to the law of large
numbers to distribute the losses and make them calculable . . . in so far as they
repeat themselves.” Moreover, Knight considered circumstances when prospects
were sufficiently diffuse that, as he wrote, “The conception of an objectively
measurable probability or chance is simply inapplicable.” It may be that the current
situation has transited from a sense of known possibilities with assigned
probabilities—that is, risk—to Knightian uncertainty. If so, Knight’s advice to the
Committee is that “the fundamental uncertainties of economic life are the errors in
predicting the future and in making present adjustments to fit future conditions.” If
the possibilities are that uncertain, the Committee could, as outlined in the bottom
panel, defer announcing an assessment of the risks under the rationale that it is
better to be unspecific than specifically wrong. Such a course would probably
require a promise of heightened surveillance to the public and a willingness among
yourselves to convene a conference call before the next meeting if events clarify the
odds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Questions? If not, let me move
forward. Today’s discussion around the table pretty much coalesced into significant alternative

March 18, 2003

72 of 101

outcomes. I believe almost everybody would argue that the economy is weak, and indeed I
suspect on the basis of the most recent numbers that economic activity has probably been
declining in the last two weeks.
There was some significant improvement in economic activity from Christmas through
the first week in February, but the economy subsequently began to weaken measurably,
evidently in conjunction but not necessarily in line with the significant rise in gasoline prices that
started in early February. Gasoline pricing is like a withholding tax, if I may put it that way, that
is set by the service station operator. Those who purchase gasoline know exactly what they are
paying, and I would submit that many people are far more aware of the reduction in their
disposable income coming from rising gasoline prices than they are of their weekly tax
withholdings, which they probably don’t look at very closely. The rise in gasoline prices has
been dramatic. Somebody mentioned earlier that this increase might in fact be a factor in the
recent weakening of motor vehicle sales. The latter clearly has occurred, and that includes sales
on an incentive-adjusted basis, if I may put it that way. With regard to the advance in gasoline
prices, which in a sense is the specific result of the current geopolitical uncertainty, we can point
not only to Iraq but, as others have mentioned, to Venezuela, which is experiencing serious
economic and political problems. Somebody also mentioned Nigeria, which likewise is having
severe difficulties. That country is a very large supplier of oil, and its output could well go down
sharply.
Bob, I wasn’t aware that in Texas people are talking about the possibility of a near-term
shutdown in Venezuelan oil production. My impression is that production has risen from a much
lower level to about 2 million barrels a day in Venezuela. That’s still well short of their
3 million barrels a day capacity. One of the problems they reportedly are having, and I’m not

March 18, 2003

73 of 101

sure it’s actually true, is that some of the oil industry workers who were fired absconded with the
software that runs many of the wells, and the Venezuelans are having trouble bringing output
back toward full production.
MR. MCTEER. Some of our contacts indicated that their production is closer to
1.3 million than to the stated 2.9 million.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The stated 2.9 million figure, as everybody knows, is
phony.
MR. MCTEER. The actual number may be a little less than half that stated level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but a number of the oil analysts who follow
Venezuela fairly closely are saying it’s 2 million. Now, if you want to go down and look, we’ll
both go down and look.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If you go down and look, there could be two
openings on the Committee. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You’re still trying to figure out ways to improve this
place? [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. There’s no uncertainty about the risk of doing that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In any event, I think the argument that the geopolitical
risks are affecting economic activity has a certain credibility, but there is no way to know how
much. You can argue that the Iraqi and Venezuelan situations are having a negative effect, but
you obviously can’t argue that all of the negative effect bearing on current economic activity is a
result of concerns about oil. I do think that the fact that the economy slowed so quickly as the
price of oil rose suggests that oil is playing a part. Moreover, it is significant that the stock
market rose sharply and oil prices fell abruptly as the time for a final decision on an Iraqi war

March 18, 2003

74 of 101

moved closer. Governor Bernanke has noted that the hurdle rate goes up as we get closer to the
event, but that presupposes a risk-neutral and not a risk-averse view of the world. So, why is it
that merely moving up the time when an event will take place creates a significant change in one
direction or the other when nothing has occurred to alter the way people view how things will
turn out? That should not happen unless there are very significant risk-adverse characteristics in
the market.
What we are in fact observing here, a very sharp reaction, is evidence in my view that the
Iraqi war issue is a relevant consideration. In particular, the role of Iraq strikes me as a crucial
factor in light of the recent behavior of the oil, stock, and bond markets. As I’ve said previously,
we may think that the probability of a very favorable outcome in Iraq is 90 percent, but the
10 percent residual is very scary. That 10 percent continues to be very scary because nothing has
happened to change the outlook significantly. I would also note that the acceleration in
economic activity from Christmas to early February seems indicative of the fact that some fairly
positive developments must have been going on in the underlying economy, which may or may
not have been brought up short by the acceleration in oil prices.
The point I’m trying to make is that we should be in a far better position to assess the
underlying strength of the economy once the major uncertainties about the Iraqi war are
resolved, especially if it goes the way people expect. We will then be in a situation where we
can better focus on the other uncertainties and factors affecting the performance of the economy.
The erosion that has occurred in this economy in the last five or six weeks has been quite
significant, and we don’t know, of course, exactly why that has occurred. There are ongoing
developments, which have been mentioned today, that may have more serious consequences than
we can know at this point.

March 18, 2003

75 of 101

The natural gas issue is a very big question. We are drilling very heavily for natural gas.
Yet marketed production barely moves. That’s largely because improved technology has made it
possible to drain probably half the reservoir of a new natural gas field in the first year. Since we
are putting so much of our infrastructure investment spending for energy production into a whole
set of gas turbine based systems, our only new source of gas is liquefied natural gas. We cannot
increase domestic production, and we cannot increase our pipeline imports of natural gas
significantly, of which something on the order of 4 trillion cubic feet per year are coming in from
Canada. As a consequence of that, natural gas could be a much more serious problem than we
realize, and it could have a fairly significant impact on the whole petrochemical industry
structure, which is not a small part of this economy. That has nothing to do with Iraq, but it’s a
really fundamental problem for the United States.
In general, I think that we have here, as a number of you have mentioned, a true
Knightian uncertainty issue. In the past when we talked about the balance of risks, we presumed
that we were able to judge that balance, which implies some judgment of the probability
distribution on both sides of the forecast. As many of you have indicated, that does not seem to
be the case at this stage. Our degree of uncertainty has gone up dramatically, largely because of
the apparently very marked impact that the Iraqi oil uncertainty and the other geopolitical risks
are having on economic activity. Our presumption is that, at some point in the not-too-distant
future, we will be able to turn uncertainty into actual probability distributions on which we can
make judgments. While we can consider as many hypotheses and scenarios as we think may
potentially be useful, my suspicion is that we really don’t know. It’s very important for us to
convey to the public that we don’t know because the truth of the matter is that nobody can know.
If the Committee were to come out with either a balanced risk assessment or a sense that the

March 18, 2003

76 of 101

risks are on the downside, I think such a statement would be conveying more knowledge than we
can possibly argue that we have. The smartest thing we could have done last year when we set
our meeting schedule for this year would have been to recognize that today was the wrong day to
hold a meeting. [Laughter] I tried to convey to the Administration that we were going to have a
meeting today and it wasn’t altogether a good idea to start a war at this particular point. But they
must have lost my note somewhere!
In any event, I think the bottom line here is that it is important that we communicate the
fact that this is truly a period in which uncertainty as distinct from risk is the dominant element
in all of our deliberations. Because of that as we move from uncertainty toward risks, the payoff
from heightened surveillance should be very large. That is, we are going to learn a great deal
about the economy over the next several weeks. As a consequence I think we will be in a
position to address the issue of whether we ought to be moving or not. I do acknowledge the
probability that our next move is more likely to be a reduction than an increase in rates, but I do
not base that on any knowledge that I would feel very comfortable with. It’s more an instinctive
than an intellectual judgment. In the circumstances, I think we probably ought to stay where we
are, indicate that we do not have the capability of truly making a judgment about the balance of
risks, but nonetheless indicate that we continue to view the underlying structure of the economy
as consistent with a favorable outlook.
Factors supporting this assessment include improving productivity; I think the staff
forecast for this quarter is a 3 percent rate of increase. This suggests that the potential for growth
of profitability obviously still has considerable possibilities. If the stock market goes up, history
tells us that people who are very depressed will rapidly cheer up a good deal. In my experience
there is nothing more effective for boosting a company’s capital appropriations than having its

March 18, 2003

77 of 101

stock price go up. That shouldn’t happen, but it does. Well, I shouldn’t say it shouldn’t. It does
say that the market value of existing assets has gone up and therefore the opportunity cost of new
assets has basically decreased. So it is quite conceivable that, if the stock market rallies
significantly, we may find that this economy will begin to look like the Greenbook forecast. If it
doesn’t, then I think there will be a fairly strong argument that we should start to ease policy.
My impression is that we will probably know a good deal more before the next meeting. If
indeed that is the case and action is required, we probably would be well advised to have a
telephone conference and decide whether or not there’s any action we wish to take or what we
wish to do. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I assume that what you are
recommending is that we do nothing today, that we have no balance of risk statement, and that
we remain very alert to developments. Assuming that’s what you are recommending, I’m fully
in favor of it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. I support the combined recommendation of the Chairman and the
Vice Chairman. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He merely interpreted what I said!
MR. FERGUSON. The recommendation and the interpretation. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s better. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.

March 18, 2003

78 of 101

MR. HOENIG. Well, I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. But I have a
question for you. Are you planning to say in the press statement that we stand ready to move, or
are you just leaving that open?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think what we would want to do essentially is to
stipulate that because we’re presumably moving from a period of uncertainty to one of risk we
are involved in heightened surveillance, which implies that our policy will depend on how the
situation unfolds. For example, the stock market is up 20 percent in Europe. If it stays there,
that’s going to change a lot of things, but I don’t know if it’s going to stay there. So it’s too soon
to move in one way or the other.
MR. HOENIG. Yes, I agree. It wasn’t clear to me how you were planning to explain our
posture to the public. That answer was helpful. Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The idea is to have the possibility but not the
certainty of a move; otherwise the market will be waiting every morning for us to have a
meeting.
MR. HOENIG. Absolutely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I support your recommendations, Mr. Chairman. I think, as I noted in my
comments, that we really don’t know enough to say anything. I would also agree with President
Hoenig in that I would try to stay away from building up expectations in the market that we are
about to do something. Although we may get clarification over the next few weeks, I think the
probabilities are very high that we could get to the next meeting before we have an idea—and
even then it might not be really clear—of where things are going.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.

March 18, 2003

79 of 101

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. My staff and I struggled
mightily with how we would handle the balance of risks statement. Hats off to the person who
first came up with the idea.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was a combination of the great insights of Governor
Kohn and Vincent Reinhart.
MR. GUYNN. Hats off to Don and Vincent. I would also echo Don’s comments about
the need to be careful that we don’t go too far in implying that a move is imminent. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. I support the recommendations. I’d like to say three other things.
First, I actually buy the Knightian uncertainty analogy and using that as a rationale for deferring
the announcement of our judgment on the balance of risks. Second, as Dave pointed out, there is
a strong possibility that in fact we’re not going to know that much very soon for various reasons
that have come up around the table, and I think we want to guard against making uncertainty
disabling. That is, in my view we ought to have a call in a few weeks, and we ought to be
thinking about acting even in the presence of continued Knightian uncertainty. The situation
may not be convertible to nice probability distributions, but we may still have to act. I believe
that we ought to prepare ourselves for that possibility mentally. My third point is that the funds
rate is low; and if it goes down any more, it will get lower still. [Laughter] I’m just trying to lay
this out in small steps! [Laughter] If it gets down much lower, we’re soon going to have to
confront the alternative or untraditional measures that we’ve been telling ourselves we have in
our quiver that we can use in such circumstances. It’s not too soon to start thinking about what
we’re going to do and also what we will look at to know how well we are doing. I believe we
have to think about both and fairly soon.

March 18, 2003

80 of 101

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I interject a comment here? Ned and I had a
discussion about this yesterday. We have to be very careful, if we’re looking at new techniques,
not to get ourselves involved in any pegging of intermediate- or longer-term rates. I say that not
because we couldn’t make it happen but because the problem of unwinding that sort of peg will
result in utter chaos. We have no choice but to fix the overnight rate because we’ve tried
everything else and nothing else has worked. Pegging the overnight rate is a fallback position
and one that I’m sure we would endeavor to work our way out of if we could. If we decide that
we want to move to the intermediate rates to try to support rates, the last thing we want to do is
to mention what our goal is because we will never be able to unwind from that if we get locked
in to a specific pattern. I agree with Governor Gramlich that it’s certainly not too soon to give
some thought to these issues. But we have to be careful in determining not only how we phase
our way into a particular policy but how we phase our way out. In many respects, the latter is far
more difficult than the former.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the present Manager of the System
Open Market Account and I, as a previous Manager, are absolutely in agreement with you. We
cannot peg an intermediate rate. It would be very, very dangerous to try to do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, although I think an economic case can be made for easing
policy, I support your recommendation. I would also suggest that the idea of having a

March 18, 2003

81 of 101

conference call strikes me as very useful. It may be that a call wouldn’t necessarily be scheduled
only for the purpose of considering a policy change. If we’re going to have the events that we’re
all anticipating imminently, it seems to me that a call next week or even—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Next week will be too soon. We won’t know enough in a
week.
MR. PARRY. I’m thinking only in terms of getting updates from the staff about how
things are unfolding, not in terms of any consideration of policy action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, what is the Committee’s general view on this? I
remember that at the time of the October 1987 stock market crash we had daily conference calls
for general updates.
MR. PARRY. We did.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don’t think a daily call is required, but if you’re talking
just about basic updates, is there interest in doing that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I’d suggest weekly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, perhaps weekly.
MR. PARRY. Fine.
MS. MINEHAN. That’s a great idea.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the advantages of doing that, incidentally, is that
the interaction among the Committee members will create a higher level of insight as to what is
going on. Too often that kind of discussion would be a waste of time. I don’t think it would be
in this case. So shall we commit to that?
SEVERAL. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, let’s do it. President Stern.

March 18, 2003

82 of 101

MR. STERN. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation on the intended federal
funds rate, but I have a question about the other two aspects of it. I agree completely with your
rationale and your discussion about the difficulty of assessing the balance of risks. What I’m
concerned about is that people in the markets didn’t hear our discussion on that and it may be
very difficult to convey our meaning. I think we want to be careful that we don’t create any
uncertainties that produce more problems than we’re trying to solve. That’s one concern I have.
My second concern relates to the issue of heightened surveillance. I think the markets
understand that we’re always on the job. Therefore, my concern is that people may look at that
and think we’re likely to do something in response to an event when in fact the event falls short
of a situation in which we would want to act. So my concern relates to how we accurately
convey our intent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we can try, but we will never succeed in that
respect. There’s no way of so manipulating the views and attitudes of the marketplace that we
can expect to alter them in a period like this. When there is continuity in the marketplace, I think
we do convey our intent, and I think we do it rather well. But this is a discontinuous event with
very significant implications. We are not going to avoid the general reactions that may best be
characterized as the market trying to figure out what this group is going to do at any particular
point in time. We have to grin and bear it and do what we think is right, and that problem will
gradually disappear. It should not be a problem that, at least in my judgment, will create a big
market distortion.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I agree.

March 18, 2003

83 of 101

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I can accept your recommendation. I have some of
the same kinds of reservations and concerns that Bill Poole just expressed. I understand your
rationale, and I think it makes sense. But this is a change, and I’m nervous because I don’t know
how the markets and the public more broadly are going to accept it. So when we write our
statement, I think the choice of language is going to be very important.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the draft language does try to deal with that. I’ll
circulate the draft so you’ll get a sense of what it tries to convey. Let me just say this, however.
There is no way we can get this done without a part of the market distorting what it is we’re
trying to do. I know of no words that we can use to avoid that.
MR. BROADDUS. I agree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Basically, the only questions we have to be concerned
about are, does it undermine the structure of the market or does it significantly affect the
credibility of this institution? I think the answer is “no” in both cases. But I’m also confronted
with Knightian uncertainty in this respect.
MR. BROADDUS. If I could, I’d like to follow up briefly on the conversation you were
having with Ned a minute ago. I would urge the Committee to think a bit more fully about how
we would deal with the risk of deflation, and especially public concern about deflation if that hits
us, should we get into a situation where we’re closer to the zero bound. I personally don’t think
deflation is a major current threat. I’m probably one of the more sanguine members of the group
here in that regard, and maybe it’s odd for me to be the one making this statement. Looking
ahead, however, I do think that deflation is arguably a more serious potential problem than
inflation for the intermediate term, and I don’t think we can assume that the confidence the

March 18, 2003

84 of 101

public has in the Fed to contain inflation necessarily carries over to deflation. We don’t have a
very good track record in dealing with deflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We had only one event.
MR. BROADDUS. That’s right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We’re 0 for 1.
MR. BROADDUS. In any case, while I don’t expect this, it’s not hard for me to imagine
events unfolding in such a way in the current period of volatile situations that we could find
ourselves approaching the zero bound. Actually, I think it’s easy to imagine a situation where
the funds rate moves below 1 percent fairly abruptly. I’m not anticipating that, but it’s certainly
possible to imagine it. If the funds rate moves below 1 percent, the public’s concern about
exactly how we’re going to deal with a deflationary situation is going to intensify quickly. We
need to be prepared to answer those kinds of questions and assure the public that what has been
happening in Japan is not going to happen here. While we at the Federal Reserve have made a
couple of public statements regarding deflation, we haven’t said very much. I think we’re going
to be pressed to say much more if we get in this situation. For our own benefit, among other
things, I think we need to consider how we would measure the stance of policy and discuss
policy operationally in the neighborhood of the zero bound. For example, one question is, will
we have an operating instrument that will be a substitute for the funds rate if we are at zero or
very close to zero? If so, we have to have some way of instructing the Desk on how to
implement policy. I don’t know what that instrument would be, so we need to think about
whether we are going to have one and what it would be.
My own view is that it would be helpful, to me at least, if the staff could give us a “think
piece” that might suggest in some detail what a Bluebook at the zero bound might look like.

March 18, 2003

85 of 101

What kinds of alternatives would be presented there? In any event, I think getting out in front of
this issue would help us avoid making policy mistakes and also help prevent public confusion
and fear that might make the situation worse than it needs to be. We may think we have time to
do this, but I’m not sure we do. We could find ourselves in a situation like this relatively
quickly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree. I don’t think we have much time, but I believe
we’ve done a lot more thinking about this than is implied by your remarks. The real danger here
is that this market is running up on the expectation that the real problem is the Iraqi war, that we
are going to get the Iraqi war resolved, and that there’s an increasing likelihood that nirvana
exists somewhere out there. If indeed there are far more deep structural imbalances in the
system than we perceive or than the market perceives, then the economy could turn around very
quickly. In other words, in my view the deflation you’re concerned about cannot exist unless
there is an asset price deflation. The possibility that there will be a false run-up that fails to take
hold is a perfectly credible scenario, and the reactions could be quite significant. In that event, I
think we would have to move in a very expeditious manner. But you’re raising a question of
what type of move we would make, and there has been quite a lot of thinking on that question.
MR. REINHART. Actually, Mr. Chairman, I have had the staff start a fact book on the
zero bound situation, which will list the unusual actions mentioned in the recent speeches by you
and Governor Bernanke. It will include the authority under which the actions can be taken and
any historical precedent. The work has been fairly closely held because I had some concerns
about what would happen were it to become known that we were actively engaged in
contingency plans about the zero bound. I’ve also asked the staff to look into some other issues,
such as whether difficulties are posed already by the compression of deposit rates and money

March 18, 2003

86 of 101

fund rates. So, we are looking at that and questioning whether there are any other consequences
for the functioning of money markets—problems that the Bank of Japan sometimes complains
about—that would possibly incline you to resort to unusual policy actions before you get the
nominal funds rate to zero. I know that Dino, working with the Research Department at the New
York Fed, has been looking into these issues as well. I guess it might be helpful to get a little
guidance from the Committee about whether there is a memo in my future. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you are looking at the question of at what point
money market funds run into trouble and at the timing of other structural difficulties in the
system that may occur well before we get to the zero bound.
MR. REINHART. People are working on a couple of aspects of that. We’re looking at it
in terms of depositories, the compression of deposit rates and money fund rates, and just
generally wondering about market functioning. For instance, if the general collateral rate is
½ percent, then the unattractiveness of failing to deliver securities is not particularly high.
MR. FERGUSON. I would argue two things, Mr. Chairman. One relates to your last
point, which is similar to what Al Broaddus had to say. It’s not the zero bound that is necessarily
driving this. Second, obviously on September 11 or shortly thereafter, we saw some of this as
we were pumping a lot of liquidity into the markets. It will be very interesting to see if anything
came out of that because we are talking about exactly that same kind of quantitative activity,
though for a different purpose obviously.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. I support both parts of the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.

March 18, 2003

87 of 101

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation, too, and I’m delighted to
hear that this contingency planning is already under way. I certainly hope we never have to use
it, but I think it is important that we do the planning now. I have just one comment regarding the
phrase “heightened surveillance.” I hope we’re going to use that phrase or something like it in
the press statement because I know that market analysts have discovered that every time we’ve
used the words “monitor carefully” in the past we have had a move between meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We’ve chosen not to use that wording.
MR. MOSKOW. I’m delighted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I agree that we should not make a policy change at this meeting. Now
is not the time to move. My desire would be to stay as low key as we possibly can and let things
play out over the next couple of weeks whatever way they’re going to play out. The second part
of your recommendation I have a bit more trouble with. I do think the risks are on the downside,
and I don’t see a big problem with saying that. When we characterize the risks, we talk about
them for the “foreseeable future.” Certainly the long-term fundamentals continue to be good—
productivity, inflation credibility—but for the foreseeable future, some of the short-term
fundamentals are kind of dicey. There are concerns about excess capacity in the case of business
investment and concerns about employment, income, and the potential for declines in house
prices on the consumer side. So I do think that the risks are on the downside, recognizing that
uncertainty clouds our ability to assess exactly where the risks are.
I can go along with the recommendation to change the format in our press statement. I
think the market is going to read that, particularly in the context of your recent testimony or one
of your speeches—I forget which—as basically saying that there is a probability of an uptick

March 18, 2003

88 of 101

after uncertainty abates and attributing that uncertainty clearly to the war. In my view, the
markets are going to read the fact that we don’t make a statement about the risks as effectively a
move to the downside, so I guess I don’t have much of a problem with that. But frankly, I think
saying that the risks are to the downside is better because it keeps us closer to the norm and takes
us more out of play. To me doing something different puts a little more focus on the central
bank than I think is desirable at this point, but on balance I don’t have a big problem with it.
I’d also like to associate myself with Ned Gramlich’s perspective that uncertainty itself
can be paralyzing. I remember reading the discussion from the last meeting where we thought
we’d have a lot more information by March 18. As it turns out, we don’t have a lot more
information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that was my forecast.
MS. MINEHAN. Well, we don’t have a lot more information as of March 18, and I don’t
know whether we’re going to have a lot more information by early May.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually we do have more information.
MS. MINEHAN. More negative information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, not necessarily.
MS. MINEHAN. The war is starting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, remember that I testified as I did regarding
the probabilities of a strengthening economy because that was consistent with the actual
forecasts of the members of this Committee.
MS. MINEHAN. That’s right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was locked into explaining why everybody had an
accelerating growth forecast back in late January.

March 18, 2003

89 of 101

MS. MINEHAN. That’s right. I shouldn’t have laid it so much at your doorstep. That
was what we said in our forecasts as of the January meeting because those forecasts picked up
the trend from the end of last year and into the early weeks of this year. That’s clear. But I think
the market is going to read the absence of a statement of risks as effectively a move slightly to
the downside. I’m okay with that, but I would hope, along the line of Ned’s comments, that
uncertainty does not paralyze us
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It really hasn’t in the past. We have moved on
innumerable occasions when we didn’t have very much of a clue as to how the markets were
evolving. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Mr. Chairman, I support both parts of the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. So do I.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have anybody else?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That does it.
MR. GRAMLICH. Now for the high moment of the day, what are you going to read?
MR. BERNARD. Well, what I will be reading is from page 13 in the Bluebook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, what we vote on is the language shown in the
Bluebook.
MR. BERNARD. The directive wording is the following: “The Federal Open Market
Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an
average of around 1¼ percent.”

March 18, 2003

90 of 101

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Bernanke
Governor Bies
President Broaddus
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Guynn
Governor Kohn
President Moskow
Governor Olson
President Parry

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you circulate the draft press statement? Is that
generally acceptable?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Bravo!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hearing no objection, the last item on the agenda is the
date of our next meeting.
MR. BERNARD. May 6.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next official meeting is May 6, but we will be
meeting, obviously, via weekly telephone conferences. I suspect the first one will be next
Tuesday. We will do it on Tuesdays. We’ll have the staff circulate a questionnaire to try to
determine what times would be most convenient for the majority of members to have those
telephone conferences in view of the fact that a lot of people have previous commitments. We’ll
try to work it out in a way that is least disruptive. Okay?
We have no luncheon agenda, so those of you who would like to catch a plane may wish
to leave before lunch.
END OF MEETING

