May 6, 2003

1 of 115

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
May 6, 2003
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 6, 2003, at
9:00 a.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Ferguson
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Olson
Mr. Parry
Mr. Hoenig, Mses. Minehan and Pianalto, Messrs. Poole and Stewart, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. McTeer, Santomero, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Mr. Connors, Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Howard, Hunter, Judd,
Lindsey, Struckmeyer, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Ettin and Madigan, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Research and Statistics and
Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors
Messrs. Slifman and Oliner, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors

May 6, 2003

2 of 115

Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Clouse, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Fuhrer and Hakkio, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, Messrs. Rasche,
Rosenblum, Rolnick, and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, St. Louis, Dallas, Minneapolis, and
Cleveland respectively

May 6, 2003

3 of 115

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
May 6, 2003
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Who would like to move approval of the minutes of March
18?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So moved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Approved without objection. Dino Kos, you have the
floor.
MR. KOS. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the charts that were
distributed a short time ago. Since the last Committee meeting, markets have been
characterized by a mixture of uncertainty about—among other things—the outlook
for the economy, residual geopolitical risks, and SARS. Simultaneously, the degree
of risk aversion decreased and spreads narrowed, volatilities declined or stayed at low
levels, equities rallied in most markets, and a consistent theme among investors was
the search for yield.
The top panel on the first page graphs the U.S. dollar three-month Libor deposit
rate in black and the three-month deposit rate three, six, and nine months forward in
the dashed red lines. Since your last meeting, forward rates have traded in fairly
narrow ranges, as markets were pushed and pulled with conflicting news—the mostly
weak economic data and a corporate earnings season that, while unspectacular, did
not come close to many of the most dire expectations in the markets. Forward curves
and futures prices are still pricing in another ease in policy at some point, though
those same curves suggest that a tightening cycle will follow shortly thereafter. Of
course, this pattern of expecting lower rates to be followed by higher rates some
months later has persisted for quite some time now.
As shown in the middle two panels, two- and ten-year Treasury yields also have
moved in a fairly narrow range. One factor that did not seem to affect prices and
yields was last week’s record refunding announcement. The Treasury will auction
$58 billion of three-, five-, and ten-year notes in the next few days, with almost all of
that bringing in new cash. Further, all forecasts of future deficits continue to rise.
While analysts have commented about the risks that the increased supply poses, those
worries have not yet shown through to yields, though perhaps they will in time as the
competition for funds increases. Two possible reasons for the lack of reaction were
cited: First, worries about future supply are already reflected at the long end of the
curve and hence partly explain the steepness of the curve; and second the decrease in
recent quarters in private-sector issuance is allowing the Treasury to borrow what it
needs without bidding up rates.
1

The materials used by Mr. Kos are appended to the transcript (appendix 1).

May 6, 2003

4 of 115

The bottom panel graphs the investment-grade spread, which has continued to
fall. If one excludes some very large issuers such as auto companies that have special
stories surrounding them, the remainder of the index is trading near spring 1998
levels. Swap spreads, in fact, are already back to those levels. Part of this narrowing
probably is a correction from what are now viewed to have been extreme levels in the
autumn of 2002, when corporate governance scares were peaking. Part of the
narrowing is simply due to supply and demand. Inflows continue to come into bond
funds and need to be invested.
On the supply side, although issuance did tick up in late January and February, it
fell again as the war approached, and it has stayed low since then. Dealers note that
corporations are using free cash flow and what little corporate issuance there has been
to repay debt and de-lever their balance sheets. This helps to explain the credit
quality improvement, though it also implies that less is going into investment than
would normally be the case.
Meanwhile on the demand side, investors have pushed out the maturity and credit
risk curves in the search for higher yields. The bottom right panel graphs the
narrowing of high-yield and emerging-market spreads. Funds specializing in both
asset classes have had inflows, and with only a limited supply coming to the market,
the competition has been intense and spreads have narrowed sharply. Just to take one
example, Brazil issued a $1 billion five-year global bond that was six times
oversubscribed. A week ago the bond was issued to yield 10.7 percent, and it has
rallied in the week since then. It now yields 9.8 percent. The issue also included a
collective action clause, which did not appear to affect demand. The Brazilian real,
Mexican peso, and South African rand were among the currencies that benefited from
investors’ search for higher yielding currencies and asset markets.
Consistent with the narrowing of spreads and less risk aversion in recent weeks,
implied volatilities have decreased or stayed at relatively low levels. Page 2 graphs
long-term implied volatilities on the S&P 100, the two main exchange rate pairs, and
the ten-year Treasury futures since January 2000. The better performance of U.S.
equity markets in recent weeks—the S&P 500, for example, is up 15 percent—has
coincided with the fall in implied vols. As shown in the top panel, which depicts the
S&P 100 volatility index, that measure of equity volatility is back to below the
25 percent level for the first time since corporate governance worries heightened after
the WorldCom collapse. Currency volatilities continued to trade in well-worn ranges,
near the 10 percent level that has prevailed for some time. These volatility levels
have been maintained both during the appreciation of the dollar in the beginning of
the period and during the more recent period of dollar depreciation. The implied
volatilities in the ten-year Treasury futures contract have continued to ebb in recent
weeks to levels observed in the first half of 2001. Part of that recent falloff in
volatility may also be due to the decline in the Mortgage Bankers Association’s
Refinancing Index, as prepayments have slowed. That also may have lessened the
demand for hedging by mortgage investors and corporate treasurers.

May 6, 2003

5 of 115

Turning to Europe, the top panel on page 3 graphs the Libor fixing for euro threemonth deposits in black and the implied rates three, six, and nine months forward in
green. The forward rates continue to trade below the cash rate and market
participants expect further easing from the ECB, as forecasts for European growth are
still being trimmed. In the middle panel, credit spreads in the euro area continue to
narrow as well. In particular, the lower end of the investment-grade universe has
outperformed the rest. But unlike the case in the United States, issuance actually
picked up early this year, as shown in the chart at the bottom left, so supply there is
holding up. One possibility is that European companies are now going through some
of the same dynamics that U.S. companies went through in 2001 and 2002, when they
issued debt heavily in order to refinance and restructure debt and to extend the term
of maturing commercial paper.
In the foreign exchange markets, the euro has continued to rise past 112 and is
now at the 113 level against the dollar—its strongest level since February 1999,
which was roughly six weeks after the euro’s launch. Investors shifting assets into
the euro area reportedly include central banks, Japanese insurance and pension
companies, and European institutional investors who have preferred to keep funds at
home rather than move them overseas. Although we don’t think of the euro as a
high-yielding currency per se, both short- and long-term rates are meaningfully higher
than those for the two G-3 counterpart currencies.
Turning to page 4, Japanese markets show no signs that the deflationary pressures
in that country are abating. The banking situation continues to post challenges for
Japanese policymakers, and the recent declines in Japanese stocks have accentuated
those worries. The Nikkei stock index fell below 8,000 during the intermeeting
period for the first time since 1983. This has again raised talk in Japanese policy
circles about measures such as so-called price-keeping operations to stem the declines
in equity prices and hence conserve capital resources of the banks and insurers.
Unlike most other major equity markets, the Nikkei did not rally in mid-March. That
divergence from other equity markets is depicted in the top panel. The S&P and
DAX, to take just two examples, came off their lows rather sharply, whereas the
Nikkei continued its steady decline toward and then below the 8,000 level. Today it
is just above that level. The Japanese bond markets also have been gloomy, as shown
in the middle panel. The ten-year yield is trading at about 61 or 62 basis points, and
the yield on the twenty-year bond is at 94 basis points. Among benchmark issues,
only the thirty-year yield, trading at 1.06 percent, has a positive integer before the
decimal point, though not by very much.
The BOJ’s policy stance has pushed investors out on the yield curve and to some
degree into private-sector and foreign assets. The right middle panel shows the recent
narrowing of private-sector spreads in Japan, which is not unlike the patterns
observed in dollar and euro area fixed income markets. But let me note three points
of caution. First, as we know, companies in Japan rely more on bank financing; bond
market issuance is low compared with both their U.S. and European counterparts.
Second, the data are poor. But net new issuance is probably flat or perhaps even

May 6, 2003

6 of 115

negative in the lower-rated segments, which would help to explain some of the spread
compression. Third, spreads widened substantially in late 2001 when some fund
managers were faced with large losses, and the ensuing liquidation widened
spreads—especially for lower-rated paper. Those spreads are only now reverting to
the levels we saw in the summer of 2001.
The noisy chart at the bottom left graphs the TOPIX bank sub-index and the share
prices of the four major Japanese banks, all of which are down substantially as the
prospect for improvement in their business recedes. Mizuho, for example, reported a
$19 billion loss a week ago. Ironically, the spreads on Japanese bank debt have
nevertheless narrowed during 2003. The bottom right panel graphs the spread for
each of the four major banks between their five-year senior debt and the five-year
JGB yield. I would make two points. First, all the spreads have narrowed and are
converging, suggesting little in the way of differentiation among the banks—or at
least less than had been the case some months ago. Second, these spreads obviously
represent very low absolute yields. With the five-year JGB yield itself at 21 basis
points today, a spread of 10 basis points on Sumitomo’s debt, for example, means that
the bank is able to sell five-year debt at 31 basis points.
Moving to the next page, one of the stars in the currency market has been the
Canadian dollar. In recent trading sessions the Canadian dollar has risen above
70 cents and is now trading at its strongest level since 1997. Among the reasons for
the Canadian dollar’s performance are Canada’s strong economic performance,
higher yields, less overcapacity in Canadian industry, a large energy sector at a time
when prices have generally been high, and the Bank of Canada’s move to tighten
monetary policy. Canadian ten-year yields are about 1 percentage point higher than
those on comparable U.S. instruments; and at the short end, Canadian interest rates
are about 2 percentage points higher. The divergence in policy has also had a
different effect on the yield curve. The middle panel graphs the two-to-ten-year U.S.
Treasury curve in blue and the comparable data for Canada in red. While the U.S.
curve has been steep at between 220 to 240 basis points all year, the Canadian curve
has actually flattened by about 60 basis points and is currently only half as steep as
the U.S. curve. The World Health Organization’s decision to issue a travel advisory
for Toronto had periodic but only transient effects on Canadian markets.
The Hong Kong and Chinese markets, on the other hand, had at times a more
pronounced reaction to SARS-related news but perhaps less than one might have
expected given the sheer volume of coverage the story received. At the bottom left in
blue is a graph of the Hong Kong dollar, which is fixed at 7.8 to the dollar. The oneyear forward rate moved upward in mid- to late April to 7.83 but since then has eased
back somewhat. At the bottom right, China’s spot exchange rate is depicted in blue
and the implied one-year renminbi nondeliverable forward rate in red. The discount
on the renminbi has narrowed somewhat, but all in all the reaction was fairly modest.
Equities in both Hong Kong and China, however, did fall, although again perhaps not
as dramatically as one might have expected.

May 6, 2003

7 of 115

Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign operations in the intermeeting period. I will
need a vote on domestic operations. And I’d be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A collective action clause (CAC) may be in the gazillion
new issuances that follow the Mexican and Brazilian ones, both of which apparently required
very little if any premium in the marketplace to obtain the CAC. Is there any evidence among
emerging-country borrowers that use of the CAC will now spread significantly? It obviously
provides greater flexibility in negotiating.
MR. KOS. I’m not an expert in that particular area. Certainly some of the stigma
associated with the CAC will be taken away. One of the concerns that officials had worried
about was that there would be some stigma associated with being first off the block with a CAC.
With Mexico and Brazil having moved to include CACs, there may be less of a stigma so it may
be easier to get them in. But I wouldn’t want to make a forecast that they will become a routine
part of such contracts.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. May I make a comment? I think the general Street
talk in New York is that, since the Mexicans have been the most vehemently opposed to CACs,
their going first was rather statesmanlike—especially since they didn’t pay anything for
including the CAC. The Brazilians went next, but there’s a big question as to whether less high
quality borrowers would not have to pay a premium for the CAC. I think the real answer is that
we don’t know yet, though it’s clearly the question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Talking about Brazilian debt as high quality is a bit of a
change.
MR. FERGUSON. Could I add one other point based on the work that I’ve done on this?
Two other countries have been mentioned in this regard, and one is Korea, which for geopolitical
reasons obviously is not going to go to the market any time soon. But they have been among the

May 6, 2003

8 of 115

emerging-market countries that were most supportive of the CAC, so the expectation is that
when they come to market they will adopt the CAC. The other country that has been active in
these discussions is South Africa, which had been a little more negative about the CAC, I think.
But there were many people who thought that, with the Mexicans having gone ahead, the
resistance in South Africa might change as well. So those two countries are ones that need to be
watched. But I think Bill is certainly right that it’s just not clear yet how all this is going to sort
out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a question about the construction of one of the graphs on page 3.
At the bottom left you show the dollar value of the euro issues. Are those converted at the
exchange rate of the month in question?
MR. KOS. I believe so, yes.
MR. POOLE. If we look at July ’01, for example, the height of that bar is about the same
as the previous bar, which I guess is for April ’01. But in fact the dollar price of the euro was
quite different at those times. So if you depicted the values in euros, the bars on the right-hand
side would not look quite so high relative to the others, right? That would mean that the most
recent bars would be converted at $1.12 or $1.11 or something like that.
MR. KOS. That’s true, yes.
MR. POOLE. And the bars some time back would be converted at $1.03 or something
like that. I don’t know exactly—my memory of those rates is not that solid. But the point is—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The swings are really quite large, though.

May 6, 2003

9 of 115

MR. POOLE. Oh, I know they are. I’m just saying that it might be more useful for our
purposes not to plot the changed dollar price of the euro with the actual euro issuance.
Presenting that in euro terms might be a little clearer for our purposes.
MR. KOS. Yes, I think for us it was a question of data that were available on short
notice. But I think you’re right that that would be a better way of presenting it.
MR. POOLE. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Dino? I need a vote.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval of domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection they are approved. Dino, you want to
discuss the Canadian and Mexican swap renewals?
MR. KOS. Yes. It’s May, which means that it’s time to take up the renewal of those
swaps. They expire in mid-December; but because of the six-month notice that would have to be
given if the Committee chose not to renew them, this is the proper meeting to vote on renewal. I
sent out a short memo on this last week, and my recommendation is that the Committee renew
the NAFA swap lines with Mexico and Canada.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval.
SPEAKER(?). Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Approval has been moved. All in favor say “aye.”
SEVERAL. Aye.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All opposed, say “no.”
MR. BROADDUS. No.

May 6, 2003

10 of 115

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We now move on to the economic situation. Dave
Stockton and Karen Johnson.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has clearly been a
narrowing of uncertainties surrounding the outlook as well as a considerable amount
of good news for the economy since the March Greenbook was completed. The
successful and expeditious completion of the war in Iraq has alleviated some of the
pressing concerns that had been weighing on participants in the energy and financial
markets. Indeed, with OPEC production higher, remarkably little damage to oil fields
in Iraq and, as yet, few signs of negative political spillovers elsewhere in the region,
oil prices have tumbled. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil is
expected to average about $9 per barrel lower in the current quarter than we had
anticipated in our previous forecast.
In financial markets, stock prices began to move noticeably higher just as we were
completing our March projection. The lifting of war-related uncertainties and the
better-than-expected earnings reports for the first quarter boosted equity prices about
13 percent above the level assumed in our last projection. Risk spreads on corporate
bonds have narrowed as well, especially for lower-tier firms. Households too seem to
be feeling better. Consumer confidence has rebounded in recent weeks, retracing
much of the decline that had occurred since last fall. Finally, one of the key upside
risks to the projection that we had highlighted earlier appears to have materialized, as
the defense spending implied by the recently enacted supplemental is considerably
more than we had incorporated in our previous projection.
So with all of that apparent good news, our forecast might come as something of a
disappointment. We have revised down the growth of real GDP throughout 2003,
and the 2.8 percent increase projected for the year is nearly ½ percentage point less
than in the March Greenbook. To be sure, greater stimulus from the factors that I just
mentioned does produce more-rapid growth next year. But even with the sharper
pickup in activity that eventually develops in our forecast, the level of real GDP is
lower and the GDP gap higher, on average, in 2004 than in our previous projection.
Our principal motivation for this downward revision has been a fairly steady
drumbeat of negative news on the real economy. To start, the spending data have
been coming in somewhat weaker than we had anticipated in March. Consumption
and investment taken together rose just 1½ percent at an annual rate in the first
quarter, more than ¼ percentage point slower than in our last projection. Moreover,
at least in the household sector, we aren’t entering the second quarter with much
momentum. Outside of motor vehicles, consumer spending has been relatively flat in
recent months. Sales of new motor vehicles improved to 16.4 million units at an
annual rate in April, up from a 16 million unit pace in March. But that incentivestimulated increase was aimed at alleviating the inventory problems that had
developed this winter, and the cutbacks in production scheduled by the manufacturers
will continue to be a drag on aggregate activity in the current quarter. Moreover, our

May 6, 2003

11 of 115

business contacts in this industry report that the response to the recent boost to
incentives has, if anything, been disappointing. Housing activity has not been as
buoyant as we had expected. Starts and permits have had a softer tone, and we now
expect a flattening out in this sector in coming months instead of modest gains.
Business spending also has presented some downside surprises. On net, the
readings on orders and shipments of capital goods in February and March were below
those anticipated in our previous forecast. In the high-tech area, outlays for
communications equipment have shown notable strength of late, but computer
spending is growing less vigorously than we had expected. Outside of high-tech, a
projected increase in current-quarter equipment spending does not appear sufficient to
reverse a now larger estimated decline in the first quarter.
The mildly negative innovations in the spending data, taken by themselves, would
not have justified the size of the downward adjustments that we have made to private
demand for the remainder of the year. Our thinking about the underlying strength of
the economy was more heavily influenced by the surprisingly weak recent readings
on the labor market and industrial activity. Private payrolls have been contracting at
an average monthly rate of 85,000 since the turn of the year, and with initial claims
for unemployment insurance averaging close to 450,000 in recent weeks, there are
few signs that businesses have, as yet, stopped shedding workers. Moreover, the
employment decline and the sharp drop in the workweek in April point to another
contraction in hours worked this quarter. Perhaps this is more good news on
productivity—and quite likely it is. But I don’t think that’s the whole story. We are
now expecting a decline in total industrial production of ½ percent in April and a drop
in the manufacturing component of about ¾ percent. Activity in the factory sector
has generally been contracting since the fall. That weak picture seems to line up very
well with negative readings from purchasing managers and the continuing downbeat
tenor of the reports that we have received from business contacts.
It is, of course, possible that we have overreacted to the incoming data. I should
stress that we are still working with readings on the economy that, for the most part,
were taken before or during the war. We have interpreted the greater weakness in
that information as suggesting that underlying activity has been softer than we had
earlier estimated. But we can’t confidently rule out that the war-related restraints on
the economy were more intense than we have been allowing for. Beyond the
readings from commodity and financial markets, we still know very little about the
postwar economy. In brief, we have received more favorable readings on consumer
confidence and chain-store sales and less favorable readings from initial claims.
As I noted at the outset, defense spending is one element of final demand that is
likely to be considerably stronger than was anticipated in our previous forecast.
Indeed, our projected increase in outlays for defense now accounts for more than half
of the GDP growth that we are projecting for the current quarter. That made us
nervous enough to canvas our brothers and sisters in the forecasting community, both
inside and outside government. We got pretty much the same answer from

May 6, 2003

12 of 115

everybody: “Gee, that’s interesting; we haven’t really thought much about it yet.”
Armed with that helpful guidance, we tried our best to steer a balanced course. To
the upside of our forecast, the CBO is estimating noticeably higher defense spending
for fiscal year 2003 than we have incorporated in this forecast. With only two
quarters remaining in the fiscal year, their figures imply some whopping increases in
Q2 and Q3. To the downside, OMB’s latest take on Iraq-related defense spending is
about as far below our forecast as CBO’s is above. But even the OMB figure is
consistent with a somewhat faster spendout of recently enacted budget authority than
was observed after the Gulf War. The bottom line is that the confidence interval
around this feature of our forecast is very wide.
Although our revisions to private and government spending, on net, resulted in
somewhat slower growth in real GDP, we continue to show growth picking up in the
second half. The basic logic of that forecast remains the same as in the last
Greenbook—forces are in place that will work in concert to produce a pickup in real
activity over the second half of this year. Accommodative monetary policy, another
dose of fiscal stimulus, waning negative wealth effects, improving consumer and
business confidence, and lean inventories are the key ingredients in our forecast of
reacceleration in spending and production.
Vincent remarked to me after the last meeting that President Minehan’s
description of all the things that had to go just right to get the staff forecast had made
me sound a bit like the guy on the Ed Sullivan show who would come out and start
spinning ever greater numbers of plates on the end of sticks. As more plates were
added to the mix, each one had to be spun with precision and speed to maintain the
balance of the entire delicate construction. While I am reluctant to endorse this
characterization of the forecast, I will admit that my arms have been getting a bit tired
waiting for a big finale. [Laughter]
Obviously, there remain serious risks to both the timing and magnitude of the
acceleration in real activity that we are projecting. The recent gains in equity markets
and declines in risk spreads could be signaling that a stronger-than-expected rebound
is in the offing. As you know, we have made much of gloomy sentiment and
heightened caution as factors that have retarded business spending over the past year
or so. But it would be a mistake to equate caution on the part of businesses with
inaction. In fact, they appear to have been hard at work. Balance sheets have been
strengthened, aided importantly by an environment of low interest rates. Firms have
become leaner through workforce reductions, reorganizations, and more-effective
utilization of their existing capital stock. And with a few exceptions, businesses have
kept inventories very lean in relation to sales. These adjustments could be setting the
stage for a more-vigorous expansion ahead.
But there also remain ample grounds for skepticism about the reacceleration in
activity that we are projecting to occur in the second half. We continue to believe
that unusual forces have been holding back investment spending and that these forces
will gradually dissipate. It is possible that this story is just wrong. Perhaps

May 6, 2003

13 of 115

investment has been weak because there are relatively few profitable investment
projects available. In other words, perhaps our model is misspecified, and the recent
pace of investment spending reflects fundamentals that are less favorable than we
recognize. In this case, the acceleration in equipment spending would likely be less
impressive than anticipated in our forecast. There are risks to household spending as
well. As we discussed at the last meeting, the personal saving rate remains well
below its long-run equilibrium. We have been comfortable that households are
making adjustments to consumption and saving of about the size and on roughly the
time line anticipated by our models. Still, we cannot rule out the possibility of a more
abrupt upward movement in the saving rate—associated perhaps with heightened job
insecurity should the labor market remain in the doldrums. This too would produce a
more muted pickup in activity than we are projecting.
Even if we have the basic elements of the reacceleration of real activity about
right, considerable uncertainty remains about the timing of the step-up in growth.
The process of repair and recovery from the bursting of the asset bubble and the
myriad other shocks that have hit the economy in the past few years could take longer
than we are anticipating. At this point, timing does matter. Core consumer price
inflation has been moving lower in recent quarters, and in our forecast most major
measures are expected to move into a range that encompasses zero inflation, once
allowance is made for likely measurement error. Any serious delay in the recovery or
shortfall in its magnitude would imply a larger output gap, at least for a time, and by
our analysis would result in an even lower inflation rate. As you know, for this
round, we updated the calculations for the probability of deflation that we presented
last December. Because the baseline forecasts for both output and inflation have been
revised down since then, we now estimate that the probability of deflation—defined
as core PCE price inflation falling below ½ percent by the end of 2004—has risen
from about 28 percent to about 35 percent. I’d take these figures with a grain of salt.
But it doesn’t take complex stochastic simulations to recognize that, with inflation
this low, any reasonable confidence interval would include a sizable probability that
the aggregate price level could fall. Karen will now continue our presentation.
MS. JOHNSON. In constructing our outlook for the rest of the world this time,
the task we faced was basically the same one we confront each Greenbook: We
needed to determine to what extent the information we had received over the
intermeeting period was consistent with our forecast in March and to what extent it
represented unexpected developments that appropriately required some adjustments
to our projection for this year and next. Although the task was familiar and routine,
the challenge was particularly difficult this time as so much of what has happened
since your meeting in March was driven by the extraordinary events in Iraq. For the
last three to four weeks, since the phase of major hostilities in Iraq wound down,
global financial markets appear to have responded to fundamental economic news
more than was the case earlier in the intermeeting period. Nevertheless, we have little
hard evidence on developments in the real sectors of foreign economies since the
most acute geopolitical risks substantially abated.

May 6, 2003

14 of 115

Developments in global oil markets are the most straightforward to evaluate.
Relative to our forecast in the March Greenbook, we are now projecting the average
spot price for WTI oil in the current quarter to be $9 lower. The same comparison for
the fourth quarter of next year yields a difference of less than $1. Thus events have
largely pulled forward in time a reduction in world oil prices that had been expected
to occur but more slowly. The most direct effect of that change is on the total cost of
imported oil for most countries, including our own, and we have visibly reduced the
U.S. external deficit this year and next year accordingly. For major U.S. trading
partners who are also oil exporters, such as Mexico, we have incorporated a negative
hit to their trade balance and to their aggregate income.
The indirect effects of the lower path for global oil prices are less straightforward.
We judge that confidence on the part of consumers and businesses abroad should be
boosted by the rapid fall in oil prices and the consequent benefit to real disposable
income and business costs. That difference should be greatest in the near term. To
date we have limited evidence on confidence abroad since the end of hostilities, and
what we do have presents a somewhat mixed picture. On balance, we saw the lower
oil prices as a moderate positive for consumer and business spending abroad,
particularly for the rest of this year.
The foreign exchange value of the dollar fluctuated somewhat widely in the days
just before and following your March meeting, mostly in response to developments
within Iraq. Since early April, however, the dollar has trended down on balance and
in terms of the index of major foreign currencies has recently moved below its
March 12 low point. No doubt more by luck than any forecasting skill we might
have, fluctuation of the dollar–euro rate left that pair about in line with the path we
wrote down in March. We have adjusted down the U.S. dollar in terms of the
Canadian dollar and the Mexican peso. In contrast, we have adjusted the dollar up in
terms of the yen. Taken together, these changes imply a slightly weaker level for the
real value of the dollar in terms of our broad index of trading-partner currencies, but
the rate of change from here through the end of the forecast period is projected to be
about the same as in our previous forecast.
As in the United States, stock prices in most major foreign economies have rallied
in recent weeks. Equity prices are now up for the year in many European markets.
The average across Europe represented by the DJ Euro Stoxx price index is back to
no net change for the year, after reaching a low of 20 percent below its late December
level on March 12. Stock prices are up on balance this year in major Latin American
emerging-market countries also, including Mexico and Brazil. For those countries,
EMBI+ spreads on dollar bond rates are down substantially as well. We interpret
these favorable developments in financial markets as consistent with an improvement
in confidence over time and a strengthening of real GDP growth. For now we judge
these developments to be in line with the pace of strengthening that we projected in
March but not a reason for revising upward our growth outlook for these countries.

May 6, 2003

15 of 115

Stock prices in Japan and emerging Asia are the exception to the general picture
of rising equity values. In Japan, stock prices touched new twenty-year lows on
several occasions during the intermeeting period. Although some prices rebounded
near the end of the period, the major stock price indexes remain well below their
values at the start of this year. We attribute the downward trend in Japanese stock
prices to the domestic concerns that continue to dog the Japanese economy, plus some
possible spillover from rising tensions with respect to North Korea and the effects of
SARS on Japan’s major trading partners in the region. The latest data have left us
slightly more optimistic about the pace of economic activity in Japan this year, but we
do not detect any evidence that would call for a major revision to our outlook for
economic activity in that country.
One new element in the global economic picture since your March meeting has
been the emergence of SARS as a major economic threat to most of the emerging
Asia region. Even though we have no expertise in anticipating the course of the
disease, construction of the Greenbook baseline forecast required that we make a set
of working assumptions about its implications for economic activity. As we reported
in the Greenbook, we incorporated into the forecast the likely consequences of SARS
based on the information known at that time. In large part that involved limiting the
effect of SARS primarily to key service sectors such as travel and entertainment and
positing that its adverse effects would be felt mainly in the current quarter. We have
added some small positive payback later this year and in early 2004 as the lost travel
and sales are partially recouped. This approach yielded an estimate of a downward
revision to growth this year in developing Asia that averaged about 0.5 percentage
point owing to the SARS outbreak. Based on the information we have to date, we see
the effects as largest for Hong Kong, somewhat less but still quite visible for China
and Singapore, and much smaller for various other Asian emerging-market
economies.
The end product of our attempts to incorporate these various developments
into the baseline forecast is a projection for total foreign output growth of
about 2 percent in the first half of this year—¼ percentage point lower than
we had in March—followed by growth of 3 percent in the second half of this
year and about 3.5 percent next year. As is the case with the domestic
forecast, despite quite favorable outcomes of many events related to the Iraqi
conflict, we have revised down the path of foreign GDP. Most of the
downward revision is due to our estimate of the near-term effects of SARS on
global growth. The weaker projection for U.S. real output growth is a factor
as well, particularly for Canada and Mexico. The more favorable oil price
developments and some buoyancy in global financial markets provide a small
offset. That concludes our remarks. We’d be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for our colleagues? President Parry.

May 6, 2003

16 of 115

MR. PARRY. David, I have a question about plant and equipment spending. In the last
forecast you indicated that geopolitical uncertainties and risks were likely to be taking a toll on
businesses’ plans for equipment and software spending. Of course, to some extent those
concerns have been resolved, but the forecast for plant and equipment spending in the second
half of the year has been revised down significantly. Does that suggest that there are morefundamental factors that have been at work for quite a few quarters in terms of the weakness in
plant and equipment spending?
MR. STOCKTON. I’d say that in our last forecast the war-related uncertainties were just
a part of what we saw as a much broader set of concerns and uncertainties about the economic
outlook that were helping to hold back P&E spending. So we hadn’t bet a lot on the end of the
war being a major source of upward impetus to such spending. As I indicated, in general the
data have been a little softer on the capital spending side, not dramatically so but enough on the
core component—the non-high-tech, nontransportation component—that we just didn’t see signs
that capital spending would move up as rapidly as we had in the last forecast. Second, some of
the revisions that we made to the second half of the year had less to do with the actual data we
were seeing on the various spending categories and more with what we were seeing on the
production and employment side. The latter in essence suggested that overall demand was likely
to be weaker than we had anticipated. For that reason we put in some reduction in our forecast
of equipment spending and also took some out of consumption. It is our view that to date overall
activity in the first half of this year is fundamentally softer than we had estimated at the time of
the last forecast. We are starting off at a lower base moving forward.
As I said in my remarks, because we have leaned on the employment and production data
fairly heavily, it’s possible that we have overreacted by still trying to disentangle what are and

May 6, 2003

17 of 115

what aren’t war-related effects on the production and the employment sides. It could be that
those effects have been bigger and that we’re somehow misreading that as an indication of
fundamental weakness. But in general I’m comfortable with the balance of risks that we have in
this forecast.
MR. PARRY. One short follow-up question: The acceleration of equipment and
software spending in 2004 is quite marked. Is a significant portion of that due to the end of the
favorable tax treatment for equipment and software?
MR. STOCKTON. Certainly in the second and third quarters of next year we think we
will see a relatively large pulling forward of that spending. If one could look a little beyond the
2004 horizon in this forecast, we’d expect a bit of a pothole in activity in 2005 in part because of
that payback on the investment spending. But also we wouldn’t anticipate as big a stimulus from
even further cuts in personal income taxes.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. One of the shocks that hit the economy, of course, was the spate of
corporate governance scandals. When we look at current risk spreads and credit spreads, they
have narrowed relative to their early 2002 levels. I have two questions on this, David. One, do
you think we are past the major part of the fallout in financial markets from these corporate
governance scandals? Second, do you think we are still seeing an impact from them on the real
economy, or are we past that now?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, in our forecast we incorporated the view that the worst is past
in this area. In fact we’d expect, with the gradual improvement in the pace of growth going
forward, that corporate spreads would continue to narrow some over the next six quarters. In

May 6, 2003

18 of 115

essence, there’s an increase in profitability and an improvement in overall activity as well as
some waning of these effects that together should result in further compression of spreads.
As for the extent to which the governance issue is having an effect, one certainly hears
lots of business people talk about the effects that the uncertainties and liabilities associated with
corporate governance have had on their own activities and on their hesitance to take certain
actions. I’m not quite sure how to interpret those comments, but we hear them often. So that
would be another reason in our minds for this effect to last a little longer and to fade more slowly
over the projection period. But that’s in effect trying to read the anecdotes. I couldn’t tell you
how many tenths of a percentage point in equipment spending we’ve incorporated for that effect.
But I think the corporate governance issues are part of our overall story of business hesitance,
gloom, and uncertainty.
MR. MOSKOW. We continue to hear some of those same stories.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Dave, you mentioned that there was a very
considerable spread between the OMB and the CBO forecasts of defense expenditures in the
second and third quarters. The big variable in defense expenditures clearly has to be the speed
with which the armaments that were used in Iraq are restored. By this time the Defense
Department would have had to place most of the orders if the expenditures are going to be costed
in the second and third quarters. This is a factual question, but I would assume that, given a
difference between the CBO and the OMB forecasts, OMB is more likely to be right because
they are part of the Administration. You mentioned that the OMB numbers were more
aggressive than your own forecast, I think.
MR. STOCKTON. Actually, the CBO number is above ours, and OMB is below.

May 6, 2003

19 of 115

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Ah, I had it backwards. How much weaker would
your forecast be if OMB is correct?
MR. STOCKTON. I’ll let Mr. Wilcox, who has Treasury experience, address that
question. I would just point out that, when we first started talking with OMB on this, they were
in the CBO camp and were well above us. They have just in the last week or so shifted toward
this lower number.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. But that would add to my view that they called the
Defense Department and got the facts.
MR. STOCKTON. That’s quite possible.
MR. WILCOX. Actually, they started out north of CBO on the advice of the Defense
Department. I’m not sure what they factored into their thinking that led them to bring their
number down to below where the Defense Department said it was going to be. It may be
because their figure is $5 billion or so weaker than ours for the fiscal year as a whole, which
translates to $10 billion at an annual rate for the remaining two quarters.
MR. STOCKTON. And that is roughly ½ percentage point on GDP growth.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you.
MR. WILCOX. I think it’s fair to say that there is a lot of uncertainty about the likely
spendout pattern. We think we’ve begun to see some entrails of that spending in the daily
Treasury statements for April. But getting from the daily Treasury statements to the monthly
Treasury statements, which form the basis for BEA’s estimates, and getting from April to the
quarter as whole involve a lot of estimating. There is a lot of uncertainty in all of those steps.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Getting from the monthly Treasury statement to the actual
deliveries, which is how defense spending is measured in the GDP, is an even greater hurdle.

May 6, 2003

20 of 115

MR. WILCOX. Yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There they are guessing. BEA does not have partial
payments or advance payments data until quite a bit later. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Dave, you referred to narrowing credit spreads, and President Moskow
did as well, as a positive aspect of financial markets. I’m wondering a little about that. People
tell me that some of the reduction in credit spreads is due to the fact that there’s a lot of money
out there chasing very few good deals. If one looks at the continuing pace of corporate
downgrades and at the declining volume of corporate bond issuance and C&I loans, the question
arises as to whether this is as favorable an aspect of the financial markets as we may be giving it
credit for. I’m wondering if credit spreads might widen before they start to narrow again.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, that’s always a possibility. It’s our view, however, that the
basic health of the corporate balance sheet has improved and has improved quite noticeably over
the last year or so. We’ve seen a decline in default rates. We’ve certainly seen a significant
drop-off in the interest share of cash flow, aided by a low interest rate environment. Whatever
the cause of this recent decline in spreads, it obviously is reducing the cost of capital to
businesses. Now, as I indicated in my remarks, if businesses don’t have reasonable projects
available then the decline in spreads might not provide the stimulus to investment spending that
we’re anticipating. But we’re fairly confident that it has been helping to reduce the cost of
capital.
As for spreads widening again, that is always a possibility, as I said earlier. If there were
any significant doubt about the likelihood of a reasonable step-up in the pace of activity and
therefore some reemergence of concerns about whether the improvements in corporate health
that have occurred thus far can be sustained going forward, that could cause a rise in spreads.

May 6, 2003

21 of 115

That, in our view, obviously would be part of a very bad patch for the economy going forward.
However, within the context of our forecast, we believe it’s quite reasonable to expect some
further narrowing of these spreads, which are still high by historical standards.
MR. OLSON. Could I just follow up on that issue? Unlike in the recession of the early
’90s, this time corporate bonds and equities took most of the hit in terms of losses as opposed to
bank loans. So it isn’t just the corporate governance scandals or the lack of confidence in
financial reporting that are involved but the fact that there were more losses in the market
securities segment than in the previous period. I was interested in Dino’s analysis, too, when in
reference to his chart on S&P 100 volatility he related that volatility in some respects to the
corporate governance issue. Even so, I think we have to remember that there were financial
market losses that were separate from the corporate governance issue.
MR. STOCKTON. Absolutely. There certainly has been a very significant strain that
was related to the fact that firms had invested in so many projects.
MR. OLSON. Which is a problem that seems to be behind us now.
MR. STOCKTON. Right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for our colleagues? President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have two quite different questions. In the Greenbook there was a
discussion of the different picture of the labor market provided by the payroll employment data
and by the unemployment rate. The Greenbook explanation of this focused on the participation
rate. But it looks to me as though the divergence in the payroll and household employment
series is larger than we usually see. Since the end of the recession, assuming that occurred at the
end of 2001 roughly, payroll employment is down in total about 1 million, and household
employment is up about 1.3 million or something like that. I know these series differ, but it

May 6, 2003

22 of 115

seems to me that the gap is larger and more persistent than usual. What can you tell us about
that?
MR. STOCKTON. The short answer is “not much” because these gaps, as you know,
widen out and come back in. You’re right that recently there has been a remarkably large gap
between the payroll and the household survey data. Our reason for emphasizing participation in
our analysis of the gaps that have developed between the payroll and the household employment
data is that we’re focusing on the unemployment rate because of its implications for measuring
the slack in the labor market. Movements in household employment have effects on both the
numerator and the denominator of the unemployment rate and therefore have less effect on the
rate. What has really surprised us is the extent to which the unemployment rate has stayed
relatively low given the weakness that we have seen in payroll employment. As we highlighted
in our presentation to the Board yesterday, we have some shreds of evidence to suggest that this
development is probably related to a broader discouragement in the workforce than the
“discouraged workers” question in the survey would indicate. As a consequence of that, while
we’ve seen less of a run-up in the unemployment rate during this period of weakness, we think
we’re also likely to see less of an improvement in the unemployment rate once economic growth
really begins to pick up.
MR. POOLE. I guess the implication of what I’m saying is that the behavior of the
unemployment rate would not look quite so peculiar if you focused on household employment
rather than payroll employment because such a big gap has opened up there.
MR. STOCKTON. The household survey is the one upon which the unemployment rate
is based.
MR. POOLE. Right.

May 6, 2003

23 of 115

MR. STOCKTON. I think it would be a mistake to focus on household employment as
suggesting that there is greater health in the overall labor markets and the employment situation.
Every survey taken of both households and businesses about the availability of jobs or the
availability of workers lines up very well with the weakness that we’ve seeing in payroll
employment. These readings seem at odds with the strength that is being suggested by the
household sector data.
MR. POOLE. Well, the strength in the household series is not huge. It’s just that there
has been a substantial gap between the two series.
MR. STOCKTON. Yes.
MR. POOLE. My other question is—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just interrupt? We had a population census
adjustment, which was supposed to smooth out the household series. But my recollection is that,
in the actual published data for household employment, the number takes off very sharply at the
time when the adjustment was made. I’ve been meaning to ask, and I’m asking now, does
anybody know whether we have a discontinuity in the series?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, there is a discontinuity. But I don’t know whether or not it’s
an important factor in explaining this recent jump. I don’t know if Larry has any insight.
MR. SLIFMAN. I don’t think so. We’ll look into that issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I ask because you gave me a chart that shows hours
worked on a household basis and on a payroll basis. They parallel each other until very late last
year, and then all of a sudden the household hours, which are in a sense a measure of
employment, jumped up sharply. That struck me as just not credible economically.
MR. SLIFMAN. I don’t have a good answer for you. We’ll have to look into it.

May 6, 2003

24 of 115

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you.
MR. POOLE. My other question is really quite different. The forecast depends not
insignificantly on the analysis related to the macroeconomics of fiscal policy. Of course, there’s
a very old debate about that. On the tax side particularly, one view obviously is that tax cuts
don’t do much of anything for short-run activity. Can you talk a little more about the confidence
intervals around the estimates of the effects of fiscal policy? There are two issues. One is what
kind of tax bill we might get. The other is, given some assumption about the macro effects of
that over the next eighteen months or so, what sort of confidence intervals do you put around
that? Certainly over the years a position has emerged that says those effects are vanishingly
small.
MR. STOCKTON. The fiscal package that we’ve incorporated on the tax side is one that
has all the elements of the President’s program with the exception of the dividend tax relief.
That would be consistent roughly with the $350 billion package in aggregate size being
discussed by the Senate, not the $550 billion package being discussed by the House.
MR. POOLE. That’s a total over ten years?
MR. STOCKTON. That’s over ten years. But we have incorporated in our forecast the
passage of that bill, and we have its effects on disposable income starting in October of this year.
So it gives a fairly good pop to disposable income starting in the fourth quarter and into early
next year. It is an important factor. From the political gridlock simulation in the Greenbook,
you can get a sense of how important the fiscal package is in our forecast. We’d expect
something closer to 4 percent GDP growth next year instead of 4¾ percent if political gridlock
materialized.

May 6, 2003

25 of 115

In terms of the effects of the fiscal package on the economy, it is certainly the case that
the staff’s forecast does not assume so-called Ricardian behavior on the part of households. We
think that disposable income is going to show up in consumer spending. For some households
that are liquidity constrained, it will provide an immediate boost to spending. For other
households that are more forward-looking, some of this involves a pulling forward of a tax cut
that was already planned. One would expect, therefore, a little less impetus to spending than
might otherwise occur from that acceleration in the timing. But even that, in a present
discounted value sense, is an improvement in permanent income. So those tax cuts contribute,
and contribute importantly, to the growth in overall activity. If we took that fiscal stimulus out
of this forecast—or alternatively, if we assumed that it happens but has no effects—there would
be a more muted improvement in overall activity. We’d have a forecast with the unemployment
rate still running at roughly 6 percent through the end of next year, which is in essence no
improvement.
MR. BERNANKE. On the other hand, it would affect interest rates, so you wouldn’t
have that effect.

MR. STOCKTON. There would be some offset through lower long-term interest rates if
the package did not pass. And we’d get a little crowding in on the investment side. That feature,
by the way, is incorporated in the model simulations that do have a forward-looking element to
them.
MR. WILCOX. I think it’s also muted because many of the elements that are
contemplated in the $350 billion package are merely accelerations and so by their nature are
essentially temporary measures. Accordingly, they don’t cause bond markets to anticipate a
substantial worsening of the long-term deficit picture.

May 6, 2003

26 of 115

MR. POOLE. By the same token, in the consumption area there are transitory effects as
well.
MR. WILCOX. Right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions? If not, who would like to start our
roundtable? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in the Seventh District
remains sluggish. Although the overall business view is negative, I’m hearing marginally better
reports than I did in March. At least part of this change in tone reflects the fact that many of our
contacts were expecting greater war-related destruction than actually materialized.
Airline ticket sales did fall sharply because of the war and the SARS outbreak. However,
United Airlines reports that demand has rebounded in the last few weeks, and they expect the
trend to continue. Their domestic and transatlantic bookings have returned to early March levels.
Bookings for Asia also have improved, after declining nearly 60 percent following the SARS
outbreak. We polled our directors and other contacts regarding SARS, and with the exception of
the airlines most expected a minimal and manageable effect in the near term. But if SARS is not
contained, they thought it could harm new business and product development down the road.
Our retail and casual dining contacts feel that consumers have become more upbeat. That
has yet to show through, however, to actual spending. As we know, light vehicle sales
rebounded in March and held up in April. On the one hand, the Big Three were relieved that the
war didn’t overly depress demand. On the other hand, their April results were weaker than they
expected given the sweetened incentives. Interestingly, and a sign that the market has become
even more competitive, some of the big foreign nameplates have begun offering zero percent
financing for the first time.

May 6, 2003

27 of 115

Outside of autos, District manufacturing remains weak. But here again reports tend to be
slightly—and I emphasize slightly—more upbeat than before the war. One industry analyst told
us that rebuilding Iraq will help to absorb the glut of used heavy equipment. Some equipment
producers have already seen a jump in price quotes from the Middle East. A major producer of
airport equipment— ramps, carts, generators, and so forth—noted that orders, primarily from
international airlines, had increased last quarter. That was the first improvement in over a year.
Our contacts report that more firms are finally deciding to replace older equipment. But
in terms of capital expansion, firms continue to delay moving forward even though many have
spending plans in place with contracts negotiated and cash on hand. Apparently they are still
concerned about cost containment. A project that used to require three signatures now requires
six. Businesses also remain reluctant to hire. Both of the national temporary help firms that we
speak with remain disappointed about their billing hours. Their business is clearly weaker than
during the recovery period following the 1990-91 recession. We received the preliminary
calculations for Manpower’s third-quarter hiring plan survey, and the index fell from 11 to 6,
which is the lowest level since 1991. However, the survey was completed just before the
beginning of the war so that was obviously a period of great uncertainty. These data are
confidential and the company has told us it won’t be releasing them until June 17, which is later
than normal.
Turning to the national outlook, the sparse data on the postwar economy are mixed. The
April employment report, unemployment insurance claims, and the information from our
temporary help contacts indicate that labor demand remains weak. On the plus side, consumer
confidence has rebounded despite the weak job market, oil prices are down, stock prices are up,
and equity price volatility and credit spreads have fallen. Of course the big question remains

May 6, 2003

28 of 115

whether business spending will finally pick up now that the burden of geopolitical uncertainty is
substantially reduced.
It’s hard to be optimistic about the near term. Hiring plans are still on hold, and excess
capacity continues to top the list of concerns in many firms. Nevertheless, it’s certainly plausible
to expect the business sector to generate more growth as we move through the year. The
anecdotal reports provide at least modest support for the scenario in which capital spending and
hiring gradually strengthen. Moreover the fundamentals, particularly the underlying trend in
productivity, are strong enough to support the eventual pickup in growth.
In general we agree with the Greenbook that the projections for this year, if realized,
would still leave the economy with large gaps in resource use as we enter 2004, which is a
concern. Furthermore, core inflation, which is now low, will probably head lower. Of course,
lower inflation would raise the real fed funds rate. That would not be a problem for the economy
if it were solidly in recovery, but higher real rates would be a concern if the current weakness is
expected to continue into the second half of this year. In the latter scenario we would probably
want to ease policy. I can see either of the two scenarios unfolding. At this point I think it’s too
early to know. We should have a better reading of the postwar economy by our next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District expansion continues to be sluggish but
seems only mildly affected by the Iraqi war and the SARS epidemic in East Asia. The main
impact of both events was a sharp reduction in international travel, especially from East Asia.
As a result, airlines suspended some regularly scheduled East Asian flights, and load factors on
remaining flights fell by half or more. Some firms have reported increased difficulties in
maintaining overseas supply chains due to travel restrictions and scattered plant shutdowns in

May 6, 2003

29 of 115

East Asia. However, the production and supply effects of SARS have been quite limited to date,
and a recent pickup in domestic tourist travel suggests that war-induced anxieties are subsiding.
More generally, the lack of bad news on the consumer side has been striking. Solid automobile
sales were fueled by generous incentives. And while sales of most small retail items have been
slow, they did not fall noticeably because of the war. Moreover, the existing vigor in housing
markets was largely maintained throughout the District.
On the business side, firms have remained reluctant to expand employment or capacity in
anticipation of improved demand and bottom lines. Moreover, some firms stated that their
caution was not directly tied to the war with Iraq. Businesses have been investing in new
information technology equipment but mainly for replacement and upgrade purposes, and
District tech contacts are not especially sanguine about short-term prospects in the industry. For
example, the search for cost savings has led to increased reliance on overseas suppliers—
especially in China, where firms have undercut domestic production of some tech products. Of
course this has an upside as well, with U.S. technology leaders such as Intel seeing strong
exports of their products for use in low cost assembly operations overseas.
On a final negative note, District states are still struggling with budgetary woes. Revenue
flows have been uneven lately; and despite some successful efforts to bring spending in line,
most District states still face a large current year budget gap. Moreover, preliminary data for
April suggest that revenue in California may fall below even the more modest targets that it set
in January. That increases the need for borrowing and for other measures to ensure short-term
cash flow.
Let me turn to the national economy. In light of weaker-than-expected economic data,
we like nearly everyone else revised down our real GDP forecast for this year. We now project

May 6, 2003

30 of 115

growth of about 2¾ percent, which is below most estimates of the potential rate. The risks to the
outlook have shifted in a favorable direction with the end of the armed conflict in Iraq, and it’s
certainly possible that this will lead to the rebound in activity that we’ve been looking for. But
substantial downside risks related to external developments remain, including the aftermath of
the war and ongoing geopolitical concerns, as do the risks from a well-known list of more
fundamental domestic economic concerns. These downside risks, combined with the
expectations for subpar growth, could have rather serious consequences in view of the low level
of inflation. With excess capacity in labor and product markets likely to remain at or above
current levels through the end of 2004, we expect core PCE inflation to fall to just over 1 percent
both this year and next. As Dave mentioned, the Greenbook has a similar forecast. After
adjusting for a reasonable estimate of measurement bias, the two forecasts imply true inflation of
about ½ of 1 percent. An analysis by the San Francisco staff of typical forecast errors for core
inflation suggests an uncomfortably high 20 percent probability that true inflation could fall
below zero next year. Of course, as we’ve just heard and as we read before in the Greenbook,
the Board staff puts this probability at 35 percent.
This possibility brings to mind familiar research suggesting that, given the long lags in
the effects of policy, it’s best to move sooner rather than later when the economy is within range
of deflation and the zero bound. Therefore, as insurance against downside surprises to both
economic activity and inflation in the future, it would seem prudent to ease policy further.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.
MR. SANTOMERO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The news on economic activity in the
Third District has changed little since our mid-April conference call. The data suggest that our

May 6, 2003

31 of 115

region experienced a somewhat larger slowdown in growth in the first quarter than the nation
did. But since the end of hostilities in Iraq, I’ve sensed an improvement in tone from our
business contacts. The data show that economic activity in the Third District remains subdued.
Our business outlook survey showed a further decline in regional manufacturing activity in
April. The index of general activity deteriorated to minus 8.8 in April from minus 8.0 in March,
and the indexes of new orders, shipments, and employment all fell as well. Respondents
attributed some of the decline in orders over the past two months to the start of the war in Iraq.
Most of the firms, however, said that such war-related declines were slight or moderate.
Regional labor markets also remain weak. The recent benchmarking of state employment
data shows that the decline in employment in our three-state area in 2002 was not as large as
originally reported. But there were declines nonetheless, and employment in the region has
continued to contract this year. Residential construction, which has been one of our stronger
sectors, has eased in recent months. The demand for office and commercial space continued to
be soft in the first quarter. Retail sales in the District in late March and early April were running
below year-ago levels in all lines of merchandise. And retailers attributed lower spring sales to a
combination of unseasonably cold weather, the timing of Easter, and the war in Iraq.
But amid these reports of subdued activity, I’ve noticed some renewed optimism since
the end of the war. During April and May I typically travel the District, holding a series of
meetings with our bankers and business leaders. My exchanges with them over the past few
weeks reveal an improved outlook and higher confidence that the recovery will begin to develop
some traction in the second half of the year. They’re not expecting a strong rebound in activity
but a rebound nonetheless. Some of my contacts tell me that their firms are starting to undertake

May 6, 2003

32 of 115

major capital investments, feeling that they’ve sat on the sidelines long enough. This is a
definite change in mood since our March meeting and our mid-April conference call.
My view on the national economy is similar. The hard data on the real sector have
generally been on the weak side. The initial estimate for first-quarter GDP was weaker than I
was expecting, and we continue to see job losses. But the softer information from anecdotal
reports and the developments in the financial markets have been positive. Equity prices and
corporate profits are up. Credit risk spreads and oil prices are down. In March we
acknowledged that it was difficult to discern how much of the economic weakness was due to
concerns about geopolitical uncertainty and how much was due to a weaker underlying economic
dynamic. We also acknowledged that a short-lived and successful war in Iraq would resolve
some of the uncertainty but that we wouldn’t have much data on the real side of the economy
soon after the war ended, given the lags in the receipt of those data. We pointed to data on oil
prices, financial market indicators, and anecdotal evidence as the initial pieces of information we
could look to as a way to assess postwar economic conditions.
Indeed, that is the situation in which we find ourselves today. Most of our real sector
data are dated, so they continue to reflect the influences of the war and therefore are less helpful
in discerning economic conditions going forward. The data from financial markets and on
consumer confidence, which do reflect postwar conditions, have been quite favorable.
Accordingly, I have little to say about the Greenbook and its attendant forecast. The baseline
forecast seems right, and the alternative forecasts were helpful to see the sensitivity of the
results. However, given that forecasting generally depends somewhat on retrospection, I don’t
receive the usual comfort from the staff’s effort this time around. That’s not a criticism of the
effort but rather a manifestation of the time period we are in.

May 6, 2003

33 of 115

That said, I would like to react to the deflation exercise in the Greenbook. The
simulation exercise implies that the probability of deflation by the end of 2004 is about 35
percent. I might quibble with the Board staff’s definition of deflation; ½ of 1 percent may seem
reasonable, but recent academic work suggests that the bias in price indexes is declining. More
to the point, however, I think our concern about deflation is a concern that the economy may
exhibit behavior associated with deflation psychology, which includes an expectation of
continued price declines. I’m not sure that a four-quarter 50 basis point benchmark captures this
very well. Further, I question how sensitive the staff’s estimate is to using a random selection of
shocks from 1970 to 2000—a time period that includes the 1970s, a decade characterized by both
volatility and a higher level of inflation. I wonder what the impact would be of using a sample
period over which the economy was less volatile and the average rate of inflation was lower—
starting, say, in 1980. My questions regarding definitions and time periods are in part a reaction
to the results of this exercise. The results, in short, are troubling. A 35 percent probability is not
trivial.
Nonetheless, given the current accommodative stance of monetary policy and the
prospects of more accommodative fiscal policy, it appears wise to wait to see what additional
data tell us about postwar conditions before deciding how to respond to the slowness of growth
exhibited in the data. If the sluggishness continues in the period after the war, then a reduction in
rates may be in order. In the meantime, I think we should remain alert to new information and
evidence of changes in either direction in the real economy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in our Southeast region
also remained sluggish over the intermeeting period. Both retail and auto sales have been weak,

May 6, 2003

34 of 115

while manufacturing has been soft except for defense-related production. Excess capacity still
exists in the commercial real estate sector, and state governments continue to struggle with
strained budgets. Labor markets were largely unchanged in March, with the District
unemployment rate at 5.1 percent. Firms remain reluctant to hire new full-time employees.
We’re not hearing reports of significant increases in the use of temporary workers either. On the
brighter side, Florida tourism and single-family construction and home sales in most of our
markets remain at healthy levels.
To get a handle on the effects of uncertainty on business investment, we specifically
asked our thirty-five Branch directors who met with us last week whether the resolution of the
war was affecting investment plans. The answers we got suggest both that it was too soon to tell
and that people were now turning their heads to reassess domestic economic fundamentals,
which at least in some sectors still didn’t favor expansion. Reportedly, most investment
continued to be concentrated on replacement rather than expansion. That said, there was clearly
a more optimistic business tone concerning the near term. I was perhaps most fascinated by
comments I got at a lunch meeting of Atlanta CEOs last week. Four different CEOs came up to
me individually as we gathered for lunch to comment on encouraging signs or developments in
their business. Interestingly, during the lunch when the host asked the group for comments about
the economy, those same individuals sat quietly. [Laughter] I’m not sure what that tells us.
Putting it all together, I found little in either the available data or the anecdotal information from
our region that clarifies whether the current thinking and behavior are a result of uncertainty or
are simply a realization of the downside risks. It seems that it’s just too soon to tell.
This is how I read the incoming data at the national level as well. While it’s easy to be at
least a little disappointed that we haven’t yet seen concrete evidence of growing momentum, the

May 6, 2003

35 of 115

data are just not sufficiently distant from the war period to allow us to parse the economic
consequences of resolving war-related uncertainty from the economic fundamentals. The
consensus among most private forecasters as well as the Greenbook and my own forecast all
make a reasonable case for growing momentum as we move through the year and into next year.
But I agree with the Chairman’s observation in his recent testimony that the future path of the
economy is likely to come into focus only gradually.
The outlook for inflation is always an important part of our policy deliberations, and
there continues to be a debate about the potential dangers of deflation. I take these concerns
seriously also, but I am not yet convinced that deflation is our foremost risk at this time. Briefly
I’m going to indicate why. The deflation issue is not simply about a declining price level but
rather reflects concern about the potential for a significant and widespread weakening in real
activity and the disruptions to financial intermediation that accompany it, like those we
experienced in the Great Depression. The Great Depression deflation was in my view the result
of widespread real economic weakness, policy errors, and extreme domestic financial distress,
along with international financial shocks that together formed the “perfect storm.” The question
is whether we see similar preconditions today for such an episode and if so, what is the
supporting empirical evidence.
We clearly have experienced significant external shocks. But the real economy is
recovering, albeit slowly. It is not contracting. Some sectors do continue to suffer. Prices are
falling for output in certain industries—the airlines, telecom, high-tech and manufactured goods
generally and for some commodities. These are relative price declines, however, and do not
reflect across-the-board deflation. In most instances the causes are easily explainable by
idiosyncratic shocks or industry-specific circumstances. The price declines flow from

May 6, 2003

36 of 115

productivity increases, overcapacity, increased global and local competition, outmoded business
models, and secular industrial change.
As a consequence, the relative price declines particular to these sectors are going to occur
no matter what we do in the monetary policy area. Even so, the concern for policy may be that
the weakening of relative prices will feed through into a general deflation. To date, however,
there is no sign that this is happening. Inflation is still positive. Furthermore, none of the
expectations measures either from surveys or the term structure signal that deflation is on the
horizon. Lastly, the fall in the value of the dollar relative to the currencies of countries
experiencing inflation is not consistent with a deflationary scenario for the United States.
What about policy mistakes? In the Great Depression, the money supply contracted over
30 percent, and financial intermediation came close to shutting down. Today, monetary policy is
quite accommodative in my view, the monetary aggregates continue to grow, and bank balance
sheets and capital positions are favorable. Financial conditions today appear far more positive
and simply aren’t comparable to the distress situation observed during the Great Depression.
Intermediation is taking place, and creditworthy borrowers continue to fund themselves through
depository institutions and capital markets. What we are seeing now in the financial distress
indicators such as measures of default, chargeoffs, and delinquencies are within the range of
standard recessions and are not in my view symptomatic of a debt deflation, nor are they a
concern to banking supervision at this time.
For some there is the specter that what happened in Japan may also happen here. My
reading of the conditions in Japan, however, suggests that they parallel the problems of our Great
Depression. The main difference is a matter of degree, timing, and the willingness of the
government to prop up economically insolvent institutions with implicit guarantees. Real

May 6, 2003

37 of 115

economic activity in Japan has declined for nearly a decade, and a gradual deflation appears to
be expected. Financial distress in Japanese depository institutions is the most significant and
well-known problem. Were it not for implicit government guarantees, these institutions would
likely have failed a long time ago, and the economy may have gone into a tailspin. In the
meantime, Japan continues to consume its accumulated wealth. Again, the features of this
experience are not in my view comparable to our own situation at this time.
Looking ahead to our policy discussion, I would observe again that interest rates are
already low, monetary policy is already stimulative, fiscal policy is stimulative and likely to get
more so, and most forecasts are showing growing momentum as we move through the year and
into next year. It seems to me that we have time to let the war-related uncertainty unwind and to
wait for the path of the economy to become clear. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the District economy is concerned,
we have the usual mixed bag of readings on activity. But overall I would say that the recent
tenor of the incoming information has been perhaps a bit better. What I’m going to discuss is
based a little on data but comes mostly from anecdotes heard at a recent meeting of our Advisory
Council on Small Business, Agriculture, and Labor and at a meeting with the leaders of the Twin
Cities financial community.
Housing has continued to be a bright spot, at least through March. All indicators of
housing activity in the District have been quite favorable. As far as the industrial sector is
concerned, I would say that, at worst, conditions have stabilized, and some small manufacturers
are suggesting that activity is picking up. The trucking industry in our part of the world seems to
be quite busy, although the large amount of consolidation in that industry may be a contributing

May 6, 2003

38 of 115

factor. But I would say that overall there is certainly some optimism among small manufacturers
and others in industry that the next six months will be better than the last six to twelve months.
Consumer spending for the most part has held up, and credit quality doesn’t seem to be a
concern among the vast preponderance of banks. On the negative side, there certainly has been
no discernible improvement in labor market conditions, and no dramatic increases in hiring
appear to be under way. Pressures on state and local government budgets persist, and we haven’t
seen all of the ramifications of that yet. The major airline based in Minneapolis is suffering, as
are most of the other major airlines, although to date its problems aren’t quite as severe as some
of the higher profile ones that we are all aware of.
Finally, based on conversations with our contacts, there doesn’t seem to be any reason to
expect a quick acceleration in capital spending. The story I got on that really has three parts,
some of which are related. One is clearly what I would call a productivity story. Businesses
simply have found ways to produce more with the same inputs. They were quite explicit about
that, and they seem to feel that it has some way to go. Related to that, there is very little pressure
on capacity so there’s no stimulus to business capital investment coming from capacity
pressures. Moreover, some businesses, as others have commented already, have been busy
restructuring their balance sheets and want to get that completed before they contemplate sizable
capital spending projects.
As far as the evidence on the national economy is concerned, I read it the way others
have done, I think. Clearly it has been on the soft side, which has produced what I would
expect—caution among forecasters and among the business community. I share that caution at
this stage. But I try to remind myself that there’s always the danger of getting whipsawed here
by marking down the forecast just as conditions are about to get better or vice versa. One thing I

May 6, 2003

39 of 115

know for sure from the days when I was doing a lot of bottom-up forecasting is that, in sluggish
circumstances such as this, it’s very hard to convince yourself that economic activity is actually
going to pick up. It’s just the nature of the beast. Today, outside of defense spending, it’s hard
to envision an acceleration in most of the components of aggregate demand. Yet we know from
history that sooner or later the economy does pick up, especially when the fundamentals—and by
fundamentals I’m talking here about productivity and the stance of monetary policy and fiscal
policy—are favorable.
But in addition, I view Dino’s description of financial market developments, with
essentially a rise in equity prices in many parts of the world and declining credit-quality spreads,
as confirming what we already know, which is that in the past several weeks the big things have
gone right. By that I mean that the war ended successfully and quickly, energy prices came
down significantly and rapidly, and earnings have been at least no worse than earlier feared or
expected. All of that gives me some comfort, but it doesn’t help me answer the question as to
when we might actually see some acceleration in economic growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to concentrate my comments on
anecdotal information that is very, very recent because the formal data we have now are almost
entirely from the period when the war was still in progress. My contacts suggest that there is a
more optimistic tone, but I’m wondering whether that optimistic tone reflects more a sigh of
relief that the worst didn’t happen rather than any genuine optimism. Everyone emphasizes that
they don’t see any evidence in the data right now; there is a sense of greater optimism but
nothing actually going on that suggests a pickup.

May 6, 2003

40 of 115

I talked with my Wal-Mart contact yesterday. It was about 5:00 p.m. on Monday, and as
is usual, he had data through a good part of the day already. [Laughter] He said there is no sign
of any significant increase in consumer buying. Weekend sales were 2.8 percent above the
previous year for comparable stores, and the data so far for Monday didn’t indicate anything new
going on. He said that there is no evidence of any postwar bounce in consumer spending on the
kinds of items that Wal-Mart sells. There was no weather explanation; weather has been normal
in most of the country, including tornadoes in the Midwest at this time of year.
I’ve also been trying to press my contacts on the capital spending outlook. My UPS and
FedEx contacts both emphasized that they’re not buying any new aircraft. They are giving up all
of the options they had previously to purchase aircraft. My UPS contact made a comment that I
thought was rather interesting. UPS is even looking at paying the penalties to give up firm
orders because the price of used aircraft has come down so much that it might be cheaper for
UPS to go ahead and pay those penalties. Of course, for any one company the purchase of used
aircraft is a capital outlay, but it is not an increase in capital spending for the economy as a
whole. That may be a point that has more general applicability as we try to interpret anecdotal
reports about capital spending going forward because there is an awful lot of idle office space
and equipment and so forth. In particular, I’m thinking about structures where from a company’s
point of view they are spending more—and they tell us that—but it doesn’t show up for the
economy as a whole.
As I look at the national outlook in terms of the actual data, those data are almost
uniformly on the weak side with minor exceptions. The positive information is mostly the
financial market information—the stock market as well as bond market spreads—and, of course,
oil prices also. I think we should all be aware that while a better tone in the securities markets is

May 6, 2003

41 of 115

a positive development, we know that later this week or next week all that could disappear in a
flash. The bottom line for me is that there is no sign at all of a postwar bounce in the information
that we have. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Let me begin by summarizing my broad view. The Eleventh District is
showing some signs of stabilizing with modest job growth recently, which is better than the
continued job losses at the national level. The real economy continues to soften at the national
level, but consumer sentiment has improved. Spreads have narrowed, profits have turned up, oil
prices have declined, and the stock market has rebounded. Looking only at the real economy,
further easing seems warranted, but the timing might be bad now with the financial markets
signaling that a rebound may be coming soon without additional stimulus. Moreover, the
markets are not expecting further easing today, so the reaction to a surprise could well be
perverse. Market participants might believe that the Fed knows something that they don’t.
Turning back to the Eleventh District, the economy appears to have bottomed out and is
showing early and, I hope, sustainable signs of expanding at a sluggish pace. Texas has
experienced positive employment growth over the last two quarters, which is better than the
nation’s loss of jobs, as I indicated earlier. Job growth was at a 0.7 percent annual rate. Over the
last two quarters, job gains have been concentrated in construction, financial services, education
and health services and in the government sector. Despite very high energy prices over most of
that period, the energy sector has been shedding jobs at a rapid clip. Though Texas has had
positive job growth, our unemployment rate has risen sharply and is nearly a percentage point
above the national rate.

May 6, 2003

42 of 115

A few bright spots are beginning to emerge, though. Our high-tech industry may finally
be showing signs of life. Job losses there have slowed as profitability and orders are showing
signs of improvement. On the positive side, drilling for natural gas has continued to register
gains now that the energy industry is more confident that strong natural gas prices are not going
to go away soon. On the bad news side, the demand for gas is outstripping the ability to bring on
new production, and gas prices now are expected to remain well above historical norms for
several years. Oil prices are expected to fall further, but energy prices overall will not fall
proportionately because natural gas and oil prices are expected to be decoupled over the next few
years. Another bright spot comes from the temporary employment industry in our area, which
has experienced a job surge at an annual rate just under 12 percent in the first quarter, in contrast
to what Michael just reported for the bigger picture. Finally, our Beige Book contacts report that
retail, auto, and restaurant sales have begun to revive after being depressed during the war with
Iraq.
On the negative side, the downsizing of airline operations is continuing, and further
employment reductions are expected. The wage reductions of roughly 25 percent that airline
employees are experiencing are adding to deflationary pressures in the high-tech sector as is the
District.
Turning to the national economy, I’m inclined to agree that the staff forecast for the
second half of the year is the most likely outcome. It has been six months since we’ve lowered
rates but the real fed funds rate is where it was before the last rate cut. Monetary policy is less
stimulative, and the economy is probably less sensitive to any Fed stimulus than it was a year
ago. Although federal government stimulus is expected to increase in the near future, the
political process may provide less stimulus than we’ve been anticipating. Further delayed clarity

May 6, 2003

43 of 115

on exactly what will be contained in the fiscal package means that any spending that is sensitive
to the tax code will likely continue to be deferred. In short, we may be getting a lot less stimulus
from both monetary and fiscal policy than we think. In addition, the state and local fiscal
situation only reinforces this conclusion.
As I look at the other downside risks to the economy, I’m increasingly concerned about
the economy underperforming the Greenbook forecast. The outlook for economic growth in the
rest of the world has been continually revised down for months on end. Also, while business
balance sheets have undergone considerable repair, there’s a way to go before balance sheets are
in line with the economic realities of the last couple of years. That applies to the broad swath of
businesses, not just to the industries such as airlines and telecom that are undergoing enormous
structural adjustments.
So overall I see the risks to the forecast as lying primarily on the downside. Given how
low inflation has fallen and the possibility of a shortfall from current economic forecasts, I could
support an easing in monetary policy at this meeting. But as I said earlier, financial markets are
signaling better times ahead, and an easing today could unsettle the markets. So I think waiting
is in order. I feel the risks are weighted to the downside, but I’d rather not say that by
reintroducing the bias statement at today’s meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District economy actually has
shown signs of some further modest weakening since the last meeting due partly, and only
partly, to the war. Both retail sales and manufacturing activity have edged down, and tourism
has been soft. Some of the reduction in tourism was very clearly related to the war. There were
a lot of cancellations in the tourist areas of Colorado particularly. On the manufacturing side,

May 6, 2003

44 of 115

just to give you a sense of recent developments, the year-over-year index for production derived
from our manufacturing survey, after having reached a level of 12 in February, slipped to
minus 4 in March and was minus 3 in April. The year-over-year index for new orders, however,
was actually 8 in April, up from 4 in March. So it’s a mixed bag but is not very encouraging.
We have met with our Economic Advisory Council and some of our directors, and there
is a mixed tone in their reports, with some modest optimism but quite a bit of “let’s wait and
see.” There has been, of course, some further pickup in energy activity and some very modest
moderation in private-sector layoff announcements. Consumers are in a little better mood since
military operations in Iraq ended but remain basically cautious. Most businesses report that the
end of the war has not affected their plans, meaning that they are still in somewhat of a wait-andsee mode. On the inflation front, wage and price pressures remain subdued, but firms are
increasingly worried about the impact of insurance costs on their profit margins.
Let me turn to the national scene. The broad contours of our economic forecast have
changed very little since our last meeting. Like the Greenbook, we expect modest growth in the
second quarter followed by a rebound to trend growth in the second half and then greater than
trend growth next year. For all the reasons outlined by others and in the Greenbook—monetary
policy, fiscal policy, the strength in the financial system, falling oil prices, and so forth—demand
should pick up. But in that context I’m aware that the recent news, as others have indicated, has
been relatively disappointing. That’s partly the reason, which I understand, for taking the
position that we should move now for insurance. Also, while I don’t necessarily think that the
probabilities of deflation are as high as Dave outlined—depending on the model, one can get
much lower probabilities—the fact of the matter is that accelerating inflation is not a near-term
threat. I understand that also as one of the arguments for going ahead and easing now.

May 6, 2003

45 of 115

Having thought about that, though, I am more of the view that we ought to wait and see
until June. A reason for that is spelled out in Part 2 of the Greenbook, in what I think is an
important statement: “. . . we cannot yet discern whether the uncertainty that may have been
restraining private spending has lifted.” We will know a little more about that in June. The
second reason that I would put forward for waiting until June is that if we ease now—though
depending on how much—I think the zero bound will move from an issue on which we get a
general question from time to time to one of significant debate and discussion publicly. The nay
sayers in various groups will be bringing that up because the funds rate would be that much
lower and the zero bound that much closer. Moreover, we have an important discussion coming
up in June on communication. Some of that will relate to the issue of the zero bound. So we
will be in a better position to have clearer thoughts on how we as a Committee should talk about
that going forward. I think there are legitimate questions as to how to discuss issues relating to
the zero bound. While it may be easy to communicate that we can buy assets up the yield curve,
there will be questions such as what we are targeting—reserves, an average rate, or whatever.
I’d like to have a discussion of those issues by this Committee before we move to a more public
realm on them. So I think that waiting until June has very little downside and it may position us
well for a clearer view going forward from there. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s little in the recent data regarding
economic activity in New England that suggests much in the way of forward momentum. Recent
employment data, especially the benchmark revisions in the early spring, indicate much steeper
employment losses than previously thought. These losses were more significant in size in 2001
to be sure, but in the period from the supposed end of the recession at year-end 2001 to the

May 6, 2003

46 of 115

present, regional job losses have been relatively severe in New England compared with
elsewhere. Indeed, while the region is roughly 5 percent of the nation’s population and
economic activity, its job losses over the past year have equaled about 10 percent of the total for
the country as a whole. Massachusetts has been hardest hit among the New England states and
has lost more jobs in percentage terms from pre-recession peaks than any other state. To those
New Englanders who gauge conditions by comparing them to the worst recession in memory, the
1990-91 recession—and the number of those is not trivial—there is some reassuring news.
Relatively speaking, things are not as bad as they were then. This time the pain is more evenly
shared, albeit with New England clearly on the low side in terms of jobs.
Other, more forward-looking indicators on the regional economy have a brighter tone.
Like the nation, consumer confidence in the region improved in April, and business confidence
rose a bit as well, largely because of improved expectations about the future. An index of
leading indicators for Massachusetts remained in negative territory, however, pushing off
thoughts of positive growth for the state until later in the fall.
In our last telephone conference call, I shared with members of the Committee a great
deal of anecdotal information that we had gathered over the intermeeting period. As you’ll
recall, those anecdotes reflected little near-term optimism about the outlook and not much in the
way of plans for new capital spending, particularly domestically. Contacts since the last phone
call have echoed many of the same themes. In talking with a senior official at CVS, which is a
pharmacy chain with a fairly broad nationwide presence, I heard comments similar to those that
President Poole heard from his Wal-Mart contacts. My source said that CVS sees no sign of a
postwar pickup in spending and a continuation of the trend toward buying smaller rather than
bigger sizes of items—despite what we might read about the popularity of economy sizes. He

May 6, 2003

47 of 115

also noted that fewer customers are buying multiple refills of their prescriptions; people are
purchasing only the exact amount they need or sometimes not even a full month’s prescription.
So, there is clearly a trend toward less spending. Most of our contacts don’t see a significant
rebound in activity this year. They are all hoping that 2004 will be better.
On the national front, labor markets remain quite slack, labor force participation is down,
unemployment is up, and industrial production and business investment remain subpar despite
some signs of life in the telecom world. About the only good news since our last meeting came
from equity markets, buoyed by the end of the war, better-than-expected corporate profits, falling
oil prices, and rising consumer confidence. These bright spots seem fragile, however. Contacts
at Thompson First Call expect corporate profit growth to slow substantially in the second
quarter, as energy company earnings reflect lower oil prices and as the beneficial effect of
currency translation diminishes. It is questionable whether markets will continue to surprise on
the upside and whether confidence will buoy spending, given the impact of real economic data,
job losses, and the inevitable reduction in the sense of postwar relief.
Most people I’ve talked to over the last several weeks have had one question in common.
They ask, How is it that standard forecasts for economic growth over the next year or so all have
a sizable rebound in the last half of this year? People ask this based on their own perspectives
and what they see in their industries. They wonder what will happen to turn things around.
Well, one answer is fiscal policy in the form of increased defense spending and tax reduction, if
any of the plans now being debated in Washington are in fact enacted into law. But when I say
that, the reply usually is, What about state and local spending? Taken together, state and local
government spending accounts for about 12 percent of real GDP—almost as much as business
investment and nearly twice as much as federal government spending. Given state deficits of

May 6, 2003

48 of 115

about $100 billion or so in the aggregate for fiscal 2004, it seems clear that either spending will
decline or local taxes will increase by amounts that eat significantly into disposable income.
Either way there would be some offset, however sizable, to federal stimulus.
Another answer to the question of what will foster a pickup in the economy is that
monetary policy is accommodative and that the markets expect it to stay so. But is it really?
With declining inflation rates, real interest rates are no more accommodative than they were
before our last 50 basis point move in November, at least according to the Bluebook analysis.
“Is the Fed really doing enough?” these questioners ask.
The final answer to the question lies in the fact that three years have passed, technology
has become obsolete, productivity remains strong, and businesses will soon be forced to invest
more. That’s the same logic used in last May’s Greenbook which forecast GDP growth, led by
optimism about both consumption and investment, by the end of the year to be about
2½ percentage points higher than it in fact was. Clearly we were wrong then. Perhaps the
passage of time has raised the likelihood of our being right this time. That is, an additional year
of spending deferral may have made a second-half of 2003 spurt of growth more likely.
But it’s hard to find many business people—except in the biotech arena, which has
mostly small firms, or in direct defense contracting—who think that the kind of growth projected
in the Greenbook is a good bet, especially by the end of this year. They may simply be myopic.
Nonetheless, I remain skeptical about the strength of the Greenbook forecast for the rest of 2003,
even recognizing that it has been tempered a bit. I wonder as well about the projection of a
nearly 5 percent pace of GDP growth by year-end 2004. This forecast seems to have more than
its share of risks on the downside. But even if it is realized, we will have had nearly four years
of below-potential growth and an output gap even into 2005. Unemployment rises through most

May 6, 2003

49 of 115

of the forecast period, falling only in the last quarter of 2004. And inflation trends downward to
below at least my definition of price stability, given the uncertainties of measurement. While
I’m concerned about the potential for deflation, for many of the reasons President Guynn
mentioned I don’t think that all aspects of deflation and deflationary psychology are as likely as
the Greenbook suggests.
That said, the degree of expected price decline and its implications for slack resource use
are not ideal nor in my view consistent with our dual mandate. As I noted before, with falling
inflation, monetary policy has become less accommodative. It may be time now—and if not
now, soon—to adjust policy so that it provides continuing support during this long, gradual
recovery period. In my view, there’s little risk, and there could be considerable gains in doing
that; and I think there is a way to explain it neutrally.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My comments about economic conditions
in the Fourth District are not too different from those that my colleagues have already reported
about their Districts. Moreover, conditions in our region haven’t changed very much since my
last several reports. The Fourth District’s economy is poised to expand at a faster pace in the
second half of this year, but reasonable doubts still exist about the timing and the extent of that
expansion. District business leaders and bankers I’ve talked to are still expressing caution if not
outright skepticism about the environment. The bankers continue to enjoy fee income from
mortgage refinancings, but they know they can’t rely on that product line to sustain their
business indefinitely. They look forward to expanding their commercial and industrial loans, but
their most creditworthy customers have yet to see any need to draw down their credit lines.
Business firms still seem to place a premium on staying liquid. For example, several members of

May 6, 2003

50 of 115

our Business Advisory Council indicated that their customers are extending the period over
which they are making payments. Some of them are extending it by thirty to sixty days, not
because they don’t have the cash to pay but because they want to conserve their cash and stay
more liquid.
Another condition that hasn’t changed in several months, as many others have already
noted, is the aversion to business investment. I continue to question business people closely
about their capital spending plans, and I’ve yet to find any concrete evidence pointing to a
firming of spending plans later this year. There is just too much excess capacity in too many
firms. Also, in line with what President Poole reported earlier, several manufacturers have told
me that there’s a glut of used capital equipment on the market and, because of the glut, prices are
quite low. Some firms with very strong balance sheets are buying this equipment and
warehousing it until demand picks up, reasoning that in the worst-case scenario they can just sell
it again. However, most firms I’ve talked to don’t want to buy any capital equipment even at
these low prices. The equipment they already own has lost significant market value, weakening
their balance sheets. Lenders, consequently, are less willing to advance credit to these firms.
Business conditions haven’t deteriorated—just the balance sheets.
Many manufacturers in the District also have become increasingly more pessimistic
about their ability in the longer term to compete against firms that have located production
facilities outside the United States, especially in areas like China, where labor costs are quite
low. Some of these manufacturers are recalling the shakeout that occurred in the 1980s after a
long period of dollar appreciation. In today’s environment, manufacturers are still cutting their
prices but are facing higher input costs for both raw materials and labor benefits. They fear that

May 6, 2003

51 of 115

we’re in another ratcheting down of industrial activity in this country—a structural adjustment
that they say began in late 2000 and could persist for several more years.
Turning to the national economic outlook, if I generalize what I’m hearing from my
District contacts—many of whom have operations nationally and internationally—one inference
that I can draw is that business fixed investment may be weaker than in the Greenbook path, at
least for the next year or two. It could be that the negative tone I’m hearing from these business
people is contemporaneous and not predictive of their future investment plans. If that’s the case
and the negative tone simply reflects the current cautious environment, then when economic
activity picks up we may indeed see the stronger business fixed investment portrayed in the
Greenbook. However, if the negative tone is more foretelling of problematic fundamentals, then
perhaps it reflects a reduced expected return to new investment. So it may be telling us that the
equilibrium real rate of capital has moved down somewhat and will remain lower for a longer
period of time than we thought. I expect we’ll talk more about that during the policy discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve been trying to think of a term that
best describes our District’s economy and the best I can come up with is “treading water.” I
don’t have a sense that the economy is sinking, but I don’t see much forward momentum either.
Our latest monthly surveys on activity in the manufacturing, retailing, and nonretail
service sectors in our District were conducted in mid-to-late April. They are not complete yet,
but we have most of the results, and they indicate that both manufacturing and retailing are quite
soft currently. Part of the weakness in retailing may have to do with the unusually cool and wet
spring weather we’ve been having in our area. The results from the nonretail service sector

May 6, 2003

52 of 115

survey—which covers trucking companies, business service firms, much of the tourist industry,
and so forth—are a little better. They suggest a bit of firming in some of these industries, as I
think I mentioned on the last conference call. The tourist industry along the coast, for example,
seems to be doing better than might have been anticipated. But again, other than a couple of
exceptions like that, there’s not a lot of forward momentum.
These more or less stationary conditions in our region I think mainly reflect both
household and business attitudes about the near-term outlook. I would describe those attitudes as
skeptical or still mixed, with a fair amount of lingering pessimism despite the early and
successful conclusion of the war. A lot of people in our area seem to think that the sluggishness
in activity is due primarily to the remaining slack in the economy that was created by the reversal
of the boom of the late ’90s. They figure that it cannot easily be corrected by low interest rates
or tax cuts but just has to be worked through—for lack of a better phrase—however long that
takes. One bright side of this is that attitudes about the outlook could improve quite rapidly if
people get a sense that this working-through process is nearing completion. In that regard, any
upward bounce in activity that eventually does result from the successful completion of the
war—and despite the lack of clear evidence now I think we could get something like that—could
be helpful if it’s taken as a sign that this process is nearly complete.
Most of the recent data suggest that the national economy is also treading water. By all
accounts real GDP continues to grow moderately; but hours worked are still contracting, and the
output gap appears to be widening further. In this context, to me the most striking recent
development is the behavior of core inflation—a point a lot of other people have commented on
already. I think the Greenbook put it very well, David, noting that in the last few months core
inflation has entered a range that, given the measurement bias, really approaches zero inflation.

May 6, 2003

53 of 115

A deceleration of inflation would have been regarded as desirable in the past; a lot of us thought
that. But as the Chairman aptly put it last week, today substantial further disinflation would be
an unwelcome development. I thought that remark was something of watershed, Mr. Chairman,
because it confirmed very nicely that we truly are conducting monetary policy in an environment
of price stability now, with risks on both sides of the coin going forward. Specifically, just as we
faced the risk of rising inflation momentum in the past—and undoubtedly will again in the
future—we now also face a meaningful risk that disinflation may acquire momentum and create
deflation and a zero bound problem, with adverse consequences for the economy and for
monetary policy.
With this in mind, the crucial question today, as I see it, is whether the recent further
actual disinflation indicates that the risk of growing disinflationary momentum has now reached
the point where we should act to preempt it. I’ve struggled a great deal with that question, and
the deflation exercise in the Greenbook didn’t raise my comfort level a whole lot, David. I think
it’s an exceptionally close call. But on balance, recent developments suggest to me that we’re
not quite at the point where we need to act. As others have noted, the real funds rate is at or near
zero and has been in the vicinity of zero for some time. Oil prices are falling, the stock market
seems to be strengthening, profits appear to be rising again, credit spreads are continuing to
improve, and the Greenbook is projecting substantial additional fiscal stimulus in coming
quarters. Given these developments, I think we can prudently wait a little longer before acting
and try to get a clearer idea of whether the economy is going to get a postwar boost or not. I
don’t think we really know the answer to that yet. Waiting would also have the advantage of
ensuring that we won’t undercut any revived optimism that the end of war might stimulate in the
near term.

May 6, 2003

54 of 115

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let’s break for coffee and come back in ten or fifteen
minutes.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are we all here? Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the answer to President Minehan’s
questioners—who I suspect are really her alter egos or perhaps she’s been speaking into the
mirror in the mornings—as to what will lead to higher growth ahead is that some of the factors
restraining growth over the last few quarters should be abating. Many of the developments over
the intermeeting period have made me a little more confident in that judgment. It seems to me
more likely that the expansion will indeed strengthen going forward and break out of the
1 percent to 2 percent growth path that it has been on since last summer.
As others have observed, the ebbing of geopolitical risks has bolstered confidence,
lowered the oil price tax faster than anticipated, and fostered better conditions in financial
markets. The signs of improvement go beyond the reduction in geopolitical risks. Increasingly,
it looks as though the restraint is lifting from the other persistent force we have cited as holding
back the economy—the unwinding of the excesses of the late 1990s. These include the fallout
from bad credit decisions, deficiencies in corporate governance and transparency, the drop in
equity prices, and the overshoot in capital spending. Risk spreads in credit markets have more
than retraced their run-up of last summer, appropriately so in my view since bond default rates
have also come down substantially. Market reactions to occasional new revelations of corporate
malfeasance have been much more measured, suggesting that investors have greater confidence
in the information they are getting from most businesses even before they’ve had the benefit of
new leadership at the Accounting Oversight Board! [Laughter] As could be seen in Dino’s

May 6, 2003

55 of 115

charts, the implied volatilities in bond and stock markets have also fallen to the levels of last
spring. As a consequence, although surely some of the caution from governance scandals is
lingering in business decisions, the cost of capital to businesses has decreased, and firms need to
have much less concern about conserving cash for fear of overreaction to earnings
announcements in skittish markets.
Equity prices have not retraced all of their losses of last summer, but they are well off
their lows of that time and have been for a while so that the force of the negative wealth effect
should be decreasing over time. The latest real side data show a little less weakness in
nonresidential construction. The most recent data do indicate a tentative pickup in orders for
equipment, reinforcing the assessment that most capital overhangs have largely dissipated and
raising hopes that replacement demand may be strengthening. Moreover, demand will be further
supported by a lower dollar, which notably has occurred without any perceptible adverse effects
on U.S. asset prices. Surely lower oil prices, greater consumer confidence, and more
accommodative financial conditions will work together with stimulative fiscal and monetary
policies and continuing gains in real income from rising productivity to strengthen growth. You
can try that in the mirror, Cathy, to see if it works.
But as the Chairman noted in his recent testimony, the extent and timing of the pickup are
uncertain. We still don’t have enough new information to sort out whether the marked
weakening in February and March was almost entirely related to the close onset of war or also
reflected more-persistent problems that will damp the upturn. We still don’t have enough
information to judge how much the better conditions will feed through to spending and
production. What is not uncertain is that whatever recovery the economy experiences will be
starting from a much weaker position than I had expected just a few months ago. The data we’ve

May 6, 2003

56 of 115

received over the last two intermeeting periods were considerably softer than I had anticipated,
and my expectations for growth this year have been revised down a lot since January. In
addition, consumer inflation has come down faster than I thought it would.
The staff has interpreted what we’ve seen as partly reflecting weaker underlying demand
as well as war-related jitters. So, the level of output in the Greenbook remains below the level of
the January forecast through the entire projection period. Even so, the staff has incorporated a
prompt and sharp strengthening of growth in coming months just to hold the economy on a
slightly lower path. These judgments seem reasonable, though as I just implied it may be too
early to make this call with much confidence.
As for the risks, I don’t have anything useful to add to the sense of risk on both the upside
and the downside that Dave and many of you have mentioned. What I do want to emphasize is
that this lower starting point for activity and prices makes a rebound of at least the dimensions
and persistence envisioned in the staff forecast—if not a stronger rebound—all the more critical
for economic welfare, and it has potentially important implications for policy. The output gap is
wider than expected; and without a very strong rebound, it will remain wider at a time when
there is no reason to accept the loss of income and production longer than necessary. Moreover,
the slack in resource utilization implies that inflation is poised to go lower from levels already
consistent with price stability. I don’t believe the current low inflation rate is itself an
impediment to economic prosperity. I don’t see evidence, for example, that the zero bound on
wages is raising actual or steady-state unemployment rates. My guess is that most of the
bellyaching about the lack of pricing power or current inflation rates would evaporate if demand
were stronger and capital utilization rates higher.

May 6, 2003

57 of 115

But there are risks from low and declining inflation rates. For the most part inflation
expectations have been stable. I’m not sure, however, that people have taken on board the very
low level of underlying inflation. Especially if that inflation falls much further, inflation
expectations could decrease in coming quarters as headline inflation moves lower following the
energy price declines. This would tend to raise real interest rates, absent offsetting policy action.
Also, even at high levels of employment, very low, steady-state inflation—by keeping the federal
funds rate and other interest rates down—could limit our room to maneuver were the economy
subsequently to be hit with a downward shock. Such risks at the current rate of underlying
inflation or one that was only a few tenths lower probably aren’t large. But I would be
concerned if it looked as though we were on a glide path that would leave inflation at
considerably lower levels. For all these reasons, it’s important that we soon see the economy
strengthening, and by quite a bit, in order to reduce the output gap and limit the decline in
inflation. I’m looking forward to the discussion of the stance of monetary policy in light of this
imperative. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Second District
economy has shown scattered signs of improvement since my last report. But generally most
sectors can still be characterized as weak. Employment and labor force indicators have been
mixed with little change overall, as labor markets have remained slack. Manufacturers note
some improvement in business conditions in recent weeks and are increasingly optimistic about
the near-term outlook. Retailers reports that sales remained below plan in March but picked up
somewhat in early April. Based on two separate surveys, consumer confidence has improved
moderately since the last report. Housing permits weakened in the first quarter as the slowdown

May 6, 2003

58 of 115

in single-family construction more than offset increases in apartment construction. Sales of
existing single-family homes and apartments slowed noticeably, though selling prices have
remained firm except at the high end of the market. Demand for office space in the New York
City area continued to slacken in the first quarter, and District banks reported increased demand
for home mortgages and steady-to-lower delinquency rates.
I find myself so in agreement with Governor Kohn’s remarks that I would just like to add
some very small, almost footnotes to them. On the geopolitical uncertainty, I’ve argued at
previous meetings that the Middle East is basically an unstable place and, therefore, that the
geopolitical uncertainty is likely to continue but will be different. As for the likelihood of Iraq
stabilizing into a model democracy, it could well happen; but if it does, it will happen slowly and
there will be many bumps along the road. The possibility of instability in some of Iraq’s
neighboring countries is quite high, and therefore I think it is likely that we will live in an
environment of continuing geopolitical uncertainty. What one doesn’t know is whether the
American people and those in other nations will react the way they did to terrorism—that is, to
accept it as a fact of life and learn to live a reasonably normal life with normal economic
reactions despite that reality.
As for risk aversion, I think it is likely to continue. But risk aversion is a psychological
condition and is rather similar to an oversold trading position. If half a dozen of the most
respected business executives in America suddenly turn openly optimistic, I think the possibility
of others following is quite high. Whether that will happen, I don’t know. But the nature of the
American society is that one would expect that to happen, with the timing being difficult to
guess.

May 6, 2003

59 of 115

I think the main thing we have to cope with today is the reality of the marketplace. After
a period of substantial volatility in the equity market, the recent upturn in the market impresses
me as something other than just an extra bit of volatility. It has at least the makings of a
breakout, but it is a rather unstable and very uncertain one. In the debt markets, as has been
discussed, spreads have narrowed, but they’re still broad by historical standards, and that too is a
rather tentative movement. The dollar weakness has continued; today the euro is at about
113.50. I think we have to be careful about the move into the euro as the currency of choice,
with growing speculative long positions in the euro. That could turn into something that would
not be very pretty to watch—that is, a dollar that is weakening far beyond what the
macroeconomic fundamentals would indicate.
But last and perhaps far more important, there is absolutely no sense in the marketplace
that we are going to change policy today. Even though a week ago I thought that changing
policy today would have quite a lot to say for it, I believe it would be very, very dangerous to
surprise the market in light of the precariousness of its recent strengthening. I think the
immediate reaction of market observers would be to ask, What does the Fed know that we don’t
know? The answer to that is “nothing.” So it seems to me that the prudent central banker would
think very seriously and decide that policy should stay where it is. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson.
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In preparation for any FOMC meeting it
obviously seems appropriate to make some judgments about three different forecasting issues.
The first is whether the baseline forecast is both reasonable and acceptable. The second is how
the forecast has evolved over a period of time, either between meetings or even going back a

May 6, 2003

60 of 115

little further in time. And the third is what the risks are around the baseline. So let me tell you
how I, at least, look at each of those three issues.
On the first, I’d argue that the Greenbook baseline forecast may well be reasonable.
Certainly with the end of the military phase of the Iraqi war, financial conditions have clearly
improved, as others have already indicated. Equity prices are rising. Risk spreads have
narrowed somewhat, though they are still relatively wide by historical standards. Reductions in
oil prices, as expected, have become clearer, and we’ve seen an improvement in consumer
confidence and a small uptick in corporate profits. All of those developments I would argue
might well be consistent with the basic contours of the baseline forecast.
Taking that baseline as at least a reasonable outlook at this stage, the second part of my
first question is, Is it acceptable? To that my answer is a resounding “no”! I don’t think the
baseline growth outcome is sufficient. The output gap envisioned in the baseline persists for
several quarters; it is not closed during the forecast period. Unemployment rates remain well
above any that are reasonable for a well-performing U.S. economy. In addition, the composition
of GDP growth is an issue. At least in the near term, the acceleration in GDP growth is heavily
dependent on government defense spending, and indeed, private demand is noticeably weaker
than one would like. Importantly, as others have mentioned, the inflation prospects offered in
the baseline are a concern. In the context of our price stability targets and recognizing some
uncertainty about measurement, I also judge the inflation outlook to be verging on unattractive.
On this point I want to make a slight distinction to explain the nature of my concern. This is not
a question in my mind about deflation per se. It’s certainly not a question of going back to the
experience of the ’30s. This is really much more a question about further disinflation, which is
troubling for a number of reasons. One reason is its implications for the effectiveness of

May 6, 2003

61 of 115

monetary policy. A second is the vulnerability of an already weak economy to any additional
shock that might emerge from either internal or external sources.
Also, I would say that having price inflation drop even lower than is currently forecast
increases the possibility of what I think of as some self-fulfilling negative ramifications for both
households and businesses. So I’d argue that even if the baseline is reasonable—as I believe it
is— I don’t think it’s necessarily acceptable and we should be vigilant in that regard.
The second issue that one thinks of in terms of forecasts is exactly how the forecast has
evolved. As David already pointed out in his prepared remarks, there have been significant
downward revisions in the staff’s forecast since March. I think Cathy compared it with the
projections of about a year ago. I went back to the September 2002 Greenbook and looked at
each one of the Greenbook forecasts since then. With one exception, the GDP outlook has been
marked down each time. There has also been a marking down in the rate of inflation. That
clearly reflects the fact that the data have been coming in weaker and weaker during every one of
these successive periods, which does at least undermine to some degree the confidence one
might have in the Greenbook forecast.
What the staff has done in the context of incoming data that have been weaker and
weaker has been to reduce the expectations for the first part of 2003, reduce a bit the
expectations for the second part of 2003, but ramp up quite dramatically the expectations for
2004. As I read it, they’ve done that but have given exactly the same set of reasons for growth
that at one point was thought to be around 3.5 or 3.6 percent in 2004 and is now projected to be
4.8 percent in 2004. So we do have a bit of a problem in that we’re starting, as Don Kohn said,
from a much lower base and hoping to get a much bigger pickup in 2004. I trust that this is not
the triumph of hope over experience and reality.

May 6, 2003

62 of 115

Let me go to the third question, which involves the issue of risks. I would say that the
risks are in some sense balanced, but I think we have to be very cautious in that assessment. In
order to see any upside risks with respect to the baseline forecast, I think two things have to
emerge and they have to do so very soon. One is that the tentative nature of the various
conversations many of us have had with business people has to turn quickly to a revelation of a
great deal of pent-up demand either for business fixed investment or for inventory. I don’t see
that that’s going to come from the structural side of investment whatsoever, for reasons that
several of the Presidents have already indicated. I think President Poole, President Pianalto, and
perhaps someone else raised the question of whether or not investment in another firm’s excess
capacity ends up being a positive with respect to the economy as a whole. So while it’s possible
to argue that there is some upside risk on the real side of the economy, I would say that it’s a
fairly tentative argument.
I think there are some reasons to be concerned about the downside risks to the real
economy. One is that conditions are not as accommodative as one might think. In the context of
inflation that has been coming in lower and lower and an economy that has been getting weaker
and weaker, monetary policy in fact is not as accommodative as some have been saying. When
we get to our policy discussion, I’m sure somebody will point out that the little dot on the
Bluebook chart that depicts the location of monetary policy has moved firmly back within the
range of the real equilibrium interest rate. It is no longer below the equilibrium rate, so monetary
policy is not as stimulative as we would like to believe.
On the fiscal side, we’ve had some colloquy about that already, and I would only add that
it does seem likely that we’ll have fiscal stimulus based just on the nature of government

May 6, 2003

63 of 115

expenditures that are already planned. It is possible, though not certain, that there will be
additional fiscal stimulus. So we should be careful there.
Having indicated the risks I see with respect to the real economy, they seem to me
balanced at best or perhaps tilted a little to the downside. With respect to the inflation picture the
risks seem almost all to the downside. In the context of an economy with so much underutilized
capacity, it is really hard to imagine a case in which suddenly we will have an outbreak of
inflation that we have to worry about. It is unpalatable but not impossible to imagine that we
may have too much price stability and will have to worry about that. I’d close by recognizing
that indeed the market is expecting very little of us in terms of a policy action today, and we have
to take that into account when we get to that part of the discussion. But I would say, If not us,
then who? And if not now, then when? [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Let me add two points to the discussion. The first is on fiscal policy.
This is going to be a very key week with respect to fiscal policy because the tax writing
committees of both the House and the Senate meet this week. It seems to many that the
momentum has shifted to the House, in part because the House committee chairman has
exhibited perhaps the strongest thought leadership and maybe the most sagacious political
leadership as well. I must say that he’s also dealing with the most friendly and accommodative
budget restraints.
The Senate probably will meet also and may make an effort to cram the President’s
dividend exclusion proposal into the legislation in some way within the limitations of their
budget restraints. It seems likely that, instead of the President’s proposal with respect to
dividends, they may come out with a cap on the tax rate on dividends and a drop in the tax rate

May 6, 2003

64 of 115

on capital gains. Many in the Congress will find that more palatable than the dividend exclusion,
just in terms of the ability to explain what they are doing. That would also then clear the way for
the acceleration of the previously enacted tax cuts. I might note that last Wednesday the
Chairman, in response to questions by the House Banking Committee, made a real effort to try to
distinguish between tax cuts that stimulate capital spending and tax cuts that stimulate
consumption. But I would say that we don’t see any of that discussion being reflected in the
deliberations on either side.
In trying to read the political tea leaves, it seems as if people have a sense that the White
House would be willing to accept a tax package with any number north of $350 billion—and if it
could be north of $450 billion, that would be all the better. But we will know more a week from
now with respect to tax policy than we know today.
My other point relates to the banking industry, where interestingly there is little change
from what I reported at the last two meetings. We saw throughout all of 2002 a gradual decline
in asset quality, but in 2003 it has remained stable. On the consumer side, there has been no
postwar bounce, in part because there was no wartime decline of any significant extent in the
consumer area. We are hearing anecdotally—from members of our Federal Advisory Council at
its meeting last Friday and from a number of other people—the first hints of plans for expansion
or indications that business people think the time might be right to expand. It seems to me likely
that this is another area where there’s a difference between the data we can measure and the
anecdotal information we are picking up, which is ex parte the numbers we can read.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Relative to previous meetings, there has
been considerably more discussion of inflation and disinflation at this meeting. I’m gratified

May 6, 2003

65 of 115

about that because I think these considerations should be central to our policy analysis at this
point. Let me just add a few points to the discussion.
Disentangling persistent from temporary changes in the rate of inflation is difficult, and
measurement issues cloud the picture further. Nevertheless, the best guess is that underlying
inflation has been declining recently. Comparing the year ending in March 2003 with the year
ending in March 2002, the Greenbook notes that inflation as measured by the core CPI has fallen
from 2.4 to 1.7 percent. In the past six months this measure has been barely above 1.0 percent at
an annual rate. Inflation as measured by the chain version of core CPI has fallen from
1.8 percent last year to 1.2 percent this year. Data for the past six months are not available.
Inflation as measured by the core PCE deflator has been stable at 1.5 percent for the past two
years, but the Greenbook notes that this stability is largely a result of increases in nonmarket
imputed prices. Excluding nonmarket prices, core PCE inflation fell from 1.3 percent in the year
ending March 2002 to 0.9 percent in the year ending March 2003, and it has averaged 0.2 percent
over the past six months. Of course, for a given nominal funds rate, disinflation amounts to a de
facto tightening of monetary policy.
Because monetary policy works with a lag, in principle we should be most concerned
about the forecast of future inflation rather than past inflation. Forecasting inflation is tricky,
though it is worth pointing out that several well-known academic studies have found that the
Greenbook’s forecasts of inflation are better than any made in the private sector. The staff
estimates that core PCE inflation will be about 1.0 percent in 2004, owing largely to the fact that
even with growth of nearly 4 percent in the second half of this year and in all of 2004, the
economy would still have considerable slack well into next year.

May 6, 2003

66 of 115

Of course, as always there are both upside and downside risks to the staff forecast.
However, our loss function with respect to the inflation forecast error should be asymmetric. A
1 percentage point undershoot of inflation from the forecast, which would bring us to the brink
of outright deflation, would be much more costly than a 1 percentage point overshoot,
undesirable as the latter might be. In short, for the first time in many decades the risks to our
inflation objective are decidedly downward. Given that the risks to employment also seem to be
downward, there appears to be a prima facie case for easing policy. I tend to agree with that
conclusion, and barring an exceptionally strong near-term turnaround in the economy, I hope that
the Committee will adopt a posture of leaning toward ease.
I would like to add an important caveat, however. The chance that we will hit the zero
bound constraint at some point, though not large, is certainly not negligible. In response to
President Guynn’s earlier remarks, by the way, I believe a zero bound constraint on policy is the
major risk of a deflationary environment—one that could have real costs because it would inhibit
our ability to stabilize the economy. More generally, as noted by Governors Kohn and Ferguson,
deflation puts a floor on the real interest rate and can therefore destabilize and distort capital
markets. Theoretically the risk of the zero bound only increases the urgency of a preemptive
easing. However, it also seems important that we have a plan for how we might proceed
seamlessly from standard rate-cutting to more nonstandard operations should such operations
become necessary. For me, along the lines suggested by President Hoenig, if there is an
argument for delaying further easing at this point, that is it. A delay would give the Committee a
chance to think about how an easing action fits into a broader strategy that may involve—though
we hope it will not—nonstandard policy operations. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.

May 6, 2003

67 of 115

MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In preparing for this meeting I started out looking
at previous forecasts, as President Minehan and Governor Ferguson did. I noted that we’ve had,
for the past three years now, a forecast that the economy will get better in the second half of the
year. We missed it the first time in 2001 because of a terrorist attack and the second time in
2002 because of corporate governance scandals. I don’t know if I’m optimistic or pessimistic
about it happening a third time, but I could hope that the new chairman of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board might have some effect on the risk of that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In which direction? [Laughter]
MR. FERGUSON. The brilliant new chairman!
MS. BIES. Yes, the brilliant new chairman! I am concerned, though, that we’re starting
out this year in a soft spot, unlike the last two years when we had stronger growth in the first half
of the year. Hours worked are continuing to decline in this soft period, employment is falling,
and production in the manufacturing sector in particular is showing significant weakness. The
main impetus for the recession was the weakness in business fixed investment, and the forecast
for BFI has again been revised downward in the Greenbook for this meeting.
I agree with some of the comments that have already been made around the table that,
while corporations are cautious, they haven’t been inactive. We’ve seen significant
improvements in inventory control, advances in productivity, and increased liquidity as firms
have moved to longer-term funding and as cash flows have risen because of improving profit
margins. But as I look at this picture, I’m still relatively pessimistic as to what is going to
happen to spark business confidence again. So I tend to believe that the risks are biased toward
weakness, especially given that I accept the forecast that economic growth will be below
potential even beyond the 2004 forecast horizon.

May 6, 2003

68 of 115

What about the outlook on the inflation front? As several people have already remarked,
the Greenbook assessment that the probability of deflation by the end of next year is 35 percent
clearly is a statement that catches one’s attention. Further, I know that the staff has been doing
work on the confidence intervals for various measures of inflation and the measurement bias.
That work shows all three major inflation measures at the top of the confidence band of about
1 percent by the end of next year. This concerns me. We don’t need to see deflation because
disinflation—getting the inflation rate down to 1 percent—is a significant enough issue.
There has been a lot of talk that businesses don’t have the confidence to invest because of
concerns raised by governance issues. I think the lack of confidence relates to the continuing
outlook for very weak pricing power. Business management tries to commit to the marketplace
that their company will show earnings growth. They commit to that by expecting some type of
top line revenue growth. But we’re sitting here expecting economic growth over the forecast
period to be below potential, with inflation at 1 percent. That means that if a corporation makes
a serious commitment to growth, they have a very small margin of error. When cash flow from
top line growth provides a robust level of new incoming revenue, companies are more able to
take the risk of investing in new business lines and new plant openings. But with an outlook for
continued sluggish economic growth and overall inflation at 1 percent or less, in effect we
confront a disinflation risk world that at some point cumulatively slows growth going forward.
Therefore, I support the comments that President Santomero made about the importance of
averting a disinflation psychology in the period ahead.
So I’m concerned that we have risks on both fronts right now—the risk of real growth
below potential for quite a long time and also a risk of further disinflation that is considerably
stronger now than we would like. I don’t think I can identify a bias or say that the risks are

May 6, 2003

69 of 115

balanced or unbalanced. In my view we don’t have a Phillips curve situation. I think we have
two negatives facing us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn’t deliberately set out to be the last
speaker today. I was just a little slow getting on Norm’s list.
One might liken the economy today to early spring in Michigan. One can see some scilla
here, some spring beauties there, and trillium over there. Ah, one says, “Spring is coming!”
True, it is coming, but there are still three inches of snow covering the yard! [Laughter] There
are a number of bright spots in the recent data, and previous speakers have mentioned all of
them, so I will pass over them in the interest of time. Bright spots aside, we should not forget
that we need to see many signs of spring before we conclude that warm weather is here to stay.
Moreover, despite the bright spots, there are still some not-so-bright spots. Industrial production
is down again; the workweek is down; the state and local fiscal situation looks ever more dire;
and foreign growth seems to get revised down every time we hear about it.
The baseline in the Greenbook forecast incorporates much of what is known about
spending demands in the near term in the framework of a structural model that has a good
forecasting record. As the Greenbook forecasters will be the first to admit, they need to see a lot
of good news to bring about the healthy growth implied by the Greenbook forecast for the latter
half of this year and all of next year. This growth is healthier than that in the Blue Chip forecast
by ½ point this year and a full point next year. But even this reasonably optimistic forecast
leaves continuing output gaps and an unemployment rate of 5.6 percent by the end of next year.
Indeed, even if investment were to be stronger than anticipated, the output gap would still persist

May 6, 2003

70 of 115

because, the way the Greenbook forecast is done nowadays, both aggregate demand and
aggregate supply are raised in response to a positive investment shock.
Over the past several years we have often had a situation where output looked weak and
inflation benign. We would typically argue that we could pursue one part of our mandate, output
growth, without sacrificing the other, stable prices. One arrow seemed to be pointed down, and
one was in neutral. Today, however, as many of you said, that is not the case. Now inflation has
fallen to dangerously low levels, and both arrows are pointed down. Evidence of the
disinflationary dangers is widespread. The Greenbook probability of deflation has risen to
35 percent, which is getting pretty close to even odds by my count. The increase in the key
market component of core PCE inflation has dropped very sharply, with the index essentially flat
for the last three months. It is possible that this high-frequency reading will not be sustained,
and it’s also possible—as the Chairman, for one, suspects—that this measure is inordinately
influenced by declines in the value of rental housing. But taking out the influence of rents,
growth in the market component is still dropping, as is growth in the overall core PCE. In terms
of my own desires, the core PCE is now growing at a rate that is arguably below the band that I
personally would be comfortable with over the longer run. Non-oil commodity prices are very
cyclical, but they’ve been moving down recently; and, of course, oil prices are way down. Both
measures of wage change are growing at low rates in the latest data. All of these are current
measures. With output gaps forecast to persist, measures of inflation are likely to drop further.
As I said, both of the arrows reflecting our mandates are pointed down.
So, what to do? Many of us I think have already made a strong case for easing policy
right now. At the same time, there are market uncertainties. There is some chance that the war
was a big factor in holding down spending and some possibility that this damping influence has

May 6, 2003

71 of 115

already been lifted. So there is some chance that we will soon start to see better spending data.
I, for one, would like to see much better spending data. We should never let uncertainty become
an excuse for prolonged inaction. We might let it be grounds for a slight further delay. Here I
would support Tom Hoenig in the view that a slight further delay would also give us more time
to organize our whole strategy in this new non-inflationary atmosphere. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. We’ve completed our roundtable,
and we’ll turn to Vincent Reinhart.
MR. REINHART. 2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the materials
that Carol is handing out now. The marked shifts over the intermeeting period in
market participants’ expectations about monetary policy are evident in the top panel
of your first exhibit, which plots the evolving probability that the funds rate would be
¼ point lower by this afternoon implied by the May federal funds futures contract.
Over the latter part of March and early April, before hostilities with Iraq were settled,
investors talked about the possibility of an intermeeting easing, making them
relatively confident that the funds rate would be below 1¼ percent by the end of
today. The cessation of hostilities and the related rally in the equity and corporate
debt markets, along with the perception that the Federal Reserve was not preparing
the market for easing, deflated that notion. As a consequence, market prices are now
consistent with about a 1-in-4 chance of action, about where that expectation has been
for the past two weeks.
Market participants still expect the Committee to ease though and ultimately by
more than anticipated at the March meeting. As shown by the solid red line in the
middle left panel, the current path of expectations of the federal funds rate touches
1 percent by November and has shifted about 50 basis points lower at a longer
horizon. Indeed, the option-implied probability distribution of the funds rate this fall
(the middle right panel) suggests that investors are placing considerable weight on a
level well below 1 percent.
Evidently, a string of weak economic releases—especially on production and
employment—more than offset the lift to the economic outlook that presumably
attended the decline in uncertainty, the fall in oil prices, and the run-up in share prices
over the intermeeting period. It is worth noting that the decline in uncertainty about
interest rates, the bottom panels, was pronounced all along the yield curve. The
narrowing of the width of the 90 percent confidence band for the federal funds rate
150 days hence derived from options on Eurodollars, at the left, was paralleled by
those posted by one- and ten-year-ahead forward rates on swaps, at the right.
2

The materials used by Mr. Reinhart are appended to the transcript (appendix 2).

May 6, 2003

72 of 115

A more favorable backdrop of financial and commodity markets might be one of
the factors inclining the Committee to keep policy on hold at this meeting, a subject
treated in more detail in your next exhibit. The case for holding policy unchanged
would be supported if the Committee viewed, as noted in the top panel, the staff
forecast to be likely and, over the period that could be reasonably thought to be
influenced by action today, acceptable. Underlying that forecast is the judgment that
economic fundamentals will spark a relatively quick pickup in the growth of
aggregate demand over the balance of the year even holding the funds rate at
1¼ percent. This can be seen by the blue bars in the middle left panel, which show
the staff’s forecast that the growth of real GDP will step up from its sub 2 percent
pace to a rate first closer to and then beyond that of potential. While it will take some
time for this growth to eat into the prevailing level of economic slack, especially
given the lackluster performance thus far this quarter, monetary policy action taken
today would mostly be felt—at least according to the staff forecast—when the
economy already has gained a full head of steam.
You may have reason to believe that economic acceleration will be quicker,
implying, as given by the second item in my list in the top panel, that economic slack
would be worked down sooner and disinflation would be less likely than in the staff
forecast. For example, while the extent of fiscal impetus in the current baseline
forecast is a bit larger than in the previous one, the Committee might believe that the
political compromise likely to be struck will take part of all the proposals currently on
the table so that the total ends up significantly larger than now envisioned. To give
you a sense of the upside risk, the Greenbook included an alternative simulation with
both higher government spending and lower taxes. As shown by the red bars in the
middle left panel, that would be sufficient to boost the growth of real GDP
1 percentage point this quarter and hold growth at the baseline thereafter. Even if you
are not confident that fiscal stimulus will be forthcoming—as gridlock is always a
possibility—you might want to wait for those prospects to come into sharper focus
before adding monetary policy easing into the mix.
Another reason the Committee might not view the time as right to ease—even if it
were leaning in that direction—is that it might be worried that financial markets could
react adversely to such action, as noted by the third item in my list. As shown in the
middle right panel, markets have been on a tear in the past nine weeks, with equity
prices up 16 percent from the March 12 low and riskier corporate yields ¼ percentage
point to 1½ percentage points lower. That rally came even as expectations of very
near-term monetary policy ease, as I already described, were being rolled back.
Investors might wonder how weak the Committee considered the outlook to be that it
was necessary to augment the already appreciable relaxation of financial conditions
since mid-March. Moreover, such an action would stand out all the more in
comparison with your recent behavior. The bars in the bottom panel record the
immediate surprises associated with Committee decisions over the past three years,
measured as the actual target rate decided at each of the meetings less the expected
funds rate gotten from futures markets the day before. As can be seen, a surprise

May 6, 2003

73 of 115

today on the order of 20 or 45 basis points, as would be the case if you ease 25 or 50
basis points, respectively, would be an outlier.
Alternatively, you might see the need for easing, discussed in exhibit 3, as too
compelling to be countered effectively by arguments about timing and reception. As
noted in the first bullet point, in the Greenbook outlook resources remain underused
throughout the forecast period, shown in the middle left panel by the unemployment
rate, which stays at or above 6 percent in this and the next four quarters. While a
¼ or ½ point easing may not materially influence the near-term contour of that path,
the projected almost 1 percentage point spread of the unemployment rate over its
natural rate at the beginning of next year is more likely to be within the ambit of your
influence.
You may not be so sure that the economy will deliver even that performance,
particularly if you believe that chief executives still see capital stocks as excessive or
you believe that the prospects for economies abroad are especially gloomy. A failure
to get the forecasted rebound in growth raises the possibility that households’ support
to the economic expansion will finally sag, setting in motion adverse dynamics that
may be difficult to stop by future easing. Market concern about the economy may be
growing in that the implied probability of the funds rate sinking below 1 percent by
the autumn (the middle right panel) has risen of late. The insurance provided by a
prompt easing may be attractive when, as in the second bullet point, downside risks to
demand are more likely or more costly.
Third, even if the Committee believes in a forecast that, to a first approximation,
meets its responsibility to foster sustainable economic growth over time, it has
another objective as well. Easing may be favored on the concern that, as in the third
point, inflation may fall further from an already low level and jeopardize your
commitment to price stability. The four-quarter growth in the consumer price index
is 1.4 percent at the end of the staff forecast, which is shown by the horizontal line in
the bottom panel. While such an outcome or lower has occurred about 30 percent of
the time in the postwar period, it has happened in only two years since 1965. True,
for part of that time the Federal Reserve had lost the anchor provided by price
stability, but you may have concerns that some costs arise from being in a region so
seldom traveled.
Whatever the choice about the level of the federal funds rate, you will still have to
grapple with the risk assessment, as discussed in the last exhibit. The elevated
uncertainties of March that led the Committee not to characterize the balance of risks
have abated. Indeed, those uncertainties have probably diminished to the point where
the same rationale as in March could not plausibly be repeated to refrain from stating
the balance of risks. Still, judging from a recent survey of primary dealers, informed
outsiders are confused about the Committee’s next step. As reported in the top panel,
about half the dealers expect an announcement of balanced risks, while the rest are
split between a tilt toward economic weakness and no assessment at all.

May 6, 2003

74 of 115

I think that there are three possibilities to consider. First, keeping policy
unchanged or easing modestly is unlikely to change materially the evident downside
risks to the path of inflation over the next several quarters, and the relative
distribution of the risks to sustainable economic growth would remain debatable. If
that is the period over which the Committee defines the “foreseeable future,” then it
could reassert the old language tilted toward economic weakness on the logic that the
weighted average of those risks represents a downside threat to its objectives.
However, March’s deferral of a risk statement might make May an appropriate time
to drop the statement altogether, the option listed second. That might be particularly
attractive if you have been troubled in the past by the misperception fostered by the
existing language of trading off economic growth and inflation and the ambiguity
attached to the notion of the foreseeable future. In that case, this afternoon’s
statement could relate that the balance of risk assessment is no longer seen as helpful
in conveying the Committee’s views to the public. On the theory that you can’t beat
something with nothing, I’ve listed a third option: The Committee could augment the
risk assessment portion of the statement. One possibility would be regularly to
include two declarative sentences that describe the risks individually to the goals of
price stability and maximum sustainable growth and a third that summarizes the
balance of those risks. While this may convey the Committee’s view of the outlook
more clearly, it probably would be greeted with bewilderment by some Fed watchers
at the onset.
While your deferral in March opened a window to change the balance of
risk assessment, you might want a bit more time than available today to
deliberate on a matter that will set a precedent. However, the problem that
you face is that anything you do today will be read as precedential. That
concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Vincent?
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I have a question for Vincent. I appreciate the dilemma
that you just defined for us. What is your reaction to in a sense abandoning the balance of risk
statement and expanding the press release statement to define our position? Does that have
merit? How would the market react to that in your opinion?
MR. REINHART. We have heard different things from different market participants.
The Bond Market Association met in this room just last week and devoted one segment of the
session to complaining about the balance of risks statement as not being helpful. They indicated
a preference that we be a little more descriptive in the statement. But I think that would result in

May 6, 2003

75 of 115

some confusion because right now the balance of risks statement provides the comfort of giving
coded words. The problem is that the codes are a limited number of choices, and at least some
members have complained that they have constrained your ability to convey what you really
think about the near-term outlook. For example, in today’s case you might say that plausibly
under the language of the last three years, you’d have to state that the risks are tilted toward
economic weakness, whereas in fact most of the members have expressed concerns about further
disinflation from an already low level. So I think expanding the risks assessment on balance—I
hate to use the word “balance”— [laughter] on net would provide more information to the
markets and more flexibility to you going forward. But flexibility comes with a cost. You don’t
have those coded signals.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The problem basically is that we have been dealing with
two issues—the GDP outlook and the inflation outlook. We have defined our balance of risks in
a manner that any acceleration in GDP growth would of necessity increase the rate of inflation
and vice versa. Now it’s very obvious that that economic model is flawed badly. As I will
suggest as I expand on Vincent’s remarks, I believe the way to handle this is to unbundle the two
issues and deal with them separately and at the end weight them for a conclusion. That strikes
me as a solution, though not necessarily the only or even the best solution. At the end of the day
it may leave members with the conclusion that the simplest thing to do is to bury the whole idea
and forget it. I don’t think that’s the right way to go because I do believe we can convey
information about our outlook. But the form that we’ve been using recently to do so essentially
assumes a predetermined relationship, which is that stronger economic growth creates inflation
and vice versa. That’s based on a very simple model. But the real world doesn’t seem to want to
conform to that model, and that is creating very substantial explanatory difficulties for us.

May 6, 2003

76 of 115

MR. HOENIG. I agree with that, and I look forward to your comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have just a comment. We’ve discussed the probability of
deflation quite a bit today, and a lot of attention was focused on the 35 percent probability in the
Board staff’s exercise. In answer to Tony’s comment about the time period used in that
simulation, I would note that we did do the exercise beginning in 1985, which is a much more
tractable period, and the probability we got was 20 percent as I indicated. It strikes me that both
of those exercises suggest that the probability of deflation is higher than I think we’re all
comfortable with.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other comments? If not, let me move on using a
somewhat different approach to recent developments, and I hope that we will come out with
some agreement on how to handle a number of issues.
There is no question that the financial data have improved quite dramatically very much
across the board. I have in mind not only the narrowing of credit spreads and the dramatic
decline in the premiums for credit derivative default swaps but the very significant drop in the
level of interest rates on BBB and even higher-yield obligations. The fall in those rates has
reduced the cost of capital to a substantial part of the business community, which for a
considerable period of time had been blocked out of the lending market by rates that were close
to prohibitive for lower-rated borrowers. To be sure, a decline in the cost of capital does not
necessarily mean that capital investment will pick up. Such investment depends on the extent to
which business executives see real investment opportunities. And in line with what Jack Guynn
was mentioning, I suspect that people who are beginning to say in private that they feel a bit

May 6, 2003

77 of 115

optimistic nonetheless are not inclined to voice their convictions in public because optimism is
not at this point the conventional wisdom.
The truth of the matter is that the data on nominal orders and on backlogs for nondefense
capital goods excluding aircraft are behaving better than the rhetoric. Backlogs have been rising
for the last three months, not significantly but they have turned up. We also are seeing upward
revisions to the data. It’s a small point, but the revised data on durable goods orders for the
month of March that were released on Friday were raised significantly. The upward revision
stemmed from data that came in higher than the estimates of unavailable data that had been
plugged into the initial report released by the Bureau of the Census. In short, the numbers look
better than the rhetoric. That reminds me of what Mark Twain once said about Wagner’s
music—“it’s not as bad as it sounds.” [Laughter]
It is clear that we are getting some fairly substantial improvement in the financial
numbers—those for the stock market obviously and, indeed, for all the credit markets. While it
is true that the markets are being driven in part by improved profit figures, to date they have not
been supported by evidence that economic activity is experiencing accelerating growth. The
question one has to raise in this context relates to history, which tells us that more often than not,
perhaps much more often than not, financial data of the type we have been looking at in recent
weeks point to an eventual strengthening in economic activity. That does not happen all the
time. There have been occasions when for one reason or another it didn’t happen. But the recent
financial indicators suggest that the burden of proof is on those who argue that the economy will
not pick up. Those who make that argument must presume that there are no significant
investment opportunities. I find that most unlikely. Indeed, the expansion of the
communications network that was going on prior to the huge decline in capital investment as risk

May 6, 2003

78 of 115

premiums rose in 2000 was by any measure that we know not completed, and the longer-term
outlook for such investment still looks reasonably solid. We also know that considerable
advances in productivity continue to be made, and that is telling us that the underlying profit
opportunities for new investments have to be there in one way or another.
There’s a very interesting question as to whether the most recent anecdotal reports that
we heard around the table, which do not indicate any new momentum in the economy since the
end of the Iraqi war, are in fact accurate. The Federal Advisory Council met with the Board on
Friday, and I came away with the impression—in fact the FAC members said this—that they
suddenly are getting a sense of optimism among their business contacts. The reason I find that
important is that the banking community has a special window on what their customers are doing
well before actual data on their activities become available. I was struck by these comments and
by the fact that they came from all twelve Federal Reserve Districts.
This morning Don Kohn got a note from our good friend, Bill Dunkelberg, at the
National Federation of Independent Business. They have just run their survey—the data are not
yet published, and I don’t know when they will be published—and it shows that their index of
confidence, which is the overall index they employ, rose 5 points in April. I believe that is a
monthly record. It is a huge increase. The report also indicated that the index rose to a level of
100 or not far from where it was in 1999 and in earlier years. In other words, if anything it’s
close to normal based on longer-term patterns, after being at its lowest level in March since
1993. According to the report, hiring plans jumped substantially. Capital expenditure plans also
were up, and plans to add to inventories remained strong. There are 1,400 firms in this sample.
Those results don’t quite square with those from the Institute of Supply Management, but it is
possible in one sense to reconcile them. All of the surveys of the Institute of Supply

May 6, 2003

79 of 115

Management are taken in the first half of the month, even though the institute waits two weeks to
publish the data. So the National Federation results could be an indication that something
different has been happening more recently. We don’t know yet. These surveys are useful.
They’re all diffusion indexes. They’re not hard data. But they are the first indication that
something may be changing.
The data that we have been getting on production and employment have been, just to
state it as simply as I know how, awful. We can ascribe the weakness in the employment data in
part to the fact that business firms have displayed an extraordinary capability in recent quarters
to meet a tepid but still rising real demand for goods and services with ever lower employment.
This is another way of saying that the ability to increase productivity is there, but it can’t be the
result of large capital expenditures because we’re not getting such capital investment. My
hypothesis—and I frankly don’t know whether it is true, but it would explain what is going on—
relates to the fact that in the 1995 to 2000 period we had very substantial capital expansion. We
had growing markets and very high perceived rates of return on new production facilities as
distinct from investments made for cost-cutting reasons. As a consequence, there was an
inordinately large emphasis in the business community on investing to expand facilities. A result
was that business firms paid little attention to the inefficiencies that invariably arise as they are
building new plants, adding new equipment, and revising the structure of doing business. Those
inefficiencies build up over time, but if the costs of those inefficiencies are relatively modest
compared with the rates of return on new facilities, businesses essentially forget the
inefficiencies. What I think has happened is that, when the spending boom ended in the year
2000, there was a cumulative level of inefficiencies sitting there that were available for
exploitation with a relatively modest amount of additional investment. That exploitation has

May 6, 2003

80 of 115

gone on for several quarters. The implication, of course, is that the underlying structural
productivity gains from 1995 to 2000 were in a sense actually greater than the published
numbers because there were negatives associated with those gains that were not part of the actual
evaluations.
This means essentially that going back and cleaning up the barn so to speak is turning out
to be a highly profitable activity. The first-quarter earnings numbers are nothing short of
spectacular in the sense that, after they were revised up very late in the quarter, they surprised
everybody. Now, I don’t know whether the gains are being sustained in the second quarter.
They still seem to be holding up, but it’s too soon to be sure. We do know that there has been a
tendency for analysts to revise their forecasts down repeatedly for a quarter as they go through
the quarter. They are doing that now but at a much slower pace than is typical, implying that the
productivity spillover is still significantly there.
I don’t know what the short-term behavior of the economy will turn out to be in terms of
the GDP numbers. I do know that, if we look at outside forecasts that are done in very
considerable detail on the bases of both working down from the macro data and building up from
individual company data, we find that JP Morgan Chase and Salomon Brothers/Smith Barney
both have 4.0 percent rates of increase in GDP for the third quarter. So does Goldman Sachs,
which has, of course, been on the bearish side of these forecasts. I myself find it difficult to
believe that such growth is in prospect because, if it is, that has to mean that by a few weeks
from today growth of real GDP estimated on a monthly basis has to move up appreciably or else
4 percent growth cannot realistically be achieved in the third quarter. That forecasters at these
three organizations believe that it can be achieved I find somewhat startling. It may be that they
are beginning to pick up what the Dunkelberg data are picking up, namely evidence that suggests

May 6, 2003

81 of 115

to them that something significant is happening that will boost GDP growth. To be sure, the
Goldman Sachs numbers tail off after the third quarter, but they’re still higher than the secondquarter numbers that we are now looking at, which are not all that good.
In any event, we did get a report this morning of a sharp increase in chain store sales. I
don’t know how much of the increase may reflect a poor seasonal adjustment for Easter, but it is
a very big increase. In fact, in the last four weeks the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi seasonally
adjusted weekly index on chain store sales went up 3¾ percent, and that rise is not at an annual
rate. It’s the increase over the four weeks.
The evidence bearing on the economic outlook is a mixed bag at this stage. The
difficulty in all of this is that a deflation process may be sneaking up on us. It is not doing so in a
way that I anticipated in that, no matter which set of price indexes one uses, the rate of inflation
has fallen fairly dramatically during the last six months. Incidentally, the issue I was raising with
respect to the owners’ equivalent rent was not that the other smaller components of the index are
not falling. Indeed, some are falling more, but I’m seriously questioning whether in fact the
owners’ equivalent rent in the current environment of very rapidly changing homeownership is
best proxied by the way the BLS does it. This involves taking a sample of rents on rental
properties that have the same physical characteristics as single-family homes. I’m not arguing
about the data as such but in terms of whether in fact we are looking at true deflationary
processes. Indeed, remember that the 35 percent probability of deflation in the staff baseline
forecast includes falling inflation as a consequence of improving productivity. The real issue
that we have to get at when we’re looking at the notion of deflation is not only what prices are
doing but also why they are doing it. An economy in which prices are falling at, say, a 5 or 10 or
15 percent annual rate but where rising productivity is matching the decline such that the

May 6, 2003

82 of 115

nominal rate of return on capital is stable or rising tells us that we do not have a destabilized
economic system. So price declines per se don’t tell us very much without advertence to the
concurrent rate of return on capital and whether in fact we have a stable environment. Indeed, I
would argue that a necessary condition for the type of deflationary problems experienced in the
Great Depression is not only a decline in product prices but of necessity a decline in asset prices.
If product prices are declining but asset prices are not, the likelihood I would submit is that
individual companies may be having pricing problems but they’re not having productivity
problems. The rates of return are there, and that’s the reason that asset prices are high.
I do think we have a concern here. In my view we cannot avoid the fact, as Governor
Bernanke pointed out, that we face an asymmetry. We know what to do with inflation when it
rises. The Committee has taken action to counter it many times and has succeeded in doing so
many times. We haven’t confronted the problem of potential deflation in a very long time, and I
find that possibility to be something on which this Committee must have an ever-increasing
focus. We have to be careful, however, about how we think about this process and make sure
that we’ve got it right and that we’re not merely looking at the zero bound issue. This is a far
larger issue that involves the mechanism by which the economy functions rather than just how
pricing affects products as distinct from assets.
My general view with regard to the policy implications is that we probably would be wise
to move the funds rate lower unless we see a fairly substantial pickup in economic activity. I
would suggest, however, that it would be a mistake to ease policy today. The reason relates to
the issue that several of you have mentioned. I did try, incidentally, during my congressional
testimony last Wednesday to open up the possibility that we might ease today. I raised for the
first time the notion that falling inflation would be unwelcome, and I did emphasize a couple of

May 6, 2003

83 of 115

times during the testimony that we, the Federal Open Market Committee, do have further room
to move lower. I think reactions to my remarks did briefly lower somewhat the May federal
funds rate futures, but the stock market then rallied and pulled back down the probability of an
easing action.
The reason I think we have to proceed cautiously is that the recent strengthening of the
stock market and financial markets generally, including the narrowing in yield spreads, is a
potentially fragile situation because it is not as yet being supported by positive developments in
the real economy. So if we were to come out today with an easing move that the market does not
expect, the question would arise as to what we in the Federal Reserve know that those in the
market do not. Because we are in such an unsettled period, we have the capacity of completely
reversing the nascent rise in financial market values. If that rise continues, it will lift the
economy with it. As a consequence, I think we need to be careful. I subscribe to Bill Poole’s
general edict about not trying to fool the market. It doesn’t serve our purposes. The ideal
monetary policy is to have nothing happen in the market every time we move because market
participants have fully discounted our action. That creates the best general environment except
for those rare occasions when we want to change the state of psychology. That is what we did in
very early 2001, when we went out of our way to move rates sharply lower at a time the market
did not expect us to do that. We did it because we wanted to alter general attitudes, but at this
point I think we’re far better off not to surprise the market. That’s largely because, even though
a number of us may think that we know how the markets will respond, things happen that we
don’t expect. I submit to you that we currently are dealing with a very chancy situation, but we
are reasonably sure that if we do what the market expects, then nothing will happen. We do not
know with any degree of accuracy how the market is going to behave in the event that we do

May 6, 2003

84 of 115

something one way or the other. Frankly, I don’t know how the market will respond if we move
the funds rate lower today. But as a commentator in the Wall Street Journal said today, if the
Fed were to do something the market would respond wildly. The reporter did not specify in
which direction. [Laughter] I suspect the reason is that he didn’t have a clue, and I can
understand that.
In any event, I think we have a tricky policy issue in front of us today. Ordinarily, as you
know, our procedure is for the members to express their views in the policy go-around, vote, and
then look at a draft press statement. I’d like to do something different today. We’ve drafted a
statement that tries to capture some of these issues. I’d like to circulate it around the table and
have it as a point of discussion as members comment on policy. I would appreciate it if my
colleagues would distribute the statement. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support the
recommendation of no change in the fed funds rate, and I further support the reasoning behind it
as evidenced by the statement you have distributed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Ferguson,
MR. FERGUSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also agree with your analysis that there
are some straws in the wind that suggest it might be wise to wait. I asked two rhetorical
questions at the end of my earlier statement. The obvious answer to “If not us, then who?” is us.
[Laughter] The more serious question of the two is, “If not now, then when?” I am supportive
of what I think I heard you imply, which is that we have a two-day meeting coming up in June
during which we can do lots of things and we also will have seen much more data by then. So
I’m interpreting that—

May 6, 2003

85 of 115

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I interrupt? I should have addressed this. If the data
we’re seeing from the Federal Advisory Council and the National Federation of Independent
Business prove to be a false dawn, we will know it by the time of the next meeting. And if that
should be the case, I think the burden of proof will be on those who think we should not move at
that time. The absence of signs of an improving economy at that point would suggest potential
deterioration that will require us to respond. I think that’s what you were questioning.
MR. FERGUSON. That’s the implication I took from your comments, so I’m glad you
made that more explicit for the benefit of everybody. As for the risk statement, a number of
people served with me on the committee that created the wording of the balance of risks sentence
three and a half years ago, but I will take sole responsibility for it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s yours! [Laughter]
MR. FERGUSON. It’s mine. When you’re the father of something that even at the age
of three proves not to be as attractive as you had hoped, you have one of two choices. You can
still embrace it because it’s yours and wait for it to grow up and become that lovely swan that
you expect. Or you can say, “You know, you’re not as attractive as we had hoped, and maybe
someone else wants to adopt you.” [Laughter] This record will be public in five years, and my
children at that stage will be old enough to actually have an interest in what their father was
saying in this room. They will be teenagers by then, and they will really resent me!
Now, with respect to the creation of the balance of risks language, the then Director of
Monetary Affairs and I got together and tried to work out the matrix of what might happen over
the longer-term horizon. When we did that, I will admit that I did not see that the U.S. economy
would be in a position where we’d have extremely low, and possibly declining, inflation and also
expanding growth with a forecast of above-trend growth. So the language that we used—and it

May 6, 2003

86 of 115

was not his fault, it was mine—didn’t fully pick up the type of situation we are in today. So I
think what you have proposed in the third paragraph of this draft statement will get us through
this period quite nicely. It disentangles the two elements of our dual responsibility. It comes
back with a weighted average. I believe it’s as clear as can be, and I’m very supportive of it.
Overall, I think this is a great statement. And in the context of having a meeting coming up in
June, I’m very supportive of your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Gramlich.
MR. GRAMLICH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, on inflation itself I would certainly
agree that, if asset prices are not declining, there is less financial risk than if they were.
However, we should keep in mind—though I have to think more about this—that, if goods prices
are declining, then the real cost of capital is rising and I think we still have the classic zero bound
problem. So it is better if asset prices are rising as opposed to declining, but I don’t believe that
solves our problem with deflation. I do want to reflect on this more, but that’s my initial—
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be a very interesting seminar topic because
there are various aspects to it.
MR. FERGUSON. Right. I want to agree. But there is a difference between a lower
cost of capital where the markets have lowered it versus your point, Ned, which is a low cost of
capital because the issue is low versus what. I think you’re absolutely right that rates of return
depend on a number of factors and not just asset prices. So I strongly endorse your point.
MR. GRAMLICH. My second point is that I definitely don’t want to blunder about when
markets are fragile. I think we have to be very careful about this whole issue, but we should also
recognize that markets aren’t exogenous either. Markets are influenced by what we say and do.
So if for whatever reason there is not sufficient expectation that we would take a policy action

May 6, 2003

87 of 115

today, that’s fine. But in my view we have to start building the case regarding what we are about
in the longer run. So I can go along with the kind of policy that you’re suggesting, Mr.
Chairman, but I wouldn’t go along with you forever on this, and indeed I know you don’t want
me or anybody else to go along with you forever.
Purely on the statement—and virtually everybody has commented on this today—I think
we have to unbundle the risks in the way that this draft statement does. I strongly support that
part of your recommendation. I do have to be honest, though, and tell you that I have some
qualms about the “taken together” sentence because it’s akin to adding up the risks for pears and
adding up the risks for apples and putting them together. I’m uneasy about that, but I have no
bright ideas for what to do about it today. The proposed wording is as good as anything I can
think of today. But if I were placing a bet, I would bet that the language would need to be
altered in three years when Roger’s swan gets even a little more eloquent and beautiful.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If not in seven weeks!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start at a little different place than you
did, but I’ll come back. When I came in this morning, I had been thinking about how to assess
the potential costs of lowering rates when in retrospect that proved not to have been necessary or
desirable versus the costs of not lowering rates when in retrospect we wished we had done so
sooner. I must say that on that calculus I think the costs of delay are greater at this point. It
seems to me that if we were to ease policy today and in retrospect that turned out not to have
been necessary or desirable, I’d be quite happy. That’s because we’d be dealing with a situation
in which the economy is stronger than expected and coming along nicely and that would be

May 6, 2003

88 of 115

occurring in an environment where the inflation environment is very stable. So I don’t think the
costs of dealing with that would be all that high.
With regard to market expectations, we have quite an unusual situation. I haven’t gone
back and looked at the data, but I think in our history of recent years it is quite unusual to have a
very high probability of a future action built into the market but no action built in for the current
meeting. Second, as the first page of graphs in front of us shows very clearly, as of the end of
March or early April the market had built in a high probability of a change in May but now has
taken that out. So in terms of market expectations, we’re dealing with an unusual circumstance.
I believe the market is going to interpret the language “The Committee believes that, taken
together, the balance of risks . . . is weighted toward weakness” as code, if you will, or a forecast
that we are highly likely to cut rates at our next meeting. The question will arise immediately as
to whether the cut is likely to be 25 or 50 basis points. That uncertainty will arise and will be
discussed right away. So to some extent not acting today but putting in this language will
surprise the market in the same way that the market would be surprised by an action today. It’s
not as if we totally avoid that market surprise.
I view this as a perfectly satisfactory solution because, if the market has a high degree of
confidence that a change in rates is coming, in terms of the effects of monetary policy it doesn’t
really matter very much whether that change comes now or six weeks from now. The term
structure is affected almost exactly the same way except for the very, very short-run maturities.
That six-week interval can’t make any difference for a ten-year bond. So I think this is an
acceptable way of making it clear that we are very likely to be easing policy unless we see a lot
of evidence that the economy is picking up steam.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kohn.

May 6, 2003

89 of 115

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your recommendation and the
announcement as drafted largely for the reasons that President Poole just stated. I also would
have been comfortable if you had recommended a slight cut in rates and that had been possible
given the market situation. I agree, too, that the risk–reward tradeoff is tilted in such a way that I
would rather be a little too easy rather than a little too tight, so I’d take my chances on that side.
But in that regard I think we do get a lot of benefit from this statement by breaking up the
balance of risks. I might note that I don’t think Roger did quite as bad a job in constructing the
old balance of risk statement as he averred in his statement. To me it didn’t quite have the
tradeoff in it that you said it did. But the fact that you thought it did and that others were
confused by it suggests that it is certainly inadequate to the current situation. So I consider it
very helpful to unbundle the risks. I think highlighting the downside risks on inflation will be
very beneficial by letting the world know what we are worried about. It reinforces the last
paragraph of your testimony and puts that issue on the table more forcefully. I think that will
help to influence expectations and to give long-term rates scope to move down if activity doesn’t
pick up very much and if inflation comes in lower. And I believe that’s very helpful.
As to the adding up of apples and pears, I think that’s basically what we have to do here
at the end of the day. We have to weigh these different factors and add them up. By the way, I
like the apples and pears better than the sausage that I used to hear we made around this table.
Fruit cup is better than sausage!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. I support this statement. I would say, perhaps not unlike others, that if
we had taken an action today, I would have been a little squeamish. But certainly I understand
where the risks are and would have supported an easing. I think unbundling the risks is a very

May 6, 2003

90 of 115

good idea. In my view, the second paragraph isn’t necessarily cast in stone but does give us
some opportunity to be more communicative with the public as we move forward. So I’m very
supportive of this. One thing I would request is that we think about the agenda for the June
meeting sooner rather than later because in light of this statement and our discussion today that
will be a real opportunity for us to do some very important planning and discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you’re giving instructions to the gentleman to your
right.
MR. HOENIG. As a request.
MR. REINHART. Your remarks this morning and those of Governor Bies and others
around the table echo the comments I’ve heard from members over the last couple of weeks in
other conversations. So the Chairman has agreed that the special topic at the first day of the June
meeting should focus on alternative policy regimes in an environment of very low short-term
rates. Dino and I will organize the staff work on the strategy, tactics, and communication policy
associated with that. That does crowd out a bit of the background material that the Board staff
has prepared on communication policy more generally. What I’ll do is circulate that material in
a couple of weeks, and I’ll ask for guidance when you receive it on whether you’d prefer to
tackle the communication policy at the next two-day meeting in January or if you’d like to deal
with it piecemeal at meetings before then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I would like to start off with where I was before I
saw this draft statement and then react to the statement. At the risk of some repetition, to me the
key policy issue this morning is whether we want to act today to preempt a buildup of
disinflationary momentum or whether we want to wait a little while to see if the economy

May 6, 2003

91 of 115

strengthens and that risk diminishes. As I said earlier, it’s an agonizingly close call. It was for
me before I saw the statement, and it still is. But on balance the recent improvement in at least
some of the data—and you added a few more in your earlier comments—had convinced me that
staying where we are was the best way to go. So I favored leaving the rate where it was,
reintroducing a bias, and making it a neutral bias. My preference for a neutral bias was based in
part on my view that introducing a downward bias at this point could undercut the renewed
optimism we’re hoping for, for which I think there is still some basis. I don’t want to frighten
the markets and the public into thinking that the deflation problem, even though it may be more
immediate, is greater than it actually is. In this statement we’ve unbundled the risks in one place
but rebundled them in the final sentence of the third paragraph. In a sense this statement still
suggests that we have a downward bias; that’s the bottom line. I’m not sure I’m comfortable
with that for the reasons I just stated.
I was going to suggest something slightly different. Let me just throw it on the table
briefly. Clearly, we do need to recognize the disinflation risk one way or another because it’s
very real. I was going to suggest that one way to do it would be to reiterate in this statement the
concern that you expressed—I thought very effectively—in your testimony last week. But in
addition to that I would state clearly in the announcement that core inflation is now at the lower
end of the range that we are willing to tolerate on any sustained basis. I recognize that this
would be a departure from what we’ve done before and a different kind of departure than we did
last time. But that is in fact what we’re talking about now, and I think it could serve us well in
trying to deal with what is a very difficult policy choice today. A statement like that wouldn’t
pre-commit us, but it’s hard to imagine circumstances in which we would want the flexibility to

May 6, 2003

92 of 115

allow a sustained inflation below 1 percent. So that’s another way of going. I don’t know
whether I’ve made it clear or not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is, indeed, another way. But if we start to do that type of
statement, we have to be very careful to make sure that we have the actual capacity to implement
the goal. Too many times people have said we will not allow X to go below Y or we will not
allow some specific thing to happen. That’s very forceful if one has a lot of troops to invade the
other guy if he is opposed. But we don’t have the tools to guarantee certain things. And if we
put out a guarantee and fail to follow through, the effects could be really devastating. My
bottom line here is that this approach is not something we can do today. I think your proposed
revision requires Committee discussion in a far broader context.
MR. BROADDUS. I would just respond, if I may. I know we can’t guarantee in any
short period of time that we can put a floor on the inflation rate. But I would hope that over any
reasonable period of time we could do that with monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, the Bank of Japan thought it could.
MR. GRAMLICH. Just on this debate. Al, I think the problem is that wording the
statement the way you suggest actually moves us quite a distance toward inflation targeting.
Many people around the table have different views regarding the desirability of inflation
targeting. I know where you are. I know where Ben is and where many others are. We should
not get to the issue of inflation targeting at 1:00 p.m. at the end of a long meeting. I think it is a
quite reasonable issue to discuss in some detail next time. But we can’t do it quickly at this
point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.

May 6, 2003

93 of 115

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start first by commenting on the
statement, which I like a lot. It may not be perfect, but I consider it a distinct improvement so I
think we should go with it. As for policy, on balance I agree with you that we’re probably better
off not acting today. Not only are financial markets fragile, but they can also be fickle. We
don’t want to do anything that will set them off unnecessarily. I think Bill’s and Don’s argument
is right that this statement conveys much the same sentiment as a funds rate cut. But it’s still
different from taking an easing action because people in the market know that we’re going to be
reading the incoming information on the economy, as are they. So I feel more comfortable
deferring any action until June depending on the nature of the incoming information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. So much on the table here! First, with regard to the policy action,
obviously I’m not a voting member; but if I were, I could have voted for an easing in policy, and
I could have done it on the basis of the concerns you expressed at the end of your testimony last
week. That is, we may need a more stimulative stance of monetary policy in the situation of
lower-than-expected inflation because policy is less, rather than more, accommodative than we
had planned. So, in order to keep the status quo, we might need to ease a bit to take real interest
rates to a position that is as accommodative as policy was, let’s say, immediately after our last
move. I thought that might be a way to explain an easing action—to say that it was more or less
an attempt to keep the status quo—that would not affect the markets so directly.
I certainly can go along with your proposal and I understand what your concerns are. On
the matter of straws in the wind, the economy is going to grow, so sooner or later we’re going to
see these little straws. The question is, When are they going to cumulate to be enough to make a
difference in terms of an economy that is growing sufficiently to absorb all the excess capacity

May 6, 2003

94 of 115

that is out there? To me the problem is not that inflation is falling so much as that we have an
output gap. The declining rate of inflation is related to that output gap, and I think we ought to
be concerned about that gap. Our best guess at forecasting suggests that the gap will remain for
more than the next few quarters that are mentioned in the first sentence of the third paragraph of
the statement. So, I’m a little uncomfortable with this approach, but I’m willing to go along with
it.
I totally agree with you that the balance of risks statement has gotten us into the pickle of
too tightly coupling inflation and growth or disinflation and no growth. So I like the idea of
splitting them apart. I’m a little troubled by the wording “upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth.” What do we mean by the term “sustainable growth” in the
context of that sentence? I usually think of sustainable growth as noninflationary growth, but I
don’t know what upside and downside risks mean in the context of noninflationary growth.
Inflation is going down by all of our best guesses. Do we just mean growth at potential? I don’t
understand what we mean. You probably do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is not the first time that particular phrase has been
argued. The issue basically is this: When we talk about risks to something we have to say what
that something is. In other words, just to say the risks are balanced or unbalanced is fine if one
knows the base against which the evaluation is being made.
MS. MINEHAN. No debate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The point here is that the term “sustainable growth” is a
proxy for an expanding economy whose growth is internally sustainable, meaning it does not
have in it the seeds of its own demise. Now, one can argue that that is maximum sustainable
growth, and one can argue that it won’t matter—the difference here is hardly discernible—

May 6, 2003

95 of 115

whether we’re talking about growth of 3 percent, 3¼ percent, or 3½ percent. It’s somewhere in
that area, but we shouldn’t be putting down a number.
MS. MINEHAN. I’m not suggesting that we put a number down. I’m just wondering
what we mean by it.
SPEAKER(?). It means what is acceptable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s what we mean.
MR. FERGUSON. As the Chairman has indicated—I'm sorry to talk out of turn without
being called on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You’re called on.
MR. FERGUSON. This concept really is very much about a growth rate that is close to
potential. Now, potential growth is in a range that we’ve never been public about, and I’m not
sure we all agree that it’s currently somewhere between 3 and 3½ percent.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.
MR. FERGUSON. I believe the staff still considers potential to be in that range, and I
think all of us generally understand that that’s what we mean here. The reason we’ve chosen this
language is that we’ve been using these words for a long, long time. They go back to the era of
the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation. In my view, it’s better for us to stick with those words
rather than to say a growth rate about equal to potential because that clearly begs the question of
what we think the rate of potential is. The word “sustainable,” at least to my ear, has an
implication of a pace of economic growth that, as the Chairman suggested, does not contain the
seeds of its own destruction. It means growth that is not too slow, which is what we have now,
nor so far above potential that we risk a breakout of inflation. Admittedly it’s shorthand. But I
don’t think it’s that mysterious that we need to tie ourselves in knots about it today. To make the

May 6, 2003

96 of 115

point again, this little swan that we tried to hatch a few years ago may need to have some plastic
surgery. But I’m not sure that today is the day we ought to look closely at this because what we
mean by sustainable growth is not the issue that has tripped us up with respect to this whole
concept. At least I would argue that. You may disagree.
MS. MINEHAN. Well, if we’re talking about growth that is close to potential and
doesn’t contain the seeds of its own destruction—i.e., it’s not inflationary and is not straining
resources—my own view is that there are more downside risks to that forecast in the near future
than upside risks. One can debate that, I suppose. There is certainly the possibility of a fall in
inflation, and I like the delinking of growth and inflation in this statement, so I guess I can live
with it.
With regard to the June agenda, I would hope that we don’t talk just about strategies to
deal with the zero bound issue. We had an extended discussion of that at a meeting not too long
ago, so there is considerable material available to us on that issue, and all of us have thought a lot
about the zero bound. We do need strategies, I agree, and we need to think about them in the
environment in which we might actually employ them. But in my view it also would be
worthwhile to explain the concept that people have raised here. I think President Stern was the
first to say a couple of meetings ago that all price declines are not necessarily bad. What does
that mean? What is the distinction between disinflation and deflation? What does it really mean
to operate in such a low interest rate environment separate from whether we buy securities out on
the yield curve or whatever? Are there other factors that we haven’t given a lot of thought to that
are going to affect us or the economy in such an environment? Maybe that’s too much!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Santomero.

May 6, 2003

97 of 115

MR. SANTOMERO. I concur with your decision and support it. I like the idea of
splitting up the two sentences. If I were a wordsmith, I’d argue that the “taken together”
sentence doesn’t need to be there. Let the markets put it together and just indicate what we
believe the conditions are that relate to sustainable growth and inflation. If we put the two
together, in some sense we are trying to summarize our view of the risks, and we’re giving code
words to the market. So my preference is to eliminate that sentence, but I can go either way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. I can support the statement. I like the fact that we’ve broken out the two
risks explicitly in this. I could have voted for a reduction in the funds rate target today because
I’m looking at how much the market has moved the fed funds futures rates since our last
meeting. The market is pricing in a rate cut; it’s just a matter of when. So having been on the
other side for a while, I’m inclined to believe that the market would not have been all that upset
by an easing action today. But I will go along with the recommendation that we wait to see how
future information develops. I look forward to the discussion at the next meeting. As I indicated
earlier, I’d like to see us think through what our strategy should be and what signals we want to
send as we move into this lower inflation world that we haven’t experienced for a long time. I
think it will help us to further improve our communication if we have considered carefully our
long-term plan to get through this low inflation period. Then we can do another plastic surgery
on this swan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Olson.
MR. OLSON. Based only on my reading of the Greenbook and the options presented in
the Bluebook, I would have supported an easing today. I am persuaded, however, by the timing
question to support your recommendation. I would just like to add one point about executive

May 6, 2003

98 of 115

sentiment, building on comments made by the Chairman, Vice Chairman McDonough, and
Governor Bies. The markets still reward executives who outperform their peers. If we look back
at the 1991-92 environment, when a significant amount of downsizing was going on, once that
downsizing had been complete there were only two options available to achieve growth—to
expand by merger or to expand by additional investment. It seems to me that this time we have
seen a great deal of improvement in the efficiency and timing of investment decisions, to say
nothing of the decisions themselves in terms of what investments to make. But the margin of
error in the timing is even tighter than it was in 1991-92. So coming back to Vice Chairman
McDonough’s comment about the psychology, once the psychology seems right for businesses
to make new investments, I think the pickup in investment could be quite rapid. In my view to
do anything at this point to disturb that would be wrong.
With respect to the statement, eighteen months ago when I first joined the Committee I
thought it would be pretty easy to improve the statements that we were making. It didn’t take me
long to realize that every change we made was parsed carefully, so by my second meeting I was
very conscious of the desirability of not changing any more words than necessary. However, as
in the business world, there are windows of opportunity. Having not opined a risk assessment at
the last meeting gives us an opportunity this time to make some changes, and these changes seem
to me to be appropriate. So I support not only the statement but also the manner in which we’ve
altered the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Bernanke.
MR. BERNANKE. I can support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I like the
statement and the decoupling of the references to inflation and growth. I would note that there
are some potential and logical issues regarding the statement that will probably emerge as we get

May 6, 2003

99 of 115

more experienced with it. For example, if the two risks are in opposite directions but one is
severe and one is mild, would that be a balanced risk or would it be—? [Laughter] Exactly. At
some point we may have to deal with this—weighting the two objectives, for example. So I
would just point out that we may have to decapitate the swan at some point. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That’s called oranges and sausages.
MR. FERGUSON. We could always vote on our loss function.
MR. BERNANKE. People have suggested that, Governor Ferguson.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think a good case could be made for a further easing of
policy today. The most likely scenario for the economy over the next year or so leaves
significant excess capacity in place. With low inflation and the economy in a weakened state, I
believe that erring on the side of ease most likely would entail very little cost whereas erring on
the side of inaction could be significantly more costly. The cost of inaction could be especially
large because we are within range of deflation and the zero bound. Finally, I believe that being
preemptive has served us well in the past. Quite frankly, if my recollection is correct, at times
our acting in a preemptive manner has involved surprising the markets, and I don’t think we’ve
suffered as a result of that.
I also would say that the third paragraph is helpful to me. Let me make a few comments.
I never thought when we talked about the upside and downside risks that it was in terms of
commenting on sustainable growth. It always meant to me the risks to our forecast of growth—
that we saw either upside or downside risks to our projection of growth, not to sustainable
growth, which I think is a very different concept. Also the last two sentences help me a bit

May 6, 2003

100 of 115

because they do point out clearly the issues that I think we ought to be focused on, particularly if
we’re still interested in acting in a preemptive way. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I think the decision on policy today is a close call. I
could have easily supported an easing today. But as I said in my earlier remarks, I think the
fairly dramatic improvement in the financial sector offers us enough promise that it’s worthwhile
to wait and see for just a bit longer. As for the bias statement, I’ve been a long-time skeptic of
the benefits of having a bias statement. In that regard, I think Roger has been very generous in
accepting sole paternity! But since he agrees it’s not the prettiest baby he’s ever seen, it seems to
me that we’re missing a very good opportunity, as you put it, to bury the whole concept and
forget it. I would take advantage of that opportunity, but failing that I think eliminating the
“taken together” sentence would be an improvement at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. I am supportive of the policy recommendation, and I support the
unbundling of the two risks. I’m also pleased that the statement acknowledges our concern about
deflation by indicating that a substantial fall in inflation would be unwelcome. However, I share
some of the views expressed by others about the “taken together” sentence, which rebundles the
risks. I am concerned that it will cause the markets to focus just on the fact that we’ve changed
our balance of risks toward weakness. My preference is not to have that sentence in the
statement. However, I can support the statement as it’s written. And I, too, look forward to the
development of a communication method that we all feel comfortable calling a swan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.

May 6, 2003

101 of 115

MR. GUYNN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation to make no policy change
today. I actually came in thinking—and I said this to somebody during the break—that the worst
of all worlds would be to take no action today and to go back to a balance of risk statement of the
kind we ended up with here. I think it was Al Broaddus and maybe Don Kohn who made a point
that was quite vivid in my mind—that we need to convey some positive sense about the outlook.
To throw a bit of cold water on the way this statement is structured I, like several others—I’m
still thinking about this as I speak—believe it might be better to strike that last sentence where
we blend the two risks. I know we can’t abandon the statement without preparing the public for
it. I’m not smart enough and don’t have enough time to think about whether or not we can
simply drop that sentence. But I’m afraid it does undo some of what we’re trying to do today,
and that bothers me a good deal.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, could I just associate myself with the preference for
eliminating that sentence?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a general willingness or desire to do that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I don’t share that view because, if we take out that
sentence, we in effect divorce ourselves from the previous form of the statement before we have
an opportunity to discuss it adequately at our next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think it would be a mistake to pull it out.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. As do I.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But if it’s the consensus—. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I definitely agree with the policy
recommendation not to make a change today. That’s in essence what I said in my statement,

May 6, 2003

102 of 115

namely that we should wait. On the balance of risks issue, I do a mea culpa here. I was on the
committee, Roger.
MR. FERGUSON. You were?
MR. MOSKOW. I certainly was, along with Bob Parry and Bill McDonough.
MR. PARRY. But it’s your baby! [Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. I think the language is obsolete now. There’s no question that it needs
to be changed. We need to eliminate the wording on the risks. I would have preferred to do the
surgery on the swan—or whatever the analogy is—outside of this group. I’d suggest that another
subcommittee be appointed to do that and to come back to the Committee with a
recommendation. For many of the reasons that people have mentioned around the table, I think
there will be other iterations of this and we are setting some precedent here, and I think it’s
something we should consider very carefully before changing.
I actually would propose another option. I don’t feel strongly enough to dissent on the
statement, but I want to suggest another option because I do have concerns about this statement.
My concerns tie in with some of the comments made by Jack Guynn and others. First, I think
this statement will surprise the market and will increase the market expectation of a cut in rates.
In my view, it comes close to risking the effect on market sentiment that we wish to avoid here.
Second, I think it elevates the concern about disinflation significantly. So my preference would
be—and to my mind this option would have the least risk of influencing the markets—to go back
to our usual format and to say that the risks are balanced. However, I would add the sentence
that you put in regarding the unwelcome risk of disinflation. I’d put what you said in your
testimony in the statement itself to show that we are concerned about it. But I still would prefer

May 6, 2003

103 of 115

to have the risks balanced. As I said, I don’t feel strongly enough to dissent on it, but that would
be my preference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It’s very difficult to make that judgment. Basically, if our
sole purpose were to do exactly what the market expects, what we find is that one-half of the
primary dealers who responded to a recent survey expected the FOMC to adopt a neutral
statement. The other half were about evenly divided between expecting an assessment tilted
toward weakness and expecting a continued deferral of any assessment. So, not all the views
were the same. I think we’re running out of people who have not commented.
MR. GUYNN. Is a postscript allowable, Mr. Chairman? Not to rebut, but I just want to
make a point that there seems to be enough uneasiness about this hybrid statement that I’m
uncomfortable with Vincent’s notion that we might have to wait until next January to talk about
this. I wonder if we can’t find some way to get back to a fundamental discussion of the wording
of our press statements because I suspect the issue we’re struggling with will be with us for a
while. We’re going to have this problem meeting after meeting if we don’t tackle it in June or at
least fairly quickly. So I would lobby for quick attention to it.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, I agree with that. And I would like to associate myself
with President Moskow’s thoughts about appointing a subcommittee rather than waiting to get
staff memos and so forth in January. Put a group together sooner rather than later, and let’s get
to it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That seems reasonable. Would you read the appropriate
statement on which we will vote?
MR. BERNARD. The vote will be just on the federal funds rate?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Correct.

May 6, 2003

104 of 115

MR. BERNARD. The wording is on page 13 of the Bluebook: “The Federal Open
Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining the federal
funds rate at an average of around 1¼ percent.”
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll, please.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Bernanke
Governor Bies
President Broaddus
Governor Ferguson
Governor Gramlich
President Guynn
Governor Kohn
President Moskow
Governor Olson
President Parry

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the only additional item on the agenda is to confirm
June 24 and 25 as the dates for our next meeting. Vincent Reinhart will be in touch with all of
you regarding special topics.
END OF MEETING

