October 30-31, 2007

1 of 162

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
October 30–31, 2007
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 30, 2007,
at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, October 31, 2007, at 9:00 a.m. Those present were
the following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Mishkin
Mr. Poole
Mr. Rosengren
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Cumming, Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and Messrs. Plosser and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Lacker and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Fuhrer, Kamin, Rasche, Slifman, Sullivan, and Wilcox,
Associate Economists
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board
of Governors
Mr. English, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

October 30-31, 2007

2 of 162

Messrs. Reifschneider¹ and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Wright, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Zakrajšek, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Dale,1 Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Gross,1 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Kumasaka2 and Luecke,³ Senior Financial Analysts, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Judson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Messrs. Judd and Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco and Cleveland, respectively
Mr. Altig and Ms. Mester, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
Philadelphia, respectively
Mr. Hakkio, Special Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Messrs. Hilton, Koenig, and Potter, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New
York, Dallas, and New York, respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
_______________
1

Attended portion of meeting relating to the discussion of communication issues.
Attended Tuesday session only.
³ Attended Wednesday session only.

2

October 30-31, 2007

Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

3 of 162

October 30-31, 2007

4 of 162

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 30-31, 2007
October 30, 2007—Afternoon Session

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody. This meeting is Karen
Johnson’s last. She attended her first meeting in 1991 and has been a regular participant for the
past ten years, so she has ninety-one total FOMC meetings to her credit. Karen has been briefing
the FOMC on international financial and economic matters since she became head of the
International Finance Division in 1997, and she has done a great job of covering about 95
percent of the world’s population and about two-thirds or more of the world’s economic activity.
Also, as the head of IF, she has logged an awful lot of miles to World Bank–IMF meetings, the
BIS, and elsewhere. She has given me a lot of good advice on jetlag, I can assure you. She is
going to finance her retirement with frequent-flyer miles. [Laughter] So, Karen, I am sure every
member of the Committee would like to join me in thanking you for your dedication and your
excellent advice and counsel. Best of luck. [Applause]
MS. JOHNSON. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have the less pleasant duty of reminding everybody about
the Wall Street Journal article on our communications policy that appeared some time ago. I
don’t think anybody actually leaked the story, because the way Greg Ip works is that he goes
around and talks to each person and gets a little of the story and then builds it up in that way.
Nevertheless, I think it is obviously bad for our institution when our internal deliberations
become public, and so let me just ask everyone, please, to be especially careful about
maintaining confidentiality. Thank you.

October 30-31, 2007

5 of 162

For our first item today, in light of Karen’s retirement, we would like to propose Nathan
Sheets to be an economist for the FOMC until the first meeting of 2008. Do I have a motion?
SEVERAL. So moved.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Thank you. Next, we turn to Bill
Dudley.
MR. DUDLEY. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to miss Karen as my
fellow scribe at the BIS. She also was the person who identified who was actually
speaking. [Laughter]
Two crosscurrents have dominated financial markets since the September 18
FOMC meeting: (1) greater discrimination by investors with respect to credit quality
across asset classes versus (2) ongoing deterioration in credit quality within the class
of mortgage-related assets. On the one hand, underlying market function has
generally improved. In particular, investors have shown greater ability to
differentiate between the corporate and the mortgage sectors and between different
types of products such as collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) versus collateralized
debt obligations (CDOs). Most of the asset-backed commercial paper market is no
longer under duress, bank funding pressures have abated somewhat, and the issuance
of CLOs and high-yield debt has increased. On the other hand, those areas more
closely linked to the U.S. housing sector remain under pressure. This includes the
subprime mortgage market, the mortgage-backed securities market, and financial
entities—such as mortgage and financial guarantors—that have significant exposures
to these asset classes.
The tension between the improved ability of investors to discriminate among
risky assets versus the deteriorating fundamentals is illustrated in the performance of
the ABX indexes. These indexes measure the cost of buying protection on different
tranches of particular vintages of mortgage-backed securities that hold subprime
mortgage loan assets. I will be referring to the handout in front of you. Exhibit 1
shows the performance for the 07-01 vintage—that is, mortgage-backed securities
originated mainly during the second half of 2006. As can be seen, the prices of the
lower-rated tranches have continued to plunge in response to rising delinquency rates
for subprime loans and the virtual shutdown of the subprime mortgage market. In
contrast, the performance of the AAA-rated tranche has held up better, especially
until very recently. This suggests that investors are more carefully distinguishing
between the implications of widespread subprime losses for those tranches, such as
AAA, that are in a senior position in the structure versus lower-rated tranches, where
the losses may well be large enough to wipe out their value altogether. Similarly,
investors appear to be doing a better job of discriminating between the different types
of asset-backed commercial paper programs. Those with high-quality, diversified
1

Materials used by Mr. Dudley are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

October 30-31, 2007

6 of 162

collateral or strong bank support or both are performing well. In contrast, those
programs with less solid support—mainly SIV and extendible programs—in which
the commercial paper holders are more vulnerable to loss continue to hit liquidity and
capital triggers and are gradually being wound down. As shown in exhibit 2, the
overall asset-backed commercial paper market has been contracting recently at a
much slower pace than earlier in the summer. Moreover, secured commercial paper
rates have narrowed significantly relative to the overnight index swap rate and
relative to top-quality unsecured commercial paper (exhibit 3).
The ability of banks to securitize assets also appears to have improved. In
particular, as shown in exhibits 4 and 5, CLO and high-yield debt issuance has picked
up. However, CDO issuance remains very depressed relative to the level of issuance
earlier in the year. Investors have lost confidence in this product as market prices
have plunged and the rating agencies have begun to cut their ratings, often very
sharply, on many outstanding CDOs. Market participants are more willing to buy
corporate debt for three reasons. First, the underlying fundamentals in the corporate
sector remain good. Second, the underlying assets are much easier to value. Third,
investors are more willing to trust the credit ratings in this area. The rating agency
models have been battle-tested over a much longer period and have been shown to be
robust across a broad range of environments. In contrast, the ability of banks to
securitize nonconforming mortgage loans remains impaired. Nevertheless, spreads
between jumbo and conforming mortgage loan rates have come in a bit (see exhibit
6). This may reflect diminished pressure on bank balance sheets from other sources.
Overall, term funding pressures for banks have diminished as banks have gained
greater clarity about their future funding needs and the need for excess liquidity has
diminished. Nevertheless, term funding pressures still persist. As can be seen in
exhibit 7, although the spreads between one-month LIBOR and the one-month
overnight index swap rate and three-month LIBOR and the three-month overnight
index swap rate have narrowed, these spreads remain high relative to the level of
spreads evident at the beginning of the summer. Exhibit 8 shows the same spreads
for Europe—they have also come in but remain higher than normal. Although the
credit default swap (CDS) spreads for the large investment banks and the large
commercial banks narrowed following the last FOMC meeting, much of this
improvement has been reversed over the past two weeks as the housing outlook has
deteriorated further and as the earnings announcements for several major financial
institutions have disappointed investors. Similarly, the CDS spreads for mortgage
insurers and financial guarantors have widened. These CDS spreads are shown in
exhibit 9.
The broader bond and equity markets have generally shown improvement. In the
fixed income market, credit default swap spreads have fallen somewhat for the highyield debt market (see exhibit 10), and the U.S. equity market has largely recovered
over the past couple of months (see exhibit 11). Interestingly, despite the poor
earnings of the financial sector and the outlook for slower U.S. growth, earnings
expectations of equity analysts for 2007 have declined only slightly, and the decline

October 30-31, 2007

7 of 162

in 2007 has been offset by an upward revision to 2008 earnings estimates (see exhibit
12). Moreover, the demand for downside protection in the equity market has
diminished. Exhibit 13 examines the relative cost of buying a put versus a call. A
positive skew is consistent with a greater cost of downside protection. Although a
significant positive skew persists, it is now much lower than it was immediately
before the September 18 FOMC meeting. Exhibits 14 and 15 summarize the
incomplete transition away from risk-reduction behavior by financial market
participants. Exhibit 14 shows the correlation of daily price movements and yield
changes across the different asset classes for the time interval between the August and
the September FOMC meetings. As can be seen, the correlations were very high—
indicating that risk aversion was the dominant impulse among investors—with most
of the correlations over this period exceeding an absolute value of 0.5. These are
shaded in blue in the exhibit. In contrast, the same correlations since the September
18 FOMC meeting, shown in exhibit 15, have come down but remain much higher
than during the first half of the year.
Two other market developments deserve a brief mention before I turn to dealer
expectations concerning monetary policy and a brief look at inflation expectations.
First, crude oil prices have shot higher. There is considerable disagreement among
market participants about how long the higher prices will last and the factors behind
the price surge. Although some argue that it is speculative, others point to morefundamental drivers such as inventory drawdowns, geopolitical uncertainties, and
dollar weakness. Regardless of the cause, the effect on the macroeconomy has been
modest up to now because higher crude oil prices have not fed through meaningfully
into product prices. That is because the so-called crack spread—the margin between
the value of the refined products produced from that crude oil and the cost of crude
oil supply—has come down sharply, as shown in exhibit 16. The narrowness of the
crack spread implies that further increases in crude oil prices, if forthcoming, would
likely feed through into product prices. Second, the dollar continues on its gradual
downward course. Although the dollar has reached new lows against the euro and the
Canadian dollar, the overall pace of the decline as measured by the broad tradeweighted index has not changed much from the trend exhibited earlier in the year (see
exhibit 17). The dollar’s trajectory still appears to be driven mainly by interest rate
differentials. This can be seen in exhibit 18, which shows the dollar versus the euro
relative to the Eurodollar–EURIBOR interest rate differential. Moreover, there is
little evidence that the dollar’s slide has made investors less willing to participate in
the long end of the U.S. bond market. You can see that by the fact that U.S. 10-year
Treasury note yields are still fairly low, trading around 4.4 percent.
Market expectations about monetary policy have shown considerable variability
since the last FOMC meeting. Exhibit 19 tracks the implied probability of different
target rate outcomes at this meeting calculated from the option prices on federal funds
futures contracts. As can be seen in the exhibit, the probability of a 25 basis point cut
has fluctuated in a wide range. The most recent survey of primary dealers, conducted
ten days ago, shows a slight tilt toward a 25 basis point cut at the current meeting,
with eleven dealers expecting a 25 basis point cut, nine expecting no change, and one

October 30-31, 2007

8 of 162

expecting a 50 basis point reduction. Since that time a number of dealers have shifted
camp. Currently, a more informal survey by the Desk indicates that nineteen out of
twenty-one dealers expect a 25 basis point rate cut at this meeting. Exhibits 20 and
21 show the primary dealer forecasts for the federal funds rate before the September
and the current FOMC meetings. As can be seen, the dealers’ forecasts for the
federal funds rate path are currently a bit lower than before the September 18
meeting—partially reflecting the fact that the FOMC easing of 50 basis points at the
September meeting was of greater magnitude than the cut embodied in the average
dealer forecast. Also, the gap between the dealers’ forecasts and the expectations
embodied in market rates has narrowed over the past six weeks. As can be seen,
considerable disagreement about the rate path remains. One year out, the dispersion
of the modal dealer forecasts remains very wide.
Inflation expectations increased following the 50 basis point rate cut in
September. However, the degree of widening is sensitive to how the forward
breakeven inflation rate is calculated. Exhibit 22 shows the five-year, five-yearforward implied inflation rate as estimated by the Board staff versus the five-year,
five-year-forward breakeven inflation rate as estimated by Barclays Bank, a major
participant in the TIPS market. As can be seen in the exhibit, typically these two
measures move together. More recently, however, they have diverged a bit, with the
Board staff measure showing a more persistent increase following the September
FOMC meeting. The two measures differ in the securities that they use to compare
nominal versus inflation-adjusted yields—with the Board staff using a smoothed yield
curve based on off-the-run nominal Treasuries and the Barclays measure using the
on-the-run nominal five-year and ten-year Treasury notes to compare with the fiveyear and ten-year TIPS notes. However, liquidity differences among Treasury
securities are hard to model. As a result, it is difficult to be confident of the accuracy
of such adjustments. This argues that one should not completely dismiss the Barclays
measure when the two measures are behaving differently. This might especially be
true when no rise in long-term inflation expectations is evident in other measures,
such as the University of the Michigan’s survey of consumer sentiment or the Desk’s
own primary dealer survey.
Finally, I want to discuss briefly the Desk’s performance in implementing the
FOMC’s directive from the last meeting for a 4.75 percent federal funds rate target.
In this respect, let me make two observations. First, in contrast to the previous
intermeeting period, in which the effective rate traded below the target for much of
the period, the average effective rate has been extremely close to the target since the
September 18 meeting. Exhibit 23 shows the cumulative effective rate relative to the
target since the last meeting. Second, as shown in exhibit 24, there has still been
more day-to-day volatility in the federal funds rate than earlier in the year. This
pattern likely reflects several factors, including the demand by European banks for
funds early in the day and the reduced spread between the discount rate and the target
federal funds rate, which has altered the banks’ demand for reserve balances.

October 30-31, 2007

9 of 162

There were no foreign operations during this period. I request a vote to ratify the
operations conducted by the System Open Market Account since the September 18
FOMC meeting. Of course, I am very happy to take questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. Are there questions for Bill? No
questions? Okay. Then, may I have a motion to ratify?
MR. KOHN. So moved.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. Thank you. A very thorough briefing.
I don’t know if we will have the same luck over on this side. [Laughter] Let me turn to Dave
Stockton to begin the economic situation report.
MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From a forecast perspective, it’s
been a pretty wild ride over the intermeeting period, with our outlook for activity
shifting sharply at various points in the process in response to large swings in the
stock market, the exchange value of the dollar, and the price of crude oil. A couple of
weeks ago, with the incoming data stronger, the stock market up substantially, and the
dollar down noticeably, we were looking at a forecast that had economic growth
moving materially above potential later in the projection period. It appeared that,
after taking you for a tour of the sausage factory in my September briefing, I would
need to issue a recall of that last batch of sausages even before the arrival of their
typically short expiration date. In the event, the stock market retraced most of its
earlier increase, and some of the improvement in financial conditions that had
occurred immediately following the September meeting was subsequently reversed.
As a consequence, our forecast changed relatively little, on net, over the past six
weeks. The growth of real activity is higher in the near term, but in 2008 and 2009,
the stimulative effects on GDP growth of the lower dollar are offset by the restraint
on incomes and spending imposed by the higher path for oil prices. We expect the
growth of real GDP to slow from a 2¼ percent pace this year to a 1¾ percent pace in
2008 before edging back up to a 2¼ percent rate in 2009. The period of below-trend
growth late this year and next year results in some easing of pressures on resource
utilization, and core inflation moves roughly sideways at just under 2 percent over the
forecast period.
To my mind, recent developments raise three big questions about our forecast.
First, does the broad-based strength that we have seen in the data on spending and
activity over the intermeeting period suggest that we have overestimated the restraining
effects on aggregate demand emanating from the recent financial turbulence? Second, is
the staff missing signs of greater restraint on aggregate demand that will weigh more
heavily on activity in the period ahead? Finally, with oil prices up sharply, the dollar
having depreciated, and resource utilization a touch tighter, why is our forecast for core
inflation about unchanged?

October 30-31, 2007

10 of 162

Let me start with the question about whether the strength in the incoming data casts
doubt on our estimates of the restraining effects of financial turbulence. There can be
little denying that, almost across the board, the readings on economic activity have been
stronger than our expectations in September. In terms of domestic spending, the largest
upside surprises have been in consumer spending, and much of the upward revision
reflects data on activity after the financial turbulence had already begun. Overall
consumer spending was stronger than we had expected in August, and the available
information on retail sales and on sales of motor vehicles suggests that real PCE
exceeded our expectations for September as well. At this point, we know very little
about October. Chain store sales have softened somewhat but only by enough to make us
comfortable with the meager monthly gains in spending that we are projecting for the
fourth quarter. Our discussions with the automakers suggest that sales this month have
remained reasonably steady. All told, third-quarter growth in consumption looks stronger
than we had expected, and spending appears to be headed into the fourth quarter with a
bit more momentum.
In the business sector, stronger purchases of motor vehicles led us to raise our
forecast of equipment spending in the third quarter. The other components of E&S came
in close to our expectations, though last week’s data on orders and shipments of capital
goods, which we received after the Greenbook was completed, were also a bit stronger
than we had anticipated. The incoming data on construction put in place are consistent
with our projected sharp slowdown in the growth of nonresidential structures after a
surge in the second quarter. But even here, the data have outflanked us to the upside,
with surprising strength in commercial construction, factory buildings, and
telecommunications structures. Taken together, stronger consumption and investment
account for only about half of the upward revision that we made to real GDP growth in
the third and fourth quarters. The external sector accounts for the other half. In
particular, continuing a pattern we have seen during much of this year, the growth of
exports once again exceeded our expectations. We estimate that real exports increased at
an annual rate of nearly 17 percent in the third quarter, about 3½ percentage points above
our September forecast, and we have marked up export growth in the current quarter as
well. The greater strength in both foreign and domestic demand led us to revise up the
growth of real GDP in the second half of this year about ½ percentage point, with
annualized growth rates of 3¼ percent and 1½ percent in the third and fourth quarters,
respectively.
So, do these fairly broad-based upward surprises in spending and activity suggest
that we overreacted in the extent to which we marked down our projection in response to
the recent difficulties in financial markets? It certainly seems a legitimate possibility.
However, we think it would be premature to make that call. As Bill noted, financial
market conditions have improved somewhat over the intermeeting period but remain far
from normal. In terms of credit provision, the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
revealed a sharp jump in the fraction of banks reporting tighter terms and standards on
loans to businesses and households, a development consistent with the restraint on
spending that we have built into our forecast. Consumer sentiment remains depressed

October 30-31, 2007

11 of 162

relative to overall economic conditions, perhaps because of worries about financial
developments. For now, although we have slightly trimmed the magnitude of the turmoil
effects on aggregate demand, the more important adjustment in this forecast has been to
push more of the restraint into next year.
At the other end of the spectrum of worry is the second question that I posed earlier:
Have we missed some significant signs of potential economic weakness in the
developments of the intermeeting period? Financial market participants seem to have
reacted to the news of the past six weeks by marking down the expected path for the fed
funds rate, whereas our forecast and policy assumptions are nearly unchanged. Is it
possible that we are missing signs of an impending downturn in aggregate activity? Of
course, the prudent and accurate answer to that question is always “yes.” But if that turns
out to be the case, it won’t be for lack of attention. At present, it is difficult to find
evidence in high-frequency indicators that the economy is in the process of turning down.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance have remained relatively low, motor vehicle
sales are reported to have been well maintained at least through mid-October, commodity
prices are firm, reports from purchasing managers continue to suggest modest expansion,
and few anecdotes outside the housing sector sound as though we’ve moved past a
tipping point.
If we are missing something important, it seems more likely to me that we could be
facing a more-grinding period of subpar economic performance associated with a deeper
and more-protracted adjustment in the housing sector. It might seem a bit surprising to
point to housing as a major downside risk when this has been one aspect of our forecast
that was right on the mark over the intermeeting period; we had expected steep declines
in sales and starts, and that is what we got. But I would counsel you not to take too much
comfort from that observation. In our forecast, we expect sales and starts of new singlefamily homes to decline another 8 percent before bottoming out around the turn of the
year. The projected configuration of starts and sales is consistent with a dropback in the
months’ supply of unsold new homes from an estimated peak of 8½ months early next
year to 4½ months by the end of 2009. Residential investment continues to fall through
the middle of next year and only edges up thereafter. But it is not difficult to envision a
more painful period of adjustment. We know a huge inventory imbalance still exists in
the housing sector. If, in response to that imbalance, house prices register steeper
declines than the ones we are forecasting, prospective purchasers could experience an
even greater fear of buying into a declining market, reinforcing the housing sector’s drag
on aggregate activity. Moreover, sharply lower prices could have more-serious
implications for the ability of households to refinance existing mortgages and could
impair the performance of mortgage markets more broadly. Those strains, as they have
in recent months, could spill over into other areas of the financial markets. As we
showed in a couple of alternative simulations in the Greenbook, a steeper decline in
house prices and construction activity could result in a path for the fed funds rate that
does not differ materially from the one that appears to be currently built into market
expectations. We remain comfortable with our baseline projection for housing, but it is
still easier to see sizable downside risks than sizable upside risks to this aspect of our
forecast, and that suggests to me that our modal forecast of GDP still has more weight to

October 30-31, 2007

12 of 162

the downside than the upside. That said, given the strength over the intermeeting period
of the incoming data outside housing, that downward skew is probably less pronounced
in this forecast than in the one we presented in September.
Turning to the price projection, the question I posed at the outset was why our
forecast of core price inflation is largely unchanged given higher oil prices, a lower dollar
and tighter resource utilization. With respect to resource utilization, both the GDP gap
and the unemployment rate suggest only slightly tighter product and labor markets than
in our previous forecast, and given the flatness of our aggregate supply curve, the effect
on prices over this period is negligible. As for the lower dollar, we see higher import
price inflation in the near term in line with the recent depreciation, but these effects
quickly play through. More broadly, the available evidence continues to suggest that
exchange rate pass-through to import prices is quite low, which in turn mutes the effects
on broader prices. The indirect consequences of higher oil prices are a bit more
consequential, and all else being equal, would have added about a tenth to our core price
projection in 2008. But not all else was equal. The incoming data on core PCE prices
were again slightly more favorable than we had expected. The surprise in this
intermeeting period was largely in nonmarket prices. More broadly, the deceleration that
we have observed in core PCE prices over the past year has been greater than can be
explained by our models, and we have carried a bit larger negative residual forward in
this forecast. As a consequence, we expect core PCE price inflation to move sideways at
a 1.9 percent pace in 2008 and 2009, unchanged from our previous forecast. Overall
price inflation is projected to move down from 3 percent this year to 1.8 percent in 2008
and 1.7 percent in 2009. The deceleration in overall prices reflects some decline, on net,
in energy prices over the next two years and a dropback in food price inflation to a rate
closer to that of core consumer prices. On the whole, I’d characterize the risks around
our inflation forecast as roughly balanced. Nathan will continue our presentation.
MR. SHEETS. Although the foreign economies appear to have grown at a
moderate pace during the third quarter as a whole, indicators for September and
October suggest that the recent financial turmoil may yet leave an imprint on activity
in some countries. Perhaps the most striking evidence on this score has been the
ECB’s survey of euro-area bank lending. In the third quarter, this survey showed the
sharpest shift toward tightening in its five-year history, along with evidence of morestringent credit standards for business and housing loans. In addition, we have seen
downward moves in surveys and measures of sentiment in the euro area, particularly
in Germany, although these indicators have generally remained in expansionary
territory. In the United Kingdom, the growth of mortgage lending continued on a
downward path in September, and a recent Bank of England survey suggests a
tightening of corporate credit conditions. All in all, we see this (admittedly
fragmentary) evidence as broadly consistent with our assumption in the September
Greenbook that fallout from the financial turmoil is likely to exert some drag on
growth over the next several quarters in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and
Canada. This assessment, however, is marked by significant upside and downside
risks—as it is still too soon to gauge these effects with much confidence. As in our

October 30-31, 2007

13 of 162

previous forecast, we do not see the turmoil weighing directly on activity in Japan or
the emerging-market economies.
More generally, the contours of our forecast remain similar to those in September.
Recent data have confirmed our expectation that average economic growth abroad
declined to about 3½ percent in the third quarter, cooling from the very rapid rate in
the first half of the year. We see growth edging down further in the current quarter,
to just over 3 percent, and remaining at about that pace in 2008 and 2009. After the
Greenbook went to bed, we received Chinese GDP data, which according to our
seasonally adjusted quarterly estimate grew at an annual rate of just over 8 percent in
the third quarter—a little slower than we had expected and down from the 14 percent
rate in the first half of the year. This deceleration appears to have been led by a
slowing in investment and a smaller contribution from the external sector. Going
forward, economic growth in China should remain below its previous double-digit
pace, as the Chinese authorities take further action to cool the country’s booming real
estate market and the rapid growth of bank lending.
In addition to uncertainty about the eventual effects of the financial turmoil on
real activity, other risks to our generally favorable foreign outlook are worth noting.
First on this list is the possibility of a softer-than-expected performance from the U.S.
economy. Although there is talk in some quarters about so-called decoupling—that
is, that the foreign economies may now be less linked to developments in the United
States than has been the case in the past—the jury is still out on this point. Although
domestic demand does appear to have firmed in some foreign countries in recent
years, a marked slowing in U.S. growth would affect the rest of the world through
trade channels (particularly Canada, Mexico, and emerging Asia) and, as highlighted
by the recent turmoil, probably through financial channels as well. As a second risk,
house-price valuations in many advanced economies appear elevated. Given that, a
correction in housing markets abroad—with potentially sizable accompanying wealth
effects—strikes us as an important downside risk for some countries. Third, although
we see average foreign inflation remaining well behaved, at near 2½ percent over the
next two years, inflation risks cannot be dismissed. After several years of
exceptionally strong economic growth, the foreign economies on average are now
operating near potential, and resource constraints may be more binding than we
currently envision. In addition, food prices have moved up in many countries, and
the prices of oil and other commodities are at high levels.
Indeed, recent developments in oil markets seem to pose intensified risks. The
spot price of WTI is trading today at nearly $92 a barrel, up $5 since the Greenbook
went to bed. Since your last meeting, the spot WTI price has climbed $13 per barrel,
while the far-futures price has increased about $10 per barrel. It suffices to say that
underlying supply-demand conditions in the oil market are exceptionally tight. Over
the past several years, as the global economy has expanded briskly, oil production has
increased only sluggishly—reflecting both OPEC supply restraint and diminishing
production from OECD countries. Against this backdrop, the price of oil has been
driven up further in recent weeks by reports of decreasing inventories (at a time of

October 30-31, 2007

14 of 162

year when such stocks are typically on the rise) and by intensified concerns about the
stability of Middle East oil production, triggered by tensions between Turkey and Iraq
and by concerns about U.S. relations with Iran. We see OPEC’s plans to expand
production 500,000 barrels per day beginning on November 1, even if fully
implemented, as unlikely to go very far in defusing the tightness in the market.
Futures markets call for WTI prices to remain elevated, in the neighborhood of $80
per barrel, through 2015.
I conclude with some upbeat news on U.S. external performance. Exports
continue to surprise on the upside, having shown exceptional strength in the July and
August trade data, as exports of aircraft, autos, and agricultural products have all
expanded briskly. Consequently, as Dave mentioned, real exports of goods and
services are now thought to have surged at a pace of 17 percent in the third quarter,
up 3½ percentage points from the last forecast. We estimate that real imports in the
third quarter grew at a comparatively modest rate. Taken together, these data suggest
that net exports made an arithmetic contribution of 1¼ percentage points to U.S. real
GDP growth in the third quarter.
Going forward, we see export growth moderating to just under 8 percent in the
current quarter and proceeding at a solid 6½ percent average rate through the next
two years. Relative to our September forecast, the path of export growth is up nearly
2 percentage points in the fourth quarter and by lesser—but still sizable—amounts in
2008 and 2009. This higher projection reflects stimulus from recent declines in the
dollar, which have exceeded our previous projections. The broad dollar index has
dropped more than 3 percent since your last meeting. But in addition to support from
the weaker dollar, we now see greater underlying strength in exports than we had
previously thought. Our projected path for imports, in contrast, is little changed from
the last Greenbook. Import growth is slated to bounce up in the current quarter,
largely because of a seasonal rebound in oil imports. Thereafter, the projected
strengthening of U.S. growth and a deceleration in core import prices should provide
increasing support to imports. All told, we see the external sector making a neutral
contribution to U.S. real GDP growth in the fourth quarter, contributing
0.4 percentage point to economic growth next year, and returning to neutrality in
2009 as imports accelerate. Thus, to the extent that our forecast materializes, large
negative contributions from net exports might very well be a thing of the past. Brian
will now continue our presentation.
MR. MADIGAN. 2 I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC
Briefing on October Projections.” The table shows the central tendencies and ranges
of your current forecasts for 2007 and the next three years. Where available, the
central tendencies and ranges of the projections last published by the
Committee―those submitted for inclusion in the July Monetary Policy Report―are
shown in italics.

2

Materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

October 30-31, 2007

15 of 162

Notably, a majority of you conditioned your current projections on an easing of
monetary policy, with most of that majority apparently seeing lower rates as
appropriate either imminently or within the next six months or so. Even with that
assumed easing, your GDP growth forecasts for 2007 have been marked down
slightly since last June, and your outlook for next year has been revised down more
substantially. Many of you noted that last summer’s NIPA revisions led you to lower
your estimate of potential GDP growth. Most of you cited the intensification of the
downturn in housing markets, the turmoil in financial markets, and higher oil prices
as factors leading you to scale back your expectations for actual growth in 2007 and
2008, though some participants commented that rising net exports could provide
support to aggregate demand. The central tendency of the economic growth forecasts
for 2008 is now 1.8 percent to 2.5 percent, below the central tendency of 2½ percent
to 2¾ percent in June. Perhaps partly because you expect easing whereas the staff
assumed an unchanged stance of policy, the central tendency of your economic
growth projections is above the Greenbook forecast of 1.7 percent for real economic
growth in 2008. That difference may also reflect your somewhat more optimistic
view of potential growth. It is worth noting that the divergence among your views
concerning the outlook for next year has widened substantially: The width of the
central tendency, for example, at nearly ¾ percentage point, is about three times that
in the June projections.
The downward revision to the outlook for GDP growth was mirrored in a small
upward revision to the unemployment rate: The central tendency of the projections
for unemployment at the end of this year is around 4¾ percent, and it centers on a rate
just under 5 percent at the end of next year. Based on the comments that some of you
have made about sustainable rates of unemployment and on your longer-run
unemployment projections, many of you apparently predict the emergence of a small
amount of slack by the end of next year.
With incoming data on core inflation a bit better than you had expected and with
some slack likely next year, the central tendency of your projections for core PCE
inflation is down noticeably for 2007 and is a shade lower for 2008; most of you now
see core inflation below 2 percent in both years. Your near-term forecasts for total
PCE inflation are higher than those for core inflation, reflecting surging energy prices
and, in some cases, an expectation of continued brisk increases in food prices.
With regard to the uncertainties in the outlook, most of you see the risks to growth
as tilted to the downside—even with an assumed easing of policy—and judge that the
degree of uncertainty regarding prospects for economic activity is unusually high
relative to average levels over the past twenty years. Your commentaries highlighted
downside risks arising from the possibility that financial market turmoil and tighter
credit conditions could exert unexpectedly large restraint on household and business
spending and that the downturn in housing could prove even steeper than currently
anticipated. A slight majority perceived the risks to total inflation as broadly
balanced, and a more sizable majority judged that the risks to core inflation are in
balance; in both cases, those in the minority saw the risk to inflation as tilted to the

October 30-31, 2007

16 of 162

upside. As the experience in the September trial run highlighted, the Committee’s
policy statement will need to be reviewed carefully for potential inconsistencies with
the risk assessments submitted with the projections. I will return to that issue
tomorrow.
Turning to the longer-horizon forecasts, you expect real GDP growth of around
2½ percent and unemployment slightly above 4¾ percent in both 2009 and 2010.
Judging from your forecast narratives, these projections are close to your estimates of
the economy’s potential growth rate and the level of the NAIRU. The former is a bit
higher than the staff estimate of about 2.1 percent potential growth, and the latter is
close to the staff estimate. For 2009 and 2010, all of your core inflation forecasts are
in a range of 1½ to 2 percent. A couple of you expect rising prices of food and
energy to keep total inflation above 2 percent in 2009, but all of your forecasts for
total inflation are within a range of 1½ to 2 percent in 2010. Many of you state that
you view your projections for inflation in 2010 as consistent with price stability.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for our colleagues? Vice
Chairman Geithner?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Dave, this is about the Greenbook forecast—I was
going to say existentialism, but I am not sure that is quite right. [Laughter] Dave, is the
Greenbook forecast something we should view as a modal forecast, as I think you implied, or the
expected value of the range of plausible scenarios that might have—
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I would say this is a modal forecast, and as I indicated, I think
there is probably more downside mass than upside mass in that probability distribution at this
point.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Is the monetary policy path that you reveal in the
Greenbook based on the modal forecast?
MR. STOCKTON. Thinking about our forecast as a modal forecast is correct.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you. If I could ask one more question. In the
Greenbook, you reveal the usual assumptions for what you anticipate for total credit growth, and
you show it decelerating significantly over this period. How does the deceleration you are
anticipating look compared with a range of previous periods in which the U.S. economy was

October 30-31, 2007

17 of 162

slowing significantly or periods following substantial financial distress? For example, if you
compare it with 2001-02 or 1990-91, is it a modest deceleration in credit growth, or does it look
large compared with that?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I should get the facts before I answer your question in terms of
exactly how this compares with both the 2000 period and the 1990 period. We could certainly
do that and circulate it to the Committee. Obviously, in our forecast we have credit growth
decelerating not just because overall activity is decelerating but because we think there will be
some important restraints on credit availability going forward. Most of that, of course, is on the
mortgage side, but some of it is on the business credit side as well. That said, we are not
forecasting a deep credit crunch. If you were more concerned that that was what you were
facing, I don’t think this forecast is consistent with it. This forecast is consistent with some
unusual restraint on the availability of credit, principally on the mortgage side but more broadly
elsewhere, but not truly a deep or strong headwind type of episode in which there is substantial
impairment going forward. As I noted at the last meeting, even the restraint that we do have on
the credit side fades over the coming year.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. I have two brief questions. One, in business investment,
particularly equipment and software, you have somewhat of a rebound in the early half of ’08,
and then it falls off again in the latter half of ’08. I didn’t quite understand. Given the way you
have the recovery in housing coming in the middle of ’08 and presumably some of the credittightening cycle gradually diminishing, why is business investment falling off again in the latter
half of ’08? The second question, just to get them both out on the table, is that you are predicting
that a 25 basis point unexpected boost to the fed funds rate would result in a fall in equities of

October 30-31, 2007

18 of 162

about 2 percent. Now, the papers I have read randomly about that suggest that such an estimate
is probably a bit on the high side. I just wonder where that number came from.
MR. STOCKTON. We took that estimate from a paper by Ben Bernanke and Ken Kuttner.
[Laughter]
MR. PLOSSER. I thought that was 5.3 percent for 100 basis points, right, which would be a
decline of a little over 1 percent, not 2.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course, we have multiple estimates. [Laughter]
MR. PLOSSER. Sorry. I just read the wrong one
MR. STOCKTON. We felt that in the past we did not typically worry about that sort of
surprise effect, given that overall our ability to predict asset prices is so limited to begin with. This
seemed stark enough that we thought we should probably lean in that direction. Whether we are too
large or too small I don’t know. It’s not a very significant or consequential effect. Obviously, we
are not pretending to forecast all the things that might happen if you were not to ease at this meeting
in terms of how the financial markets might take that. We’re just trying to take the biggest pieces,
and that’s where we were.
MR. PLOSSER. And the investment piece?
MR. STOCKTON. It looks to me as though some of the investment piece has to do with the
idiosyncrasies of our forecast of the high-tech area. The underlying core piece of E&S spending
follows pretty much a standard accelerator path, where things slow down more evenly through next
year and then begin to pick up with the overall pickup in activity toward the end of next year as we
move into 2009. So I think your basic intuition about what you should have seen is there. We have
some slowdown in high-tech spending that sort of progresses. In transportation, in particular, things
are especially weak in the first half of this year. They pick up a little in the beginning of next year

October 30-31, 2007

19 of 162

and then slow down again, and that really is more based upon our forecast of motor vehicles and our
forecast for aircraft production.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have two questions. I guess the first is more a comment than a question.
When we look at the net exports—and I think you commented on that in terms of the outlook—it
seems to me that most of it is really coming on the import side, which I assume is importantly
related to domestic demand and consumption. Looking at the annual data—I’m looking at page 24
in Part 1 of the Greenbook, which has the annual data over a string of years—export growth is
actually slowing in terms of percentage growth year over year. So I guess the way that I would put
it is, To what extent is the lower growth in imports really driven by lower aggregate consumption
rather than a genuine improvement in the current account? That’s one question.
Another question is really quite separate, and I think it will tie into our later go-round here. I
don’t have a good sense of the relative importance of your anecdotal information in modifying your
outlook compared with the underlying data that you follow so thoroughly and so expertly. To what
extent do you modify the views based on the data, the model, and your reading of the numbers by
your anecdotal information, your business contacts?
MR. STOCKTON. So do you want me to start with that?
MR SHEETS. Sure. That sounds good. [Laughter]
MR. STOCKTON. On the anecdotal side, as I think about the revisions that we’ve made to
the forecast of this most recent period, by which we have taken down the level of GDP nearly
¾ percentage point for our estimate of the effects of the financial disturbance, I don’t know whether
you’d call that based on anecdotal or on actual data. It felt pretty much like guesswork with a few

October 30-31, 2007

20 of 162

anecdotes at the time of the last meeting, when we had some measures of financial stress that were
significant and we knew on the data side, in terms of the impairment to the mortgage markets, that
something very significant was going on. The housing side was about half the adjustment that we
made. So I guess I’d just say that a big chunk of that was probably data based, but some guesswork
was involved in how much restraint on housing activity would come from the cutbacks in mortgage
availability that were going to occur in the subprime market.
In terms of the consumer side last time, we really had very little to go on, except a hint that
maybe consumer sentiment had weakened somewhat. Since then I think we have accumulated a
little more evidence in favor of our hypothesis that possibly some restraint on spending will occur
going forward. Consumer sentiment has remained low relative to what we think the other macro
fundamentals would suggest. We think that there is a correlation between the residuals of
explaining consumer sentiment and our consumption equation. So that correlation, in addition to
the senior loan officer survey—again, I don’t know whether you consider that anecdotal evidence or
systematic data, but there’s a very substantial and widespread uptick in the tightening of terms and
standards for both business and household loans—gives us more confidence that what we thought
were pretty sizable effects that we built into the forecast have some credible basis.
Now, there are still some touchy-feely kinds of things that we’re looking at. For example,
with the assistance of the Reserve Banks, we did the survey of our Beige Book contacts on capital
spending. I can’t say that we didn’t make some adjustment to our E&S forecast on the basis of
those anecdotes, but again, those anecdotes gave us a little more confidence that something may be
happening on the capital spending side going forward. So I wish I could tell you that, yes, threetenths of this is anecdotes and seven-tenths is data. There’s a big gray area between the kinds of
information that we gather versus the GDP data. If you ask how the GDP data alone influenced our

October 30-31, 2007

21 of 162

outlook, as I noted in my briefing, those have been pretty clearly to the upside, and we haven’t yet
seen any hard evidence in the actual spending data outside the housing sector that we’re getting any
restraint. So that remains a forecast based upon these other shreds of evidence that we think support
some notion that there will be a weakening going forward.
MR. SHEETS. In response to your first question, I think the answer is that it’s the
improvement in the net export contribution in the current account that’s being driven by both a
strengthening of exports and a softening of imports. The net export contribution or the direct
contribution of exports to GDP growth has risen roughly 25 basis points over the past couple of
years—so about ¼ percentage point. By the same token, the arithmetic negative drag from imports
has been reduced about 40 basis points. I think it’s strictly an arithmetic computational thing. Your
observation that it’s more imports than exports is absolutely right, comparing 2007 with where we
were several years ago. But certainly for the third quarter and for the second half, exports have been
extraordinarily strong, and imports have been softer than maybe they were a couple of years ago but
not extraordinarily weak. So in the near term, it’s more an export story. Then the other point is that
certainly you’re also correct that the softening of imports that we’ve seen over the past few years
has been driven in large measure by the softening of U.S. domestic demand, and that’s probably—I
don’t have an exact decomposition here—on the order of two-thirds of the softening in imports.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? If not, we’re ready for our economic goround. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will talk a little about the District this time.
It continues to perform well, with ongoing weakness in the housing sector offset by strength in
agriculture and energy. As has been true for a while, construction activity remains mixed, with
weakness in residential construction offset by continued strength in commercial construction. In

October 30-31, 2007

22 of 162

terms of residential construction, both the number of single-family permits and the value of
residential construction contracts declined in September, and home inventories rose with slower
home sales, as is happening elsewhere. However, District home prices measured by the OFHEO
index edged up in the second quarter and remain stronger than in the nation as a whole. On the
commercial side, after a robust spring, construction activity has slowed but has remained solid.
Energy regions, such as Wyoming, report strong activity. But even in the non-energy regions,
activity remains solid. Office vacancy rates were stable, and absorption rates declined. In
addition, developers reported more-stringent credit standards, and they expected credit
availability to remain tight.
Consumer spending softened in September. Mall traffic was flat, and retailers reported
that sales were down slightly. In addition, auto dealers reported that sales fell further in
September as high gasoline prices cut demand for our SUV sales and for vans. In other areas,
though, activity appears to remain at least moderate. For example, travel and tourism remain
healthy. In addition, manufacturing activity picked up slightly in October. Solid increases
among producers of durable goods offset a weakening among producers of food, chemical, and
other nondurable goods. Even so, purchasing managers remain optimistic about future activity,
as most forward-looking indexes strengthened or held steady. Finally, we continue to see
strength in agriculture and energy. District producers are selling a bumper crop at high prices as
poor crop conditions in the rest of the world trimmed global inventories and boosted export
demand. In addition, robust meat demand kept cattle and hog prices above breakeven levels.
The sharp rise in farm income led to a surge in farm capital spending in the third quarter and is
expected to rise further in the fourth quarter.

October 30-31, 2007

23 of 162

Turning to the national economy, my outlook for growth is basically unchanged from our
last meeting. Generally speaking, economic indicators have been a bit stronger over the
intermeeting period, as described here, but financial markets continue, obviously, to exhibit some
stress. The senior loan officer survey suggested moderate tightening of credit conditions. That
is consistent with our estimates of slower growth in the current quarter. As before, though, I
remain more optimistic than the Greenbook about both the near-term outlook and the longer-run
growth potential for the economy. Specifically, I think growth over the forecast period will
average about 2½ percent. My forecast is based on maintaining the fed funds rate at its current
level of 4¾ percent through the middle of next year before reducing it to its more neutral level
late next year or early 2009. With regard to trend growth, I continue to expect a decline in
potential growth from about 2¾ percent to 2½ percent by 2010.
Disappointing housing data have led me to mark down my near-term forecast for
residential investment. I continue to expect that residential investment will decline through the
first part of next year before turning up in the second half. Also, after strong growth in the first
half of this year, nonresidential construction is likely, perhaps, to slow significantly over the next
year and a half. Supporting growth in the near term will be moderate growth in consumer and
government spending along with strength in exports driven by the lower dollar and robust
foreign growth.
Turning to the risks to the outlook, I believe they remain on the downside as far as real
output but have not worsened noticeably since our last meeting, especially with that action. I
believe that construction, both residential and nonresidential, and slower consumer spending
from higher energy prices constitute the main risks to the outlook. With regard to the inflation
outlook, recent data on core inflation continue to be, as noted here, favorable. I expect core PCE

October 30-31, 2007

24 of 162

inflation to average about 1.8 percent over the forecast period—remember, assuming no change
in the fed funds rate—but I also expect that overall PCE inflation next year will moderate as the
effects of higher food and energy prices wear off. However, I do remain concerned about the
upside risk to inflation as well. Greater dollar depreciation and higher energy and commodity
prices, along with greater pass-through from all three, could push inflation higher for a period of
time. In addition, I am also concerned about the implications of the gradual upcreep in the TIPS
measures of expected inflation for the long-run path, and I am receiving more anecdotal
information, in discussions with individuals in our region, about a change in expectations about
inflation as they continue to deal with some rising prices in materials and other goods. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There has been little change in the District
economic conditions since our September meeting. Except for housing, activity is expanding at
a modest pace, somewhat below trend. Our business contacts are cautious, generally expecting
slow growth to continue over the next quarter, but they remain fairly optimistic for business
conditions six to twelve months out. Payroll employment continues to expand at a slow pace in
our three states, which partially reflects slow population growth, and so the unemployment rate
remains slightly below that of the nation. Retail sales have generally held up, but there are
divergent views among retailers regarding holiday sales. High-end stores expect a very strong
finish to the year; lower-end merchants are more cautious. Housing construction and sales
continue to decline, but the pace of that decline is in line with the expectations at our last
meeting. The value of nonresidential building contracts has declined more sharply in our region
than in the nation as a whole. Nevertheless, I would characterize nonresidential real estate

October 30-31, 2007

25 of 162

markets as firm. That office vacancy rates are declining and commercial rents are rising suggests
a positive outlook for commercial construction going forward.
According to our business outlook survey, manufacturing activity in the District has been
increasing at a modest pace for the past several months. The general index of economic activity
moved down slightly, from 10.9 in September to 6.9. Shipments and new orders also weakened
slightly. Staff analysis suggests that our manufacturing index, which precedes the release of
national industrial production numbers, provides useful information in forecasting monthly
manufacturing IP and total IP. That forecasting model is predicting a rise in both manufacturing
IP and total IP in October. About two-thirds of the District manufacturers and service-sector
firms we have polled said that recent changes in financial conditions have not prompted any
change in their capital spending plans, and the other firms are about evenly split as expecting a
slight decrease or a slight increase over the next six to twelve months compared with the past six
to twelve months. However, in speaking with my business contacts, I do hear a sense of
continuing caution among businesses in their capital spending plans. The manufacturers seem to
be a bit stronger than the service firms, perhaps reflecting a more robust export market, which
many of them are participating in. District bankers, in general, continue to express concern over
housing and mortgage lending but see commercial and industrial lending as fairly stable and
proceeding about as they had expected.
There has been little change in the District’s inflation picture since our last meeting.
Firms continue to report higher benefit costs, but other wage pressures have moderated. Our
manufacturers reported having to pay higher prices for many inputs, particularly energy-related
inputs and petroleum-based products as well as agricultural commodities. They have passed on

October 30-31, 2007

26 of 162

many of those increases in terms of higher prices to their consumers. While retailers report only
modest price increases for many products, food prices are generally higher.
In summary, since our last meeting, there has been little change in the economic
conditions in the District or in the outlook for the region. Overall, business activity in the region
is advancing at a fairly modest pace, and most of our contacts expect that pace to continue for the
next quarter or so. But in general, firms in the District remain optimistic about business six to
twelve months from now.
Turning to the nation, the economy appears less vulnerable to me than it did at the time of
our last meeting. Financial markets have improved somewhat, as Bill Dudley was telling us.
Conditions are not back to normal yet in all segments of the market, but the markets that are still
under stress are the same ones that were under stress last month. Subprime and jumbo
mortgages and asset-backed commercial paper are the ones that still are struggling. Price
discovery still plagues many of these markets, and I suspect it will take some time before the
markets can sort things out and trading returns to normal. That does not mean that the ultimate
agreed-upon market prices for some of these assets will bear any resemblance to what they
looked like before August. Indeed, they probably won’t, but that’s not necessarily a bad sign or
a cause for concern; it may even be a healthy development. We haven’t seen disruption spread
to other asset classes for the most part, and the level of stress in financial markets seems to have
fallen even as volatility remains high. The spread of jumbo over conventional mortgage rates
remains elevated, reflecting some concern, I think, about the risk that expensive homes may face
greater price declines than other homes, but the premium is less than it was in September.
Both investment-grade and non-investment-grade corporate bond issues have increased.
Financial institutions have begun to write off some of their investments and take the losses. This

October 30-31, 2007

27 of 162

has weighed heavily on equity markets, but I view the write-downs as a necessary part of the
process toward stabilization in the markets. Earnings reports from nonfinancial firms have
actually been pretty favorable. I’m not saying that we are out of the woods yet, but in my view
the risks for a serious meltdown in financial markets have lessened somewhat since our last
meeting.
The news on general economic activity has improved somewhat since our last meeting as
well. Indeed, some of the data have come in better than expected. Employment was revised up,
and retail sales data suggest that consumer spending remains resilient, despite the downturn in
housing. Like the Greenbook, my outlook for the economy has changed little since our last
meeting, when we acted preemptively and lowered rates to “forestall some of the potential
adverse effects of financial market disruptions and the expected intensification of the housing
correction on the broader economy.” Housing investment and sales continue to decline but about
as expected in our forecast. After all, the rapid reduction in subprime lending is exacerbating the
decline in housing demand and thus home sales, contributing to the slower recovery of that
sector. Other sectors of the economy have performed about as I expected, with little evidence as
yet of any major spillovers from housing. Oil prices have moved higher than expected since our
last meeting, as has been discussed, but it is unclear to me yet how permanent that increase will
be or how much of a drag it might be on activity. The oil price rise is likely to show through to
headline inflation in the coming months. Although core inflation measures have improved since
the beginning of the year, the rise in energy prices has the potential to put upward pressure on
core inflation. Thus, while inflation and inflationary expectations have been stable to date, I
suspect that inflation risks are now more to the upside than they were in September.

October 30-31, 2007

28 of 162

The forecast is an important context for our policy, in my view. We have stressed in the
past year that we are data driven and respond to the evolution of our forecast. In general, like the
Greenbook, as I said, my forecast of the economy going forward is little changed from my
September view. I see that growth returns to trend, which I estimate to be about 2.7—a little
higher than the Greenbook—late in 2008 as the housing correction runs its course and the
financial market turbulence unwinds. Core PCE inflation remains slightly below 2 percent next
year and moderates toward my goal of 1½ percent by 2010. I built in a 25 basis point easing
sometime in early 2008 to bring the funds rate back down to a more neutral level, and in my
baseline forecast I assume a constant funds rate thereafter. That forecast, however, is contingent
on inflation and inflationary expectations remaining well behaved. Having said that, I repeat my
caution that inflationary pressures are somewhat elevated at this point, and we run the risk that
inflationary expectations may become unhinged if the markets suspect that we have lessened our
commitment to keep inflation contained. Thus, I don’t rule out the possibility that we may have
to reverse course and tighten policy sometime in 2008 or 2009 in order to achieve consistency
between my target rate of inflation of 1½ and inflationary expectations. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Boston forecast is very close to
that of the Greenbook. With the constant federal funds rate assumption, the economy is very
close to full employment, and core inflation is close to 2 percent at the end of 2008. Such an
outcome is consistent with what I would hope to achieve with appropriate monetary policy.
However, while this is an expected path that seems quite reasonable, the distribution of risks
around that outcome for growth remains skewed to the downside. Our forecast, like that of the

October 30-31, 2007

29 of 162

Greenbook, expects particularly weak residential investment. Problems in financing mortgages,
expectations of falling housing prices, and more-severe financial stress for homebuilders are
likely to weigh heavily over the next two quarters. In fact, our forecast for residential investment
has become sufficiently bleak that there may actually be some upside risk to it. [Laughter]
Somewhat surprising to me has been the lack of spillover to the rest of the economy from
the problems in residential investment. I remain concerned that falling housing prices will
further sap consumer confidence and cause a pullback in consumption, though to date there is
little evidence of a significant effect of the housing problems on consumer spending. Similarly, I
would have expected the financing problems that have aggravated the housing situation to have
caused a sharper reduction in investment in general and in nonresidential structures in particular.
However, so far these remain risks rather than outcomes. Thus, while I am worried about the
downside risks, I am reminded that forecasters have frequently overestimated the consequences
of liquidity problems in the past.
On the financial side, there have definitely been improvements in market conditions,
though markets remain fragile. Particularly worrisome has been the announcement of significant
downgrades of tranches of CDOs and mortgage-backed securities with large exposure to the
subprime mortgage market. Not only have the lower tranches experienced significant
downgrades, but a number of the AAA and AA tranches have been downgraded to below
investment grade. Some investors cannot retain below-investment-grade securities and are
forced to sell these securities in an already depressed market. The number of the downgrades,
the magnitude of the downgrades, and the piecemeal ratings announcements all are likely to call
into further question the reliability of the ratings process. If many high-grade securities tied to
mortgages are downgraded to below investment grade, some investors may conclude that

October 30-31, 2007

30 of 162

repricing of even high-graded tranches does not reflect a liquidity problem but rather a
substantial reevaluation of credit risk. Thus, I am concerned that continued widespread
downgrades may make recovery in the securitization market more difficult, particularly for
nonconforming mortgages, with a consequent increase in the financing cost of these assets. I
also remain concerned that the asset-backed commercial paper market remains fragile. While
investors seem to be distinguishing between conduits whose structure or underlying assets are
quite risky, my sense is that money managers are watching the market quite closely. I continue
to hear concerns over the possibility that some money market funds will experience losses that
will not be supported by their parents, resulting in increased investor concern with the safety of
money market funds more generally.
On balance, the data both on the real economy and on financial markets have improved
since our September meeting. That improvement makes it more likely that the economy will
continue to recover gradually from the financial turmoil. However, both the real and the
financial risks remain skewed to the downside.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like the global economy, the Eleventh
District is slowing, but relative to the other Districts it remains very strong. Our retail sales
improved in September. Nonresidential and commercial construction remains elevated. Servicesector job growth strengthened significantly in September, and our staff estimates that
18.2 percent of the jobs created in the country year to date were created in the State of Texas. I
just wanted to mention that. [Laughter] Needless to say, wages are rising because of labor
shortages, a decline in immigration, and the increase in minimum wage. I will stop with the
Texas brag and now go on to the national economy.

October 30-31, 2007

31 of 162

I think President Rosengren just gave an excellent summary of the financial markets. I
would add only the following—that with regard to credit markets, the hardening of the arteries or
the blockage of the aorta or whatever cardiovascular analogy we want to choose to describe what
happened is no longer as severe and life-threatening as it appeared to be in August. As
mentioned by the staff, whether it is net bond issuance of investment-grade securities or C&I
loans et cetera, the markets are moving toward pricing assets according to what they will sell for
rather than what their hypothetical mathematical modeling value might posit. There was a
startling statement in the Financial Times on Friday morning. Somebody, otherwise forgettable,
said, “Corporate treasurers are no longer buying things they don’t understand.” [Laughter]
Imagine that. Investors are coming home from lala land. To be sure, we’re not out of the woods
quite yet, as President Plosser and President Rosengren mentioned. The situation remains real,
but we’ve gone beyond suspended reality. If you will forgive me, you might say we have gone
from the ridiculous to the subprime.
MR. LACKER. Let the transcript say “groan.” [Laughter]
MR. FISHER. By that I mean, by the way, that the subprime market is a focus of angst,
which it should be, but the ridiculous practice of the suspension of reason in valuing all asset
classes, if not over, is in remission. We have a long way to go before full recovery and must
acknowledge that shocks regarding access might occur. I am confident, as I have said in
previous meetings, that—just to be polite—some cow patties might show up in the punchbowls
of some portfolios, perhaps especially in Europe and Asia. But I would submit, Mr. Chairman,
that we are on our way back to markets priced by reason rather than by fantasy. So, while we
must remain ready to act as needed, I think it is appropriate to focus our discussion today and
tomorrow foursquare on the economy, and I want to turn to that now.

October 30-31, 2007

32 of 162

The wealth effect of the severe markdown in housing is as yet incalculable and
worrisome. As the Greenbook states and my sounding with CEOs confirms, there are as yet no
appreciable, let alone debilitating, signs of spillover into the rest of the economy. The economy
has been weakened. You see it in the rails and trucking and retail. It has not shown signs of
succumbing as much as one might have expected to the full-blown virus that is afflicting
housing. As Dave mentioned, going back to July, banks in our District and everywhere else have
reported tightening terms and standards on loans to businesses and households. The overall
sentiment or mood of the country, as reported by the press and the surveys, is sour. Yet we
haven’t seen sharp increases in initial claims, low PMI (purchasing managers index) readings, or
sharply falling durable goods orders. Households are still reasonably optimistic about their job
prospects. Consumer spending continues to grow, albeit at a slower pace. The CEO of Disney
started his discussion with me this time by saying, “I hate to be the bearer of good news,” and
went on to cite an internal survey they recently completed that shows that families plan to spend
liberally on vacations, despite setbacks in presumed housing prices, as well as strong ad statistics
for their broadcasting network.
There remain widespread reports of labor shortages, not just in our District but also
elsewhere. The bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is that, there is clearly a fat left tail on growth—the
economy is growing slower. But the economy is growing at a positive pace. Some might say
that it has slowed to a sustainable pace. In part, this is due to infrastructure investment, spending
on nondefense capital goods that is better than expected, decent if not robust E&S demand, fiscal
stimulus, and strong export performance that we talked about earlier, assisted by superior
demand growth abroad, facilitated by a progressively weaker dollar. I note that we meet the day

October 30-31, 2007

33 of 162

after the trade-weighted dollar celebrated a post–Bretton Woods low—not an easy thing for a
strong dollar man to note.
Certainly, there is a risk that downward economic momentum will emerge. I worry about
the plight of the big, populous states like Florida and California under the crush of the housing
implosion. I take note of the reports from UPS, the rails, and the truckers as to the deceleration
in year-over-year trends in pre-holiday shipments. I realize that Wal-Mart same-store growth has
slowed, that mall traffic is down, and so on. But not a single one of my thirty-five CEO
interlocutors, except for the homebuilders, felt that the economy was at risk of falling off the
table. Fluor and the other big builders—or logistics organizers, as I like to call them—report a
booming domestic infrastructure business, especially in the petrochemical sector. The
technology folks, as manifested by the earnings reports of Microsoft, Apple, and others, continue
to find that demand is brisk. Cisco’s CEO confirms that business with all but the financial
institutions “has begun to flow again” after being laid low by the uncertainty of August. The
airlines report volume conditions as “less bad” than they were in the third quarter. UPS’s CFO,
about to become CEO, who serves on President Lockhart’s board, is concerned, like the rails,
about consumer holiday demand, and notes that trans-Pacific shipments into the United States
have slowed. Yet when he digs deep into the data, he will tell you that the tech side looks good.
So the net effect is that, while nowhere near robust, “domestically, conditions have not
materially worsened.”
Except for housing and Bill’s two law firms, we are not hearing of significant lagging of
receivables or collectibles. Many of my interlocutors, however, worry about prices, as do our
staff members in Dallas. We differ significantly, Mr. Chairman, from the central assumption of
the Greenbook in our views on headline inflation looking forward. I noticed you cocking an eye

October 30-31, 2007

34 of 162

in my direction, Brian, when you were talking about the outliers. The Greenbook has a 3 percent
number for PCE inflation for this year, followed by a deceleration, to a pace of 1.8 percent in
2008 and 1.7 in 2009. We in Dallas are not as confident that we will continue to experience a
disinflation of the momentum of the PCE. Partly this stems from concerns expressed anecdotally
by big importers like Wal-Mart, who report stiffening Chinese prices, by the CEO of JCPenney,
who is planning for cost increases of goods imported from China on the order of 3 to 4 percent
next year, and by the users of pulp and recycled waste paper that are set to announce a 5 percent
increase in essential paper products effective in February, having just announced a double-digit
increase not too long ago.
Our concern at the Dallas Fed stems from two more-pervasive sources than that anecdotal
evidence I just cited, and those are food and energy, for which we anticipate a more pernicious
pass-through effect from recent rapid price increases of underlying commodities. The concern
we have for food is encapsulated in the eye-popping chart on page II-30 of Part 2 of the
Greenbook. You have to have a hawk’s eye to see this chart from that end of the table, but it
shows an incredible divergence between food prices and the core PCE. Now this pattern has a
historical precedent. A spread of this magnitude between food prices and core indexes occurred
on several occasions between 1951 and 1980. In 1973, the gap was 20 percent. In 1974, the gap
was closed when the CPI rose up accordingly. But we have not seen a gap of this nature in over
a quarter-century. Wholesale food prices are up 6.3 percent for the year to date. Through
September, the CPI for food is up 5.7 percent. As mentioned by one of the previous
interlocutors, milk and green grocery prices are rising at double-digit paces. This goes beyond
ethanol, Mr. Chairman, as a driver of shifts in crop rotation and production. It is occurring
against a ramping up of the caloric intake of a few billion new eaters in China, India, and

October 30-31, 2007

35 of 162

elsewhere. This is hardly encouraging, and it injects a modicum of doubt in predicting a
significant decline in PCE inflation.
We spoke about energy price dynamics earlier. They further cloud the picture. If you
talk to Exxon or Independence, they will tell you that there is no problem in finding oil, in
refining it, or in delivering the final product. They will, however, note that there are two key
impulses at work. First, there is no evident slowdown in demand growth according to them—
that is, domestically—and the appetite in the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) and in the
developing countries was described as voracious. An enormous amount of infrastructure in
chemical plant capacity is being constructed everywhere, from the Gulf Coast of the United
States to the Middle East to China and Singapore, in order to be nearer to either feedstock or
growing final demand. Any analysis of the income elasticity of demand for oil in low but rising
income nations like China and India points to demand for oil that will grow even faster than their
slightly slower but still rapidly growing income levels. Second, price pressures on crude at the
margin are compounded by noncommercial activity, which we did not talk about earlier.
Noncommercial contracts, the busywork of what are called “city refiners” in the industry—that
is, the city of London and the financial exchanges—have of late been running at triple their
traditional volume according to Exxon’s CEO, driving oil through $90. Thus far, gasoline and
distillates, which is where the pass-through rubber hits the consumer price road, have been tame
in response. Bill discussed the low crack spread, for example. Yet our models at the Dallas Fed
for retail gasoline prices envision increases above $3 a gallon next year if crude stays above $85,
which we consider a reasonable probability. Similarly, price pressures for distillates are
increasingly probable. Finally, while currently high inventories continue, it is noteworthy that
natural gas prices have reversed their summer slide downward to $5.50 per million Btu and are

October 30-31, 2007

36 of 162

now quoted at $7 at the Henry Hub. All this gives me, Mr. Chairman, a sense of discomfort, like
that expressed by President Hoenig and President Plosser, on the headline inflation front and is a
reminder that the balance of risk is not necessarily skewed only toward slower growth. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Yes, sir, Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Are we permitted to question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Richard, you described vividly the bunch of forces
working on headline inflation. But since you identified yourself as a negative outlier on the
inflation forecast, it seems to me your headline forecast is still for significant moderation in
headline inflation in ’08. Am I wrong in that? At least I infer from this that you’re not showing
an acceleration in core PCE inflation.
MR. FISHER. No. But I am talking about a spread being maintained between the two,
and I am concerned about it, depending on where we are going to go in terms of our
communication exercise, which we will talk about tomorrow. But we don’t show as much relief
on PCE inflation as the Greenbook indicates nor as the central tendency indicates, and I wanted
to explain why.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the past week or so, we have been
following the devastating fires in Southern California. They have burned over 500,000 acres,
destroyed nearly 2,000 homes, and inflicted seven deaths and sixty injuries. These were large
fires, even by California standards, but they were by no means the largest in recent memory; and,
of course, the loss of life and economic costs pale compared with Katrina. While the fires have

October 30-31, 2007

37 of 162

seriously affected the lives of many individuals, they do not seem likely to show up in the
macroeconomic data.
Turning to the national economy, developments since we met six years—six weeks
ago—actually, it seems like just two weeks ago—[laughter] generally have been favorable and
the risks to the outlook for growth have eased somewhat. But I think it is too early to say that we
are out of the woods. The inflation news has continued to be favorable, but some upside risks
have become more prominent. With respect to economic activity, we have raised our forecast
for growth in both the third and the fourth quarters in response to incoming data, even though the
pace of deterioration in the housing sector has been more severe than we expected and the
problems associated with housing finance seem far from resolution. We agree with Greenbook
that residential investment is likely to continue its severe contraction for at least a few more
quarters. We also agree with Greenbook that the rest of the economy has held up reasonably
well, at least so far. Exports have been strong, and while business fixed investment seems to be
slowing, it should still make a robust contribution to growth in the second half of this year.
With respect to consumer spending, most aggregate data suggest only a modest
deceleration so far. Such readings help to allay our concerns about potential spillovers from
housing to consumption, but they don’t completely assuage them. Survey measures of consumer
confidence are down sharply since the financial turmoil began, and most indexes of house prices
show outright declines. Given the current state of the housing and mortgage markets, bigger
declines going forward are a distinct possibility. Indeed, the Case-Shiller futures data for house
prices point to larger declines in the months ahead. A sharp drop in house prices would likely
crimp consumer spending over time through wealth and collateral effects. Some of my directors
and other contacts are also raising warning flags about consumer demand. For example, the

October 30-31, 2007

38 of 162

CEO of a large well-known high-end retailer said that the company’s sales are softening and that
the company is having to work diligently to control inventories. In his view, the consumer has
pulled back. The CEO of a Southern California bank observed a number of his clients talking
about a drop in discretionary consumer purchases. The bottom line is that consumption spending
seems to be all right for the time being, but there is a real risk that households may cut back on
spending more than expected in response to higher oil prices, a slower economy, and economic
uncertainty.
I agree with President Rosengren’s assessment of financial markets. Strains appear to
have eased a bit on balance since our September meeting, with interbank lending markets
showing some improvement and spreads on asset-backed commercial paper declining. But
structured credits related to mortgages remain quite troublesome, and liquidity conditions and
Treasury bill markets are still at times strained. My impression is that, despite having moved in
a positive direction over the past six weeks, these markets remain vulnerable to shocks, and so
the economy remains at risk from further financial disruptions. Both survey evidence and
anecdotal evidence have confirmed that banks are tightening lending standards across the board.
Tighter terms and conditions are being applied to a range of business lending, including
commercial real estate, and on most household lending from prime and nonprime mortgages to
auto and home equity loans.
The main financial variables that are commonly included in formal macroeconometric
models appear to have changed since the onset of the financial shock—say, in late June—in
ways that should have roughly offsetting effects. Oil prices are markedly higher, which should
restrain consumer spending, and the stock market is roughly unchanged since June in spite of the
financial turmoil. A weaker dollar should have a positive influence on growth. Mortgages rates

October 30-31, 2007

39 of 162

on jumbo loans and the rates facing the riskiest corporate borrowers are higher, but many private
borrowing rates are down because of the decline in Treasury yields. Of course, the current levels
of Treasury yields, as well as the stock market and dollar, reflect at least in part the market’s
expectation that the Committee will ease the stance of monetary policy at this meeting.
Underlying our forecast is the policy assumption that the Committee will cut the funds
rate another 25 basis points at this meeting. In assessing the appropriate path of the stance of
policy, I took a number of considerations into account. First, core consumer inflation currently is
at a level that I consider consistent with price stability. Second, unemployment is very near my
best estimate of the full employment rate. In the context of a Taylor-type rule, these
considerations imply that the real funds rate should be near its neutral level. In fact, any version
of the Taylor rule you prefer, with whatever rates you want to put on inflation versus the gap,
will give you the same recommendation because all the terms are zero and drop out, except for
one—the equilibrium real rate. Of course, we cannot know the level of the real equilibrium rate
with certainty. Defined in terms of the PCE price index, our best estimate is in the range of 2 to
2½ percent, which is well below the current real rate of about 3 percent.
I would like to highlight two additional points here. First, the actual real rate has been
boosted over the past six months or so by declines in short-term inflation expectations, whether
one measures them by lagged inflation, by surveys of expected inflation over the next year or so,
or by forecasts of inflation including the Greenbook forecast. Second, one important aspect of
the financial turmoil is that it probably represents in part a movement toward a more reasonable
pricing of risk, as seen in the rise in risk spreads. This development tends to push the
equilibrium real funds rate down toward the lower portion of the range I just cited.

October 30-31, 2007

40 of 162

The bottom line is that in my view, even without the contractionary effects of recent
financial developments, an appropriate stance of monetary policy would involve further declines
in the fed funds rate. I have assumed that the funds rate drops to 4½ percent by the end of this
year and to 4¼ by the end of next year. My assumed path ends in the same place and embodies
the same medium-term assumption concerning neutral as FRB/US, on which the extended
Greenbook forecast relies. The only difference concerns timing. We assume a more rapid path
to the long run than the Greenbook does. Our forecast shows real GDP growth gradually picking
up to around 2½ percent, our estimate of potential, by the end of next year. However, given that
the financial shock is not yet resolved, I think the downside risks to this forecast predominate.
With regard to inflation, I expect core PCE inflation to remain around 1¾ percent over
the next several years. The probable appearance of a small amount of labor market slack is
likely to help hold down inflation. In addition, I expect that, with inflation remaining below
2 percent, inflation expectations will edge down as well, reinforcing our success. I hope that this
result will be aided by the release of our extended forecasts and the greater awareness of where
we would like to see inflation settle down. I see the risk to my inflation forecast as moderate and
mainly to the upside in view of recent increases in oil and food prices, declines in the dollar, and
a slower rate of structural productivity growth.
So, in summary, I think the most likely outcome is that the economy will move forward
toward a soft landing. I see downside risks to economic activity and some upside risks to
inflation. But in view of continuing questions about the effects of the financial market shock, I
am more concerned about the activity side of things right now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.

October 30-31, 2007

41 of 162

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like many others around the table, my report
to this Committee in September indicated a sharp deterioration in business confidence. My business
contacts were concerned about what may happen. During the intermeeting period I heard less about
what may happen and more about what is actually happening. My contacts who are linked to
residential real estate have seen a further and, in some cases, sharp drop-off in business activity. My
banking supervision and regulation staff told me just a few days ago that they’re now seeing a
sudden and sizable percentage increase in nonperforming loans at a number of large banking
companies in my District. To be sure, nonperforming loans had been at extremely low levels, and
most of the sharp rise can be traced to mortgage and construction development lending. But I’m
now beginning to hear reports that bankers are experiencing some loan performance problems
outside their real estate portfolio. The CEO of a large, major bank in my District has also reported
difficulty in securitizing the student loans that they’re making, forcing them to keep those loans on
their books and to make adjustments elsewhere in their balance sheets. To what extent these
banking conditions are affecting overall bank lending is not obvious, but clearly there has been
some disruption to the channels of intermediation, and I am now beginning to hear reports of some
spillover to other sectors of the economy. A growing number of retailers tell me that they have seen
a noticeable decline in spending since mid-September in items ranging from autos to apparel.
While my reports from the business community reflect a falloff in business conditions from
what we submitted to the Beige Book just a few weeks ago, they don’t necessarily indicate a
significant deviation from the slowdown that was already built into the economic projections that I
submitted in September. In preparing for this meeting, I found it difficult to judge whether the
reports of weakness that I am hearing represent an unfolding of the September projection or
additional deterioration in the outlook. In the end, I have only minor differences with the

October 30-31, 2007

42 of 162

Greenbook projection in the near term and, like the Greenbook, made only minor revisions to my
forecast. I see economic activity a bit softer than the Greenbook for the remainder of 2007, but I
project slightly better growth in 2008. Like the Greenbook, I have assumed an unchanged path for
the fed funds rate over the forecast period. The recent rise in oil prices has caused me to push up
my near-term PCE projection, but inflation expectation projections remain anchored around
2 percent. I see a small upside risk to the near-term inflation projection as a result of the continuing
dollar depreciation; but on the whole, I continue to judge our inflation risks as reasonably balanced.
I would like to conclude by echoing the sentiments of others around the table. Considerable
strains in the financial sector remain, and further turmoil in markets is a distinct possibility. I think
that, in this environment, households and businesses can easily be spooked—excuse the Halloween
pun—and I don’t think it would take much additional tightness in credit markets to push my fragile
near-term growth outlook even lower. So this concern continues to be the predominant risk to my
outlook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Conditions in the Fifth District’s housing
sector continue to deteriorate. Sales have weakened further across most areas, and starts have
pulled back sharply. Inventories are rising in part, we hear, because some residential investors have
run short on patience and are listing their properties. The housing correction has been particularly
acute on the outer edges of the Washington, D.C., metro area, and contacts from the area anticipate
that additional slowing in more-central markets is likely. In addition, reports of home-price
reductions are becoming more common around my District. Until recently the weakness looked to
be mostly contained in housing, but spillovers into other sectors are beginning to appear. For

October 30-31, 2007

43 of 162

example, our survey of the Fifth District manufacturing sector—which, by the way, is larger than
the Philadelphia and New York manufacturing sectors combined—[laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But not Texas.
MR. FISHER. Or California.
MR. LACKER. —and we don’t appear in Part 2 of the Greenbook—posted notably weaker
readings for October. Drilling down into the details, much of the softness can be traced to housing.
MR. PLOSSER. We can’t help it if you have no predictive content. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The Chair is calling for order.
MR. LACKER. Conditioning on the Philadelphia index, we actually have marginal
predictive value for the national ISMs. But I continue. A modest housing spillover into business
investment plans seems to be unfolding as well. In the recent Board-commissioned survey of
capital investment plans, our District was among those in which more businesses plan to trim rather
than boost spending in the months ahead. Again, a more detailed look reveals that most firms
planning reductions have ties to housing. Reports on retail sales in the District remain soft, with
sales of automobiles and building materials notably weak. In addition, an executive from a major
transportation firm headquartered in the District told us that freight volumes, both rail and trucking,
are now at the lowest level since the 2001 recession. Although in a number of District markets
commercial real estate activity remains healthy, we are hearing scattered reports of commercial
construction projects being shelved. One director from D.C. said that commercial development
there “doesn’t have the pulse it had six weeks ago.” The turmoil in financial markets has not
appreciably constrained business lending in our District, however. Contacts generally describe
credit as readily available to creditworthy borrowers, but some say spreads have widened a bit. On

October 30-31, 2007

44 of 162

the price front, our monthly measures suggest some moderation in growth despite ongoing
complaints of higher input costs.
At our last meeting, I was more optimistic than the Greenbook on the national economy. A
significant part of the difference was related to housing, where I saw greater probability of the drag
receding sooner. Longer term, I had a somewhat higher estimate of trend productivity growth,
which supported a somewhat stronger outlook for household consumption. The main shift in my
perspective since the last meeting is that I am now at least as pessimistic as the Greenbook about
prospects for housing bottoming out anytime soon. The 10 percent fall in housing starts in
September was certainly eye catching, and it indicates that the weak summer housing market tailed
off further toward the end. In our District, and this seems to be true elsewhere as well, the housing
downturn appears to have spread into many formerly unaffected markets. It is hard for me to
believe that any discernible stabilization is likely before the spring, when the seasonal pickup in
housing activity typically takes place. Even then a prolonged period of depressed activity seems
more likely than any noticeable bounceback. Other recent news suggests a bit more demand-side
fallout from the housing market than I had been expecting. Manufacturing production was sluggish
in August and September, and durable goods orders have shown only modest growth, especially
outside the aircraft industry. I mentioned a minute ago that our survey of the Fifth District
manufacturing sector—which, by the way, is larger than the Philadelphia and New York
manufacturing sector—[laughter] is showing a significant slowdown for October, particularly in
housing-related industries.
Consumer spending has been a source of stability during this housing correction, and I
expect that to remain true over the forecast period. I think household spending will generally
expand in line with disposable income, but even though consumption advanced broadly in the third

October 30-31, 2007

45 of 162

quarter, it now seems we’re in for a bit of a slowdown this quarter. In that regard, I’m feeling
sympathy for what President Yellen said. So I’m less sanguine overall about the near-term outlook
for growth at this meeting, although that may just represent catching up on my part to the
Greenbook’s past level of gloominess.
Having said all that, I do believe that the effects of this summer’s financial market
adjustments are likely to be limited; and out beyond the middle of the next year, I’m, again, more
optimistic than the Greenbook and for the usual reasons. I think that productivity growth and, thus,
real income growth will be somewhat higher than in the Greenbook forecast, and my outlook for the
personal saving rate is centered on its current value rather than a steady increase.
Inflation appears to have ticked up a bit in September, at least according to the CPI. Still,
year-over-year core PCE inflation remained reasonably contained, and I’ve been struck by the
extent to which TIPS inflation compensation has held relatively steady in recent months, especially
given our easing move last month and the run-up in oil prices. While I would like to see inflation
come down further, I’m somewhat more comfortable about inflation than I was at the beginning of
the year. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I have noted in the past, the industrial
mix in the Sixth District looks a lot like the country as a whole. The regional data and anecdotal
information show that, although the Sixth District economy is still expanding, the pace is marginally
weaker than it was in September. In earlier meetings I commented on the severity of the housing
situation in the District. There is no improvement in sight for the housing market, and there are
signs that the sharp decline in residential construction is spilling over into nonresidential real estate
segments, such as shopping center development. Employment growth is softening as well.

October 30-31, 2007

46 of 162

Although the largest negative effects are in construction-related sectors, the slowdown in job growth
appears to be fairly broad based.
The broad contour of our national forecast is similar to the Greenbook baseline. Like the
Greenbook, our forecast includes a slowing in business investment. Based on our survey of District
business contacts, it appears that the low levels of expected capital expenditure are due mainly to
pessimism about the pace of economic activity rather than restrictive credit conditions per se.
Specifically, financial market turbulence does not appear to have directly affected economic
activity, but it has created a greater uncertainty about the outlook for the economy. As a
consequence, the majority of my directors and business contacts are reporting very little in the way
of plans to increase capital expenditures in the coming year. Where business investment is
discretionary, most respondents report a wait-and-see posture.
More positively, the weaker dollar does appear to be having a positive effect on exports
from the region. For the year to date, the dollar value of exports through the Sixth District ports was
up 35 percent through August, whereas import growth was only 21 percent. Not coincidentally, the
majority of businesses that indicated they were increasing capital expenditures over the coming
months were exporters.
In the run-up to this FOMC meeting, I again made calls to a few financial market
participants, and they reflected a range of institutional and market perspectives. A synthesis of this
opinion is consistent with the views that were expressed earlier by Bill Dudley and others. There’s
a widespread view that persistent volatility in credit markets is bound to negatively affect the
general economy. Credit market conditions have improved somewhat, but stability may be a long
way off. A second wave of volatility may accompany incoming details regarding mortgage
delinquencies caused by rate resets in 2008, and there’s a suspicion that third-quarter writedowns

October 30-31, 2007

47 of 162

may be followed by substantial further losses recognized at year-end. Also, as referenced in the
Bluebook, there is skepticism about the M-LEC (master liquidity enhancement conduit) proposal
from several angles.
In summary, our soundings of the economy, informed by formal modeling work, point to a
continued slowing of the economy that will likely persist well into next year. Anecdotally, credit
constraints outside the housing sector do not appear to be a major factor at this stage. But
uncertainty created by financial market turbulence does seem to be acting as a constraint, and I
believe that the heightened uncertainty regarding the economic outlook for 2008 warrants
consideration of insurance against this downside risk.
With respect to the outlook for inflation, I agree with the view expressed by others that
recent developments in energy prices, if they persist, make it likely that we are about to enter
another period in which headline numbers substantially exceed the trends suggested by core
measures. Because of this, I feel it’s appropriate to characterize inflation risk as having increased.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Seventh District economy appears to be
expanding at a moderate rate, similar to what I reported at our last meeting. As we talked with
business contacts, we heard mixed reviews regarding activity across different sectors of the
economy. On the downside, everyone in the construction industry, from builders to suppliers, had
grim assessments, and our contacts with the Detroit Three characterize the vehicle market as
mediocre. Another negative is on the labor front. Our contact at Manpower reported that demand
for temporary workers was down a lot. He said that the current market felt almost as it did in 2001.
Kelly’s assessment was not quite so negative, although they did say that some indicators were

October 30-31, 2007

48 of 162

flashing yellow. Of course, the BLS has been showing declines in temp help employment since
early 2006, and most other indicators point to a healthy labor market. Indeed, we continue to hear
about firms trying to cope with shortages of skilled workers. For instance, a couple of heavyequipment manufacturers based in Illinois said that they were recruiting engineers from the Detroit
area. That was encouraging. There were other upbeat reports on activity. United Airlines said that
all their markets were quite good, apparently better than President Fisher was reporting earlier.
They noted the bookings for business travel, which can be an indicator of business’s more general
willingness to spend, remained strong in October and November. International bookings also were
extremely good. We heard numerous reports of strong export demand—for example, for machine
tool manufacturers and heavy-equipment producers. With regard to the financial situation, I
continue to hear that there is a disconnect between Wall Street and Main Street. Importantly, except
for construction, our contacts do not see nonfinancial firms being constrained by a lack of access to
credit or by the pricing of credit.
Turning to the macroeconomy, the news on economic activity that we’ve received over the
past six weeks has been better than the downside scenario that we feared. Indeed, it has been better
than what we had assumed in our baseline forecast in September. Like the Greenbook, we have
raised our outlook for growth in the second half of 2007 about ½ percentage point. Residential
investment does look a bit worse than we thought, but consumption came in a good deal stronger
than we had expected. Also, the incoming news about labor markets, including the revisions to
employment in August, points to continued support to household spending from growth in jobs and
income. Unlike the Greenbook, we marked up the outlook for activity a bit in 2008 and 2009. Our
current projection sees growth recovering to a little above potential in the second half of next year
and in 2009.

October 30-31, 2007

49 of 162

With regard to inflation, the incoming price data have been positive, and we have revised
down our forecast for inflation a bit, to about 1¾ percent in 2008 and 2009. I think the risks to this
forecast are two-sided. Some of our statistical models translate the incoming data into quite low
forecasts for inflation in 2009 and 2010 if you take them at face value. But higher costs for energy
and other materials, the weaker dollar, and potential pressures from resource utilization still pose
some risk that inflation will come in higher than we currently are forecasting. For me, the positive
inflation developments are an important ingredient allowing us to focus on risk management. Since
risk-management considerations have played a key role in our policy decisions, it is important to
think about how the risks to the forecast have changed since September. Last time and today, Dave
Stockton cited several downside risks to watch for: an intensified fallout from the problems in
mortgage finance onto housing demand; a substantial drop in consumer sentiment; and a spillover
from financial market disruptions to business spending. These high-cost scenarios are possible, but
I think their likelihood is smaller than they were in September. We have been pessimistic on
housing for a while, and for once, despite Dave Stockton’s warning, I am encouraged that the
Greenbook’s forecast for 2008 has not been marked down materially. It is a small comfort, but just
a bit. The economy outside of housing seems to have entered the fourth quarter with more
momentum than we had thought it would. Importantly, consumption growth has been solid even
though there has been another downtick in sentiment.
On the financial front, the Greenbook points to the special Beige Book capital spending
questions and to the senior loan officer survey as signals that we could expect more spillovers to
nonfinancial activity. Tighter standards for C&I loans are definitely news, but they are hardly
surprising. The real news will be next quarter. Looking at previous surveys, we had one bad
quarter in 1998, and then it came down, and then the later tightening was part of the increase in the

October 30-31, 2007

50 of 162

fed funds rate. So I think that the next quarter will be very informative and important. In assessing
how risks have changed, these surveys need to be balanced against the improvements we have seen
in credit markets. While I continue to be concerned about collateral damage from the credit markets
to real activity, I still think the problems in financial markets are likely to remain largely walled off
from the nonfinancial economy. So on balance, the economic outlook has improved, and the risks
of financial contagion have diminished somewhat since September, although they haven’t
disappeared. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There really have not been any significant
changes in economic conditions or trends in the District. Moderate expansion is continuing. The
special survey we did on financial conditions and whether the changes there had affected capital
spending plans suggested that plans, at least for firms in our District, were largely unaffected.
Contacts with insight into the shipping industry do report that exports are very strong, stronger than
at least they had anticipated. That, of course, is consistent with what we have been seeing in some
of the aggregate data.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I agree with the Greenbook’s assessment of the
incoming information that we received since the last Committee meeting. I won’t rehash it here,
except to say that the surprises have been positive, a bit on the upside, and I think we still—at least
at the aggregate level—haven’t seen generalized spillovers from the contraction in housing activity
or prices on overall economic activity. I also agree with the Greenbook’s assessment of the outlook
for the economy for the next two or three quarters. I think growth is likely to be subdued as a
consequence of the changes in financial conditions that we’ve seen. As far as prices are concerned,

October 30-31, 2007

51 of 162

core inflation seems to me to be relatively well contained at least on a year-over-year basis, and I
expect that performance to be maintained as long as we pursue appropriate policy.
Looking at the overall economic outlook beyond the next two or three quarters, I think there
is a reasonable chance, given recent developments and recent actions, that by the middle of next
year, say, we’ll be looking at real economic growth of something close to what the economy has
averaged over the past six years—that is, the period 2002 through 2007. This is a bit more
favorable, a bit higher, than the Greenbook outlook, and as best I can judge, the Greenbook is more
conservative than I am about the nonconsumption, nonresidential investment components of
aggregate demand. Put another way, those components add a bit less to aggregate demand in the
Greenbook than I would expect. But my real point is that I don’t think it is a great stretch to see
pretty respectable growth by the middle of next year. My reading of the projections package that
was briefly discussed earlier suggests to me that at least some have the same view. Of course, that
improvement could occur even sooner given the uncertainty associated with forecasting short-term
perturbations in the economy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to concentrate on the outlook for the
nonhousing part. I think the housing sector is obviously in miserable condition, and the issue as to
where that’s going to go really depends on how much of it spreads to other parts of the economy.
Now, I have a contact with a large software firm, and the headline there is that things are going
great—in fact, going gangbusters, I would say. Computer hardware sales nationally are running at
14 to 16 percent above last year, about 3 percentage points above expectation. Business IT growth
is around 12 percent. Export sales are good. Server business is good. Computer gaming software
is strong. Just overall a very bullish outlook there. Capital expenditures at this company are up

October 30-31, 2007

52 of 162

about 35 percent this fiscal year over last fiscal year and are expected to be up another 15 percent in
fiscal 2009. So the outlook is uniformly very, very strong. The company says it is behind in hiring
and has lots of unfilled positions partly as a consequence of turnover.
Now, all the other contacts were pretty downbeat. UPS is expecting a peak season that is
milder than in the previous years; my contact believes that the economy is not going into a negative
but is clearly slowing down. The company is leasing eleven fewer aircraft this year. To meet the
peak, they always lease extra planes for shipping. They are probably holding about steady on
capital outlays. My contact at FedEx says that the outlook is very soft, not much buildup toward the
holiday peak. The retailers that they talked to are anticipating a softer season, not an absolute
decline, but slow growth. International business remains very strong. This company is reducing
capital expenditures by 10 percent from its previous expectation. My contact in a major company in
the trucking industry says that we are in a recession, the worst he has seen in twenty to forty years.
The company is reducing its fleet size by 10 percent, is cutting capital spending quite substantially,
and has no good news. A contact with a major money center bank said that the bank’s analysis of
credit card usage indicates that sales have been flat in some areas and are declining in others. Credit
card usage for department store and catalogue sales has been declining. In an e-mail I received after
that conversation, my contact painted a weaker picture than had been discussed the previous day. I
think that there are other comments around the table suggesting that the anecdotal reports are a bit
on the weak side.
Now, to me there is a puzzle in the market’s assessment of the outcome of this meeting.
The market has essentially bid in a probability of 1.0 of either a 25 or a 50 basis point cut. If I were
simply following the flow of news, the general flow of news putting housing aside has been okay,
maybe a little stronger than expected, and following this fed funds futures market for a long time, it

October 30-31, 2007

53 of 162

does respond to the current information. The flow of data clearly moves that market, and if that
were all that were driving the market, I guess I would have anticipated a 50-50 split between no
change in the fed funds target and down 25 basis points. So why has the market bid in such a high
probability of a cut at this time? I’ll offer a hypothesis, which is that a number of people who are
players in this market, like my contact at a large bank, are looking at news and saying that the
proprietary inside information they have on what’s going on leads them to believe that the overall
economy has a soft tone to it that is not yet showing up in the data that we follow. I’m throwing out
that hypothesis. I don’t know what other hypothesis to offer, but it does seem to be a reasonable
one. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We have been extraordinarily efficient today.
Why don’t we take a coffee break and come back at 4:30?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let’s reconvene. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I just want to start by saying in defense of the Empire
State that there is no way—the only way that Richmond could be bigger than New York and
Philadelphia is if you don’t count the substantial business we have in the manufacturing of financial
products.
MR. KOHN. It’s a lot smaller business than it used to be. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. As the Chairman said at the Economic Club of New
York, it is likely to emerge stronger. I think the outlook looks about the way it did in September.
Just a few quick points. Financial market conditions are substantially better than during the peak of
the panic in mid-August; but the improvement, as many of you said, is still quite limited and

October 30-31, 2007

54 of 162

uneven. Sentiment is still quite fragile, and I think we still seem likely to face a protracted period of
adjustment ahead as the markets work through the substantial array of challenges remaining.
Growth in the United States and in the world economy in my view seems likely to slow—
more here, of course, than elsewhere. Here, even though the nonhousing, non-auto parts of the U.S.
economy don’t yet show significant evidence of a considerable slowdown of actual or expected
demand, I think that still seems likely. In our central scenario, though, housing construction
weakens further. Housing demand slows further because of the tightening of credit conditions.
Prices fall further. Consumer spending slows a bit, and businesses react by scaling back growth in
hiring and investment, and this produces several quarters of growth modestly below trend. I think
that growth outside the United States is likely to slow a bit. It will slow toward potential, if not all
the way to potential, in those economies that have been growing above potential. Although the
world is larger in relative terms and somewhat less vulnerable to a U.S. slowdown than it once was,
it seems to me very unlikely that domestic demand in the rest of the world will accelerate as
domestic demand slows in the United States. So the risks to this outlook for U.S. growth still seem
to lie to the downside. The magnitude of the downside risks may be slightly less than in September,
but they remain substantial. I think the main source of this downside risk to growth is the
interaction between expectations of recession probability and the credit market dynamics. Each
feeds the other. As the outlook for housing deteriorates and the recession probability stays elevated,
financial institutions and investors stay cautious. That caution, in turn, slows the pace of recovery in
markets—in asset-backed, securitization, and structured-credit markets—and in credit growth more
broadly. As expectations adjust to anticipate a longer, more-substantial period of impairment in
markets, then recession probability at least potentially increases.

October 30-31, 2007

55 of 162

I think that the underlying inflation numbers and the measures we use to capture underlying
inflation do not suggest any meaningful acceleration in underlying inflation, and we still expect the
core PCE to run at a rate below 2 percent over the forecast period. In some ways, though, the
inflation outlook now feels a bit worse. It feels worse because of the modest rise in breakevens that
we saw following our last meeting and because of sentiment in markets around gold, commodity
and energy prices, and the dollar. The fact that breakevens at long horizons have risen or failed to
fall as monetary policy expectations have shifted down is not the most comforting pattern out there.
So I think we need to be very careful not to encourage any sense in markets that we’re indifferent to
those potential risks. Having said that, I think the risks to that inflation forecast are roughly
balanced.
The range of tools we have for measuring equilibrium combined with what you see in
financial market expectations suggests that monetary policy, to assess the real short-term interest
rate, is at or above most estimates of neutral and, therefore, is still exerting some modest restraint on
growth. The expectations now built into markets imply too much easing over the next eighteen
months, more than I think we’re likely to have to do. But I think the appropriate path of monetary
policy lies under the Greenbook’s assumption. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In broad outline, the situation is evolving as we
anticipated in our last meeting. Spending outside of housing has been well maintained. The
housing market is very weak. Financial markets have been returning more toward normal
functioning, banks have tightened credit terms and standards, and core inflation has remained low. I
think it is the nuances around each of these that complicate our decision at this meeting.

October 30-31, 2007

56 of 162

As Dave Stockton and others pointed out, spending outside housing has been a bit stronger
than expected. Paths of consumption and investment, along with employment, seem to be
moderating going into the fourth quarter, but gradually. Importantly, the data for September haven’t
been especially weak, and these could have potentially been affected by the financial tightening,
increased uncertainty, and reduced consumer confidence that followed the events of August. With
growth in the third quarter likely to be at or above 3 percent and no material change in the output
gap for several quarters now, it does appear that the real funds rate of 3 percent plus that persisted
since mid-2006, while quite high relative to historical averages, was not far from the equilibrium
real rate at that time, given the low level of long-term rates, the ready availability of credit at
historically low spreads, and the high level of wealth relative to income through this period. It
seems somewhere between difficult and impossible to calibrate the effects on aggregate demand of
the rise in long-term rates last spring, the tightening of credit conditions of the past few months, and
the expected decline in housing prices. The staff has judged 50 basis points of easing—we did that
at the last meeting—to be enough to keep the economy near its potential in the context of the
relatively solid incoming data. That doesn’t seem unreasonable, though it does leave the fed funds
rate at the higher end of its historical range.
Nonetheless, I see a couple of reasons for important downside risks to such a growth
forecast. First, though the housing market was roughly in line with staff forecasts, builders have
made only a little progress in reducing inventory overhangs. Moreover, reports suggest that
downward price pressures are increasing—for example, the constant quality new home index
declined in the past two quarters. Market expectations for the Case-Shiller index revised down,
suggesting that the drop in house prices could be steeper than the moderate drop assumed in the
staff forecast. Substantial decreases in house prices would at some point revive the demand for

October 30-31, 2007

57 of 162

housing. At the same time, that decline threatens greater spillovers from wealth effects on
consumption and from tighter credit conditions as lenders react to threats to their capital from
declining collateral values. Second, although financial markets are improving in many respects, the
trajectory is gradual, uneven, and subject to reversal. We saw this just in the past couple of weeks,
when adverse housing data, downgrades of highly rated mortgages and senior tranches, and
earnings warnings caused some risk spreads to widen out. The secondary markets for
nonconforming mortgages are still quite disrupted. Clearly, uncertainty about the pricing of many
of the assets in question, about the amount of credit that will get put back to the bank balance sheets,
and about the size and location of the losses that have to be taken continue to make lenders very
skittish. In this environment, I wouldn’t be at all surprised to see a further tightening of credit
availability at banks in the coming months. The developments in housing and financial markets are
also likely to weigh on business spending plans, as we saw hinted at in the capital spending
revisions that some of the Reserve Banks reported, and for households as evidenced by the low
confidence surveys.
These downside risks are strong enough that I think they will persist even if we ease slightly
tomorrow. Besides the influences I already cited, my judgment in this regard takes account of
market expectations. The markets’ implied r* has been below the staff’s and, I think, the
Committee’s implied r* for some time now, but the gap seems to have widened considerably. In an
environment of increased uncertainty about the outlook, such disparities perhaps aren’t surprising,
and we can’t substitute market participants’ judgment for our own, but I did take a little signal from
the extent of the pessimism about aggregate demand that I inferred from the interest rate path in the
market relative to the staff’s path in the Greenbook. I don’t think r* is quite as low as President
Yellen was suggesting—it is perhaps in the 2 to 2½ range since term premiums are still low; and

October 30-31, 2007

58 of 162

even with house prices declining, the wealth-to-income ratios are still pretty high, and the dollar has
been falling.
But I did assume a slight easing of monetary policy sometime in the fourth quarter in my
projection. I also projected low, stable core and ultimately total inflation, but I do see some upside
risks around this outcome if the economy follows its most likely path. It is still producing at a high
level of resource utilization, and some measures of compensation and labor costs have been rising.
Core CPI inflation on three-month and six-month bases has accelerated even if the acceleration
hasn’t shown through to the PCE measures. Increases in energy and commodity prices, along with
recent declines of the dollar, are also a risk factor—less from their direct effects on prices, which are
likely to be small, but more because they could suggest a potential for a more inflationary
psychology that could feed through to expectations. Our decision tomorrow will involve weighing
these risks, the extent of the relative risk to our dual objectives, and the potential costs of missing in
either direction in the context of the market conditions and expectations built into markets. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought I’d just talk about four subjects today:
first, spend a few more moments on the capital market conditions, which Bill did a great job of
summarizing; second, talk about financial intermediaries; and third and fourth, talk briefly about
implications for growth and inflation. In terms of the capital markets, I think it is important that we
judge their state today not from where they might have been two weeks ago or from where they
might have gotten ahead of underlying reality—if you look at credit spreads and equities—but from
where they were before we last met or from where they were in the darkest days of August. I think
these markets are at the very high end of what are reasonable expectations for improvement. As

October 30-31, 2007

59 of 162

Governor Kohn suggests, it doesn’t mean that they can’t reverse themselves. It certainly doesn’t
mean that they are solid—plenty of fragility is there. But all things considered, as a function of both
time and Fed policy, there is, indeed, better sentiment; bid-asked spreads have narrowed; price
discovery is at work; and differentiation and tiering are very real. I’d highlight a few markets that
have gone into the category of being on more solid ground. Bill referred to the interbank funding
markets. The multiseller bank-sponsored conduit is performing well. Prime auto finance paper has
gone through quite a volatile period in the past couple of months but has now found its way to the
good side, where I think those markets are increasingly open. High-quality paper is increasingly
being received on terms that don’t look dramatically different from the way they would have looked
before August. Another example is credit card receivables.
Of course, as many others around this table have pointed out, there is no panacea. Serious
problems remain in some asset markets, particularly housing and certain parts of structured finance.
But I note that might be for good reason. I’d hesitate to call this poor market functioning. By and
large, it may be that some investors don’t like the outcomes, but as the asset-backed commercial
paper markets have separated the haves from the have-nots and the have-nots are without bank
sponsorship and have poorer quality assets and poorer disclosure, they are having a hard time
finding and securing bids. Another example might be some large financial institutions that are
rolling over more of their funding on a shorter-term basis than they desire. There may be good
reasons for that, and as we think about our policy tools tomorrow, we shouldn’t try to come to the
rescue with any fixes for institutions that may not have been managed well or, at least, may not have
had a capital structure that fit the risks. There are a couple of other indicators of continued concern.
Obviously, the Treasury bill market has been quite volatile and is a pretty good reminder to us that
these markets are not back to anything that we’d even want to consider normal. Another indicator

October 30-31, 2007

60 of 162

that I look to in evaluating whether the capital markets are coming back to some normalcy is the
percentage of cash holdings in money market mutual funds. In the pre-July period, money market
mutual funds, particularly those that hold these prime-plus securities, would hold 5 to 10 percent of
their assets in cash. On the darkest day in August, that was up to 45 percent. By and large, my
sense is that the average now is something in the mid-20s. That suggests that there might be
requests for redemptions and liquidations for which they need to keep cash available, but they are
feeling a little better about their prospects and about some of the paper that they’re holding.
On balance, I’d say it’s pretty easy for us to sit here and judge improvement. It’s a lot
harder for us to judge success. I think President Plosser talked about the normalization in these
markets, and we must hesitate to think that the markets before their August turmoil were normal.
Risk premiums were abnormally low, and access to credit perhaps unusually easy. So in judging
the success of time in our policy prescriptions, I think we’re having a hard time—at least I’m having
a hard time—figuring out what are the new steady-state outcomes that are trying to be achieved.
These markets appear delicately balanced between fear and greed. One example of greed, as we
discussed in previous meetings, is some of the pay-in-kind, or PIK, securities with toggle features in
the high-yield market. One of them was priced just last week between 97 and 98. So some of these
corporate credits may well have improved in the eyes of the market beyond what we think might be
sustainable. On the other side is fear. A new paradigm is trying to take root in the markets, but the
risk of reversal remains very real. The marks on many leveraged loans look good. But if you judge
the financial institutions that hold this paper, they are rushing to get the paper to market as soon as
they possibly can, perhaps with a view that the corporate credit conditions won’t hold at these
levels.

October 30-31, 2007

61 of 162

Second, let me talk briefly about financial intermediaries. As we discussed before, after the
tumult in mid-August, many of them retrenched. Then many of them tried to re-liquefy. At that
time they were trying to revalue their securities. Now they are probably somewhere in the process
of revaluation, review, and refinement. Some of them, after the earnings announcements of the past
couple of weeks, might be going back to step 1 and trying to understand what the risks are and what
their liabilities are. Some of the improvements that we saw in the capital markets after our
September 18 meeting might have been upended or seemed so by a couple of announcements from
a leading investment bank and commercial bank that represented a negative surprise to the markets.
A couple of explanations are possible for why the market seemed to react not just with respect to the
securities of those two banks. Were the losses and risk-management systems particular to those
banks that called the risk management into question, or were they illustrative of losses to larger
segments of their peer group owing to poor risk-management systems? It was probably a
combination, but I guess the key question for me is whether we are seeing impairment of the entire
financial sector or simply the realignment of the competitive landscape. I think the answer is the
latter, but I’m not certain. The best-in-class comparables among commercial banks and investment
banks seem to suggest that bifurcation is at work. If you look at the credit default swaps, at the
profits, and at the share prices for the best in class of this group, they seem to have come out of the
scare of a couple of weeks ago stronger and more profitable and, frankly, in much better shape. I
would have thought that those sorts of entities would be putting opportunistic capital to work in a
hurry, particularly when many of their competitors are down. I’m afraid that is not the case. Even
they are playing defense in this market. We talk, I talk, about the resilience of our capital markets.
What they tell many of us, I think, is that the way for them to be resilient is to be exceptionally
prudent here. The risk-reward tradeoff for them suggests that this is a time to be careful. You can’t

October 30-31, 2007

62 of 162

succeed if you don’t survive, and I suspect that many of them are still quite jarred by recent events.
The profitability of most of these financial institutions has been significantly called into question. I
suspect that the losses in the fourth quarter are going to look particularly bad, but I would expect
that many of these financial institutions are asking themselves the question of what business they
really should be in after all.
Third, let me speak briefly about the implications for economic growth. To me there is no
question that we have less market uncertainty than two months ago, and the prospects of some
really bad tail events have dissipated somewhat; but there is still caution, as Vice Chairman
Geithner said. Certainly, large multinational nonfinancial companies, excluding housing, seem to
be holding up well, as represented by their bottom-up S&P earnings forecast for the fourth quarter
of next year, and certainly there’s good news to report, as President Poole suggested, from many in
the tech sector. Housing is, of course, as bad as the Greenbook has long suggested. So at the end of
the day in terms of trying to judge what’s going on in the real economy, we go back to a discussion
the Greenbook highlighted for us, which is the state of the consumer. Even though on balance I am
a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook for GDP growth for the balance of ’07 and ’08, I have to
admit that the conclusion that consumer sentiment has taken a hit seems, at least from my reading
and my discussions with some business leaders, to be backed up by some very disappointing
consumer spending for October. Having surveyed a few of the credit card companies, I think that it
looks to many of them that October spending is really not at comforting levels. Nominal spending
excluding fuel for their consumer base appears flat to down over the past four weeks. That is, I
think, a rather remarkable outcome. Delinquencies have also ticked up a bit, but I would say that’s
probably less disconcerting to me than what the credit card companies seem to be reporting as a

October 30-31, 2007

63 of 162

proxy for retail spending. The key over the medium term, however, is job growth and real
disposable income, in my judgment more important than the negative wealth effects from housing.
Let me turn to the final issue for discussion—at least on my list—which is inflation risks.
At the end of this six-week period, I must admit to being considerably less sanguine about inflation
prospects and risks than the Greenbook. It is true that incoming data have not been bad at all. Some
have even been pretty good, and inflation expectations are seemingly anchored. But as Governor
Kohn suggested, I worry a lot about inflation psychology and the real effect of importing inflation
given dollar weakness and the effect of commodity price increase pass-throughs on a breadth of
products. Given the massive liquidity on the sidelines, given uncertainty in the global capital
markets and the current political calendar, and given the rather large and growing expected
discrepancies in interest rate differentials between us and our trading partners, I worry about
outsized moves between the U.S. dollar and foreign currencies. A disorderly move in the dollar
could prove very costly, even undermining foreign direct investment in the United States and
perhaps threatening to unanchor inflation expectations, particularly if the judgments of this
Committee aren’t well understood by the markets. I have never been a big believer in looking at
artificial levels for prices or at charts to figure out where we should worry. Nonetheless, I must say
a euro-dollar move beyond 150 strikes me as a level that the markets will be paying keen attention
to. We’ll obviously talk about the policy tradeoffs involving these risks in the next round. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much. I very much agree with Dave’s
characterization of the Greenbook as a modal forecast, and I think it is an excellent and perfectly
reasonable modal forecast. As almost all of us have said, the data are coming in a little stronger.

October 30-31, 2007

64 of 162

We will have a fair amount of momentum going into the fourth quarter. We will have a
significant drag from housing in ’08. The financial markets outside of housing have generally
had fairly significant improvement, although a lot of brittleness remains. A very clear example
of that is how the markets seemed to flatten out in the past week or so and certain markets
backed up a bit, and thus the risk spreads are widening. It is also interesting to note that, when
the first earnings reports that were fairly negative were coming out, there was a positive market
reaction because it was sort of a relief that they were owning up to the challenges. Now that
more information is coming out, some of which is more negative than had been expected, the
market’s reactions have been more negative, and some of the risk spreads have been widening.
That suggests that a lot of concern is still out there, and a lot of people are waiting for the other
shoe to drop. I will note that I am sure that other shoe will have been manufactured in
Richmond. [Laughter]
Since this was a modal forecast, I want to think about a downside scenario, one on which
I put a reasonable amount of probability mass and one that I think we should seriously consider.
A number of people have talked about bank balance sheets. Generally, there has been less
concern about them than before. One of the big issues that we had focused on earlier was
leveraged lending. That seems to be working itself out reasonably well without much incident.
There is obviously a lower new flow on, but the new flow does have covenants, et cetera. So
that seems to be working out reasonably. ABCP, SIVs, conduits—there is still uncertainty about
how much may come onto the balance sheets, although there is a lot more comfort with the
extent of the call on the capital that is there, but there is still uncertainty as to how much might
be called. You know, the SIVs seem to be working themselves down. They are shrinking
through orderly asset sales. But, of course, what are they doing? They are selling the best assets

October 30-31, 2007

65 of 162

first, so the potential challenges are still left behind. For the banks, the conforming mortgages
are easy to get off the balance sheets. There seems to be a debate about whether banks are
choosing not to get nonconforming ones off the balance sheet or whether they can’t get them off
the balance sheet. Many organizations that have a lot of capital seem to be just originating these
wholly on the balance sheet and waiting for better pricing, as we have heard reports from other
institutions saying that they are ready, willing, and able to buy at a good price and the supply just
isn’t there.
Nonetheless, there is still much more carefulness in the underwriting of those loans.
Obviously, the jumbo mortgages, the nonconforming mortgages, are more important than they
used to be because housing prices have run up so much around the country: $417,000 doesn’t
buy you as much house anymore, even in parts of the country that don’t have or traditionally
have not had particularly high housing prices. That raises a concern about a squeeze through the
mortgage markets. So I see that the consequence of the financial turbulence is primarily
highlighting issues in the mortgage markets, as a number of people have said. Also, as I think
the Greenbook and Bluebook pointed out, it is not a problem for highly rated or even just
moderately well rated corporations to get funding. That is not a challenge right now. It seems
mainly to be coming through the housing market.
So I see a potential for a slow-burn scenario coming and for the housing market to slowly
play itself out because we are going to have continuing negative shocks. More than 400,000
resets are going to be coming every quarter, starting with this quarter, through 2008. As a
number of people have noted, we have much higher credit standards than before. Many of the
people who were supplying subprime loans no longer exist, and those who are supplying them
are supplying them at much, much higher standards. We will be proposing and putting out new

October 30-31, 2007

66 of 162

rules. The Congress is considering new rules. This is all casting a pall over people who might
potentially be supplying credit into some of these markets. The delinquencies and foreclosures
are clearly going to continue rising at least for a few quarters, probably—as analysis by some
people at the Board suggests—peaking in mid-2008. But there is still a lot of uncertainty with
respect to that. So it is going to continue to put more and more challenges in this market.
All of these things coming together could put a lot more pressure on housing prices. I
think we have been seeing some significant declines in housing construction, but I see a potential
for a reasonable likelihood of a much larger negative house-price effect than what the Greenbook
has. As a shred of evidence for that, the incredibly illiquid Case-Shiller index that is traded on
the Mercantile Exchange, if you look forward, for a number of markets they have a cumulative
decline of 20 percent over a couple of years. Now, the number of players may be no more than
the number of fingers that I have, but still it is a piece of data suggesting that it could be lower.
The anecdotal reports are that real housing prices are much lower than the indexes are indicating.
Certainly, in the new market, they are throwing in a lot of extras, add-ons, et cetera, and the
inventory may actually be larger because the anecdotal reports are that a lot of people are taking
their houses off the market, so they are not formally included in the enormous inventories that
are out there but may well be potentially there for supply.
So what does this suggest going forward? Well, from a risk-management perspective, we
ought to be thinking about buying insurance against this downside scenario. What is the cost of
insurance? Inflation and inflation expectations. As most people have mentioned, we have seen
some gradual slowing and expectations are still being contained but, as Governor Kohn pointed
out, there is a bit of an uptick in the CPI, which is definitely worrisome. But what is the risk?
Well, let us think about the upside risk. I go back to 1998, when the FOMC cut 75 basis points.

October 30-31, 2007

67 of 162

Growth was 4.5 percent in 1998 and 4.7 percent in 1999. As I mentioned last time, we saw very
little increase in inflation—actually a decline in core inflation. I looked at the core PCE in
addition to the core CPI that I reported last time, and that was effectively flat at 1.4, 1.6 percent
in ’98 and ’99 and then 1.6 percent again in 2000. The potential benefit of buying a little
insurance now is that, given that a lot of these challenges may be peaking in mid-2008, it may
have some effect down the line. It provides perhaps a bit more insurance against some of the
negative shocks that we may be hearing about. If those other shoes do drop over the next few
months, then we have a lower downside risk for broader financial turbulence. Also, by mid2008, if the scenario that I am describing or the other negative scenarios that people have
described, aren’t materializing, we can take back some of these moves. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My forecast is actually quite similar to the
Greenbook forecast. In terms of inflation, I see a little faster movement back to 2 percent, where
I think inflation expectations are grounded, but the difference is very minor. I do think the risks
are quite balanced around that. In terms of economic growth, I am fairly comfortable with the
Greenbook forecast, maybe a smidgen less sanguine in the next two quarters but really not very
different. However, in terms of the issue of potential downside risk, I do think that, given the
policy path that the Greenbook assessed, there are substantial downside risks and they come
from several sources. One source is that the financial market disruptions have led to some
tightening of lending standards. I think that could have some potential effect on business
investment. The housing market is pretty grim. We still have a big inventory overhang, and
there is a question about whether that large inventory overhang is going to lead to even fewer
housing starts than the Greenbook has forecasted. Furthermore, it has raised the issue about

October 30-31, 2007

68 of 162

house prices, which have spillovers into household spending. The spreads for commercial real
estate are still very high, and so there is a question about whether commercial real estate will be
as strong as it has been. That is a bit worrisome as well. Consumer confidence has not
deteriorated too much, but it has been on a path of deterioration. So, again, I worry a little about
what the consumer might do. In general, I worry more about these downside risks, given the
policy path of keeping the federal funds rate constant.
What about the financial markets and their disruptions? Well, I think that there are two
elements to the disruption in these big, widening credit spreads. One is the valuation risk: All of
a sudden people realized that they didn’t know as much about what kind of assets were in
portfolios and how complicated the structures were in terms of those assets. Clearly, the solution
to that problem is price discovery. We see that happening, but it is going to be very slow. So
that problem, in terms of the credit markets, will take a fair amount of time to resolve. The
second element is what I call macro risk, which is the concern about a downward spiral: The
problems in the credit markets will lead to a weakening of the economy, which then makes price
discovery harder to do, which means that you have wider credit spreads, which then make things
worse. Of course, that’s the issue with the tail risk that all of us have been talking about. I think
the policy change that we did in September clearly had a big impact. It did exactly what we
wanted it to do. It is almost a textbook case in doing what we wanted it to do—it took out a lot
of the macro risk. It didn’t take out the valuation risk, which is getting better but very slowly
over time.
So looking at this issue and thinking about going forward in terms of the credit markets, I
am a little worried that credit markets are still quite skittish. That has several elements. One is
the danger that macro risk could come back. So there is a question about shoes dropping. There

October 30-31, 2007

69 of 162

is an issue about what we might do at this meeting, and then there are issues about what might
actually happen that people don’t know about. One thing that is sort of surprising is that, when
you look at what is happening in credit spreads, they seem pretty reasonable in their steady but
very slow improvement. But then, you sense some discomfort—in particular, the reaction to the
Treasury superconduit has not been very positive. If it worked, it would actually reveal
information because it would look like the way that the old clearinghouses used to work, when
they would combine assets. Randy knows all about this because he studied this stuff. You pool
your assets, then you monitor each other, and then you actually create information that makes the
markets work better. I think that is what the Treasury was trying to get at. But the skepticism in
the markets is such that they think this could be used to hide information about assets and that
other shoes may be dropping in this regard. This does not give me a lot of confidence, and so I
worry very much at this juncture, which I think is a critical one, that a policy move could have an
effect of sending the credit markets in a bad direction. That is something we have to take into
account tomorrow. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you everyone. Let me try to summarize
this discussion. It is a little harder than usual. Broadly, the macroeconomic news came in
slightly better than expected during the intermeeting period. Housing has been very weak, as
expected; but consumption, investment, and net exports were relatively strong in recent months.
In the aggregate data, there is yet no clear sign of a spillover from housing. Most participants
expect several weak quarters followed by recovery later next year.
The risks remain to the downside but may be less than at our last meeting. One issue,
given all these factors, is determining the equilibrium short-term interest rate. Financial market
conditions have improved somewhat since our last meeting, with investors discriminating among

October 30-31, 2007

70 of 162

borrowers and with the process of price discovery proceeding. There was general agreement that
conditions are not back to normal and that it would be some time before that happened. Some
suggested that a risk of relapse remains, should credit quality worsen or further bad news be
disclosed. Lending conditions have tightened, particularly for mortgages, and securitization
remains impaired. There is not yet much evidence that this tightening is affecting business
borrowing, however, although financial conditions may have somewhat increased uncertainty
among business leaders.
Views on how consumption would evolve were mixed. Consumer sentiment is on the
weak side, house prices are down, and oil prices are up, which suggests some weakening ahead.
However, the labor market remains reasonably solid, which should support consumer spending.
Anecdotal information about consumer spending was unusually mixed. Some saw evidence of
growing weakness in consumption. This evidence included weak reports from shippers and
credit card companies. Others saw the consumer side as slowing a bit but generally healthy.
Investment, including investment in commercial real estate, may also be slowing somewhat; but
again, the evidence is mixed. Manufacturing growth appears to be moderating. Other sectors—
including energy, agriculture, high-tech, and tourism—are doing well. Core inflation has
moderated, and there was generally more comfort that this improvement would persist. There
was less concern expressed about tightness in labor markets and wage pressures. Energy prices
and food prices could lead total inflation to rise, perhaps even into next year, and there is the risk
of pass-through to the core. Similar concerns apply to the dollar and to export prices. Some, but
not all, TIPS-based measures of inflation expectations have risen, and survey-based measures
have been stable. Most participants saw inflation risks to the upside, but at least some saw them
as less pressing than earlier this year. That is my summary. Comments?

October 30-31, 2007

71 of 162

Well, again, as usual, it is hard to be the last person to speak, but let me make just a few
comments. First, as always, the Greenbook was very thoughtful. The authors have done a good
job of balancing the risks, and I find their forecast very plausible as a modal forecast. Housing
does seem to be very weak, of course, and manufacturing looks to be slowing further. But
except for those sectors, there is a good bit of momentum still in the economy. Having said that,
I think there is an unusual amount of uncertainty around the modal forecast, maybe less than in
September but still a great deal.
Let me talk briefly about three areas: financial markets, housing, and inflation. A lot of
people have already spoken about financial markets. Market functioning certainly has improved.
Our action in September helped on that. For example, commercial paper markets are working
almost normally for good borrowers, the spreads are down, and volumes are stable. One concern
that we had for quite a while was that banks would be facing binding balance sheet constraints
because of all the contingent liabilities that they had—off-balance-sheet vehicles, leveraged
loans, and so on. That problem seems to be somewhat less than it was. Some of the leveraged
loans are being sold off, some of the worst off-balance-sheet vehicles are being wound down. So
there is generally improvement in the financial market, certainly. In the past couple of weeks
there has been some deterioration in sentiment, and I see that as coming from essentially two
factors. First, there were a number of reports of unusually large and unanticipated losses, which
reduced the confidence of investors that we had detected and unearthed all the bad news. This
problem will eventually be resolved, but clearly we still have some way to go to clarify where
people stand. The other issue, which I think is more pertinent to our discussion, is about
economic fundamentals. There was a very bad response, for example, to Caterpillar’s profit

October 30-31, 2007

72 of 162

report, and so the market is appropriately responding to economic fundamentals as they feed
through into credit concerns.
From our perspective, one of the key issues will be the availability of credit to consumers
and firms going forward. My sense—based on my talking to supervisors, looking at the senior
loan officer survey, and talking to some people in the markets—is that banks are becoming quite
conservative, and that is what Kevin said. It is not necessarily a balance sheet constraint but
more a concern about renewed weakness in markets. It is also a concern about the condition of
borrowers, about credit risk, and the demands of investors for very tight underwriting. Now, of
course, tight underwriting is not a bad thing; it is a good thing. But from our perspective, we
need to think about its potential implications for growth and, if you like, for r*. The biggest
effect of the tighter underwriting, of course, has been on mortgage loans, although we have seen
a bit of improvement in the secondary market for prime jumbos, which is encouraging if that
continues. This is the area in which vicious-circle effects, which Vice Chairman Geithner and
others have talked about, is most concerning. House prices, according to the Greenbook, are
projected to fall 4½ percent over the next two years. Clearly, there is some downside risk to that.
If house prices were to fall much more, that would feed into credit evaluations, into balance
sheets, back into credit extension, and so on. So I think there is a risk there, as Governor
Kroszner and Governor Mishkin also discussed. The corporate sector is not much of a problem.
Good firms are issuing debt without much problem. I don’t really have much read on small
business, but I have not heard much complaining in that area either. With respect to consumers,
my guess is that we are going to see some effects on consumers. Certainly, home equity loans
and installment loans have tightened up. We can see that in the senior loan officer survey. We
don’t see that yet for credit cards, but since a lot of credit cards are used by people with subprime

October 30-31, 2007

73 of 162

credit histories, I suspect that we will see some tightening there. So I do expect to see some
effect on consumers from credit conditions.
As has already been mentioned, an area we also need to note is commercial real estate.
Financing conditions have already tightened there quite considerably, and spreads are much
wider. The senior loan officer survey shows the tightening of terms and conditions that matches
previous recessions, and CMBS issuance has dropped very significantly. You can debate
whether or not this tightening is justified by fundamentals. On the one hand, vacancy rates
remain low, and rents are high. On the other hand, it is still also true that price-to-rent ratios are
quite high. If you calculate an equity risk premium for commercial real estate analogously to the
way you calculate one for stocks, you would find that it is at an unusually low level, which
would tend to suggest that prices may fall. So it is uncertain, I would say. Certainly one area in
which we might see further retrenchment in commercial real estate is the public sector: Tax
receipts are slowing, and that might affect building decisions. So I do think this is another area
in which we will be seeing some effects from credit tightening. I should be clear—the
Greenbook already incorporates a considerable slowdown in commercial real estate, but that
means it will no longer offset the residential slowdown.
I just want to make one comment about housing, which I think we all agree is a central
source of uncertainty, both for the credit reasons I have discussed and in terms of prices, wealth,
and other issues. Let me just make one point that I found striking anyway, which is that—at
least from the Greenbook—the forecast of a strengthening economy by next spring and the
second half of next year is very closely tied to the assumption that housing will turn around next
spring. In particular, if you look at all the final demand components for the economy, other than
housing, in 2007 those components contributed 3.5 percentage points to GDP. According to the

October 30-31, 2007

74 of 162

Greenbook forecast, in 2008 all those components together will contribute 2.0 percentage points
to GDP. So the fact that GDP doesn’t slow any more than 0.6 comes from the assumption that
the negative contribution of housing next year will be much less than it was in this year. It is
certainly possible—again, I think the Greenbook authors have done a good job of balancing the
risks. But as we have noted, we have missed this turn before, and it could happen again. So let
me just note that as an important issue. If we do miss on that turn, the other forecast errors for
consumption and so on obviously would be correlated with that miss.
Finally, let me talk for a moment about inflation. I want to share the concerns that some
people have noted. If you wanted to be defensive about inflation, you could point out that the
movement in oil prices and the dollar and so on is in part due to our actions. But it is also due to
a lot of other things—for example, the dollar in broad real terms is about where it was in the late
’90s. In that respect, it is perhaps about where it should be in terms of trying to make progress
on the current account deficit. Similarly, with oil, a lot of other factors besides monetary policy
are involved. That said, I share with Governor Warsh the concern that the visibility of these
indicators day after day in financial markets and on television screens has a risk of affecting
inflation psychology. I do worry about that. I think we should pay attention to that. So I do
think that is a concern, and we obviously need to take it into consideration in our policies, in our
statements, and in our public remarks.
I have one more comment on housing before ending. In thinking about the turnaround
for housing next year, Governor Kroszner talked about resets and those sorts of issues. We
spend a lot of time here at the Board thinking about different plans for refinancing subprime
borrowers or other borrowers into sustainable mortgages. We have looked at the FHA and other
types of approaches. A very interesting paper by an economist named Joseph Mason at Drexel

October 30-31, 2007

75 of 162

discusses, at a very detailed institutional level, the issues related to refinancing, in terms both of
the servicers’ incentives and of the regulatory perspective. Mason points out that there are some
serious regulatory problems with the massive refinancing effort, including consumer protection
issues, because refinancing can be a source of scams. There are also issues of safety and
soundness because refinancing can be a way to disguise losses, for example. If you read that
paper, I think you will be persuaded—at least I am becoming increasingly persuaded—that a
significant amount of refinancing will not be happening and that we will see substantial financial
problems and foreclosures that will peak somewhere in the middle of next year. So I think that is
an additional risk that we ought to take into account as we think about the evolution of housing.
Those are just a few comments on the general outlook. Let me just note, we will adjourn
in a moment. There will be a reception and a dinner, for those of you who wish to stay. There
will be no program or business, so if you have other plans, feel free to pursue them. A number
of pieces of data, including GDP, will arrive overnight, and we will begin tomorrow morning
with a discussion of the new data. Perhaps that will help us in our discussion of policy. Thank
you. The meeting is adjourned.
[Meeting recessed]

October 30-31, 2007

76 of 162

October 31, 2007—Morning Session
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody. Let’s start with Dave Stockton,
who will bring us up to date on the overnight data releases.
MR. STOCKTON. 3 We left at your place—and I hope you will find—a table showing
the GDP release numbers relative to the Greenbook forecast that we had. I thought I would start
out by just walking you through that for a minute and giving my impressions of what its
implications are. As you can see, there was an advance estimate of third-quarter GDP of
3.9 percent—that was 0.6 percentage point above our estimate for the third quarter. Looking at
the second line of the table, you can see final sales. We were actually surprised a bit to the
downside—just a tenth—by final sales. The real area of surprise in this release, if you look
further down the table to the level in chained 2000 dollars, was the change in nonfarm
inventories. The BEA has a much higher estimate for third-quarter inventory investment than we
do. Typically that change doesn’t carry a great many implications for us going forward. If
anything, if we hold inventory investment at the level that we projected for the fourth quarter, the
higher level that they are estimating for the third quarter would actually lead to a reduction in our
estimate of fourth-quarter GDP.
Going back just briefly to the components of final sales, as you can see, two areas explain
most of the small downside surprise that we had in final sales. Personal consumption came in at
3 percent versus the 3.2 percent we were estimating, and equipment and software expenditures
came in at 5.9 percent versus the 7.4 percent that we were estimating. One other area that came
in a bit below our expectations was net exports, which is down there in the “level” area. Nathan
tells me that his folks would not be inclined to take all of the lower estimate, so they would
probably be carrying a slightly higher number for net exports going forward.
3

The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 3).

October 30-31, 2007

77 of 162

We had two small offsetting upward revisions. One that was big in percentage change
difference was nonresidential structures, for which the BEA is estimating 12.3 percent versus
3.7 percent. That miss was principally in drilling and mining, which would have been a big
surprise to us in the second quarter. The BEA has some proprietary information on drilling and
mining. I must say the big increases that they are showing for the past two quarters seem at odds
with what we can see in the data that we look at for rigs in use and foot-drilled. Nevertheless,
there is not really any strong reason to doubt that. Going to the very bottom part of the table, you
can see for core PCE an upside surprise of 0.2 percentage point. That was all in the nonmarket
component of PCE prices, the part in which the BEA is making various imputations. In fact, the
market part of the core PCE came in 0.1 percentage point below our expectations. Again, we
don’t typically give a great deal of weight to nonmarket prices.
So that is the GDP release. I would say, obviously, it was stronger. I don’t see any
reason necessarily to doubt this number. It will be revised as data come in. In looking at their
estimates for September, for which they are missing data, we could quibble a bit on net exports
and on inventories. Those quibbles would be largely offsetting, so if we had had this release in
hand, today we would probably be showing a number something close to 3.9 percent.
We had two other important pieces of information this morning. One was the ADP
survey of private payroll employment growth. Their estimate for the gain in private payrolls in
October is 106,000. That is above the 50,000 that we implicitly had built into our forecast.
Again, this has significant information content in terms of its predictive content for payrolls; they
have improved their methodology over the past couple of years as they have gotten into this.
While I don’t think we would move our estimate all the way to their 106,000, we would certainly

October 30-31, 2007

78 of 162

raise it from the 50,000 that we have—probably to 75,000 or 80,000, at least, for an estimate of
payroll employment growth in October.
The other piece of data that came out this morning was the employment cost index. It is
showing hourly compensation for private-sector workers up at an annual rate of 3.1 percent in
the third quarter. That is considerably below our estimate of 3.8 percent through the third quarter
and leaves the twelve-month change in that measure of hourly compensation flat at 3.1 percent.
So that basically is showing no signs of any acceleration whatsoever.
Obviously, a lot of detail will come out later today and tomorrow in terms of the
underlying data and assumptions behind this GDP release. So right now I am really shooting
from the hip, but I will shoot away anyway. As I indicated, I don’t think we would necessarily
fight the BEA on the 3.9 percent. We would probably mark down our fourth-quarter estimate
from the 1.4 percent that we had in the Greenbook to 1.2 percent, with a smaller contribution
coming from inventory investment. Again, we would probably raise our level of inventory
investment a bit but not enough to prevent the swing from becoming a little more negative going
into the fourth quarter. That change, if we were at 3.9 in the third quarter and 1.2 percent in the
fourth quarter, would boost the second half from 2.4 in the Greenbook to about 2.6 and raise the
year as a whole from 2.3 to 2.4. On PCE prices, I don’t think we would really do anything to our
forecast. We would take the third-quarter estimate on board, but we would keep the growth rates
of both total PCE prices and core PCE prices unchanged in the fourth quarter. So we would be
adding somewhere between 0.1 to the second half and 0.05 to the year as a whole. That might
cause the year as a whole to round up just a bit.
I think that is basically where we would be. In going back to my remarks of yesterday, I
think that these releases—certainly the GDP release—would not have affected in any important

October 30-31, 2007

79 of 162

way our basic take on the data, which was that the incoming data have been stronger than we had
expected at the time of the last meeting. But we still see good reasons for thinking that GDP
growth will slow significantly going forward. If we do get 106,000 on payroll employment for
October as in the ADP data, the extent of that slowing will probably be a little less than we
thought in terms of the overall level of GDP going forward. In terms of the downside risk, I
think we are still looking at a housing sector that has a significant amount of overhang and
downside risk and that could be a bit worse than we’re expecting.
Shifting gears completely—Vice Chairman Geithner asked yesterday about debt growth
in our forecast and how it compared with the early 1990s and the earlier part of this decade. I
have left a chart of that at your places. As you can see, our forecast has a bigger drop-off in debt
growth than we have experienced so far in this decade but not nearly so large as the one that we
experienced in the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s. Again, I would characterize this
forecast as not really having what you would call a full-blown credit crunch but as having some
significant restrictions on credit provision going forward. So I will take whatever questions you
might have, and I will do my best to answer them.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any questions for Dave? President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to ask—and this is a question based on
ignorance—you’ve talked about nonresidential structures, and you mentioned drilling and
mining. One thing that has impressed me in talking to some of the bigger logistics companies—
Fluor, Bechtel, Zachry—are the enormous numbers in what I mentioned earlier—the
infrastructure developments in the Gulf Coast area and somewhat in the heartland, I think all the
way up to President Hoenig’s District. The numbers are quite large, and they continue to surge.
Would that be part of this nonresidential structure investment number?

October 30-31, 2007

80 of 162

MR. STOCKTON. Yes, most of that would be part of this nonresidential structure
figure. But since we don’t know exactly what proprietary information the BEA has, I’m not
quite sure what is included in the number. But conceptually, that should be there.
MR. FISHER. And the weight of construction and mining is what?
MR. STOCKTON. Drilling and mining in the overall economy is very small.
MR. FISHER. Yes, that’s what I thought.
MR. STOCKTON. I mean, nonresidential structures contribute about 3½ percent;
drilling and mining I could get for you.
MR. FISHER. I think the two combined are something like that.
MR. STOCKTON. Yes, it’s a small piece.
MR. FISHER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Dave? President Rosengren?
MR. ROSENGREN. I had a follow-up question on nonresidential structures. You talked
about drilling and mining, and I was wondering about the other parts of commercial real estate.
Was anything in there? I don’t know if you had a chance to look at it, but the reason I ask is that,
if you thought financing was starting to become a problem and you do have very weak
nonresidential investment going forward, you would expect to start seeing it there. So I’m
wondering if anything was in that breakout.
I have a second question, which is that you didn’t mention durable goods. But if I
thought that credit problems, particularly subprime and other things, were starting to create
issues, I would expect to start seeing more imprints in the data for some of the durable goods. So
was seeing durable goods a little stronger in the consumption figures a surprise at all?

October 30-31, 2007

81 of 162

MR. STOCKTON. We don’t have the details yet. In fact, a construction-put-in-place
release will come out later today and will provide us with a bit more insight into the composition
of the non-drilling-and-mining component. So I don’t really know what is happening there in
terms of this particular figure. In terms of durable goods, given what we’ve seen, I think that it
would still be early at this point for any credit restriction to have left much of an imprint on
capital spending or durable goods orders. We are looking for that. We have been a little
surprised at the strength there, so I think that would be part of a question mark in our own minds
as to whether we have overestimated the restraint. But as I said yesterday, given the data that we
currently have in hand, I think it is probably too early to see a significant mark yet from the
credit restraint. If we don’t over the next three or four months, that will more seriously call into
question our forecast. Now, we have not built in a very large capital spending effect from the
financial turmoil because we basically think corporate finance is still looking pretty good. There
may be some pockets of stress and some difficulties with tighter terms and standards in bank
lending, but that is not the big area in which we are expecting constraint. It really is the
household sector.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian?
MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take this opportunity to remind the
Committee that you will have the opportunity to revise your projections that you submitted a few
days ago in light of the information available through the time of this meeting—of course
including the data that were released this morning. We would need to get your revised
projections by close of business tomorrow.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Other questions? If not, Brian?

October 30-31, 2007

82 of 162

MR. MADIGAN. 4 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to the package
labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” That
package includes two versions of table 1: The first is the version that was discussed
in the Bluebook, and the second is a revised version dated October 31. The revised
table presents basically the same policy alternatives as the Bluebook version but with
some changes in the rationale and risk assessment sections. To review, alternatives B
and C contemplate leaving the stance of policy unchanged today, but they differ
importantly in their assessments of risk: Alternative C characterizes the downside
risks to growth as roughly offsetting the upside risks to inflation, whereas alternative
B indicates that the downside risks to growth are the Committee’s greater policy
concern. Alternative A, in contrast, eases the stance of monetary policy 25 basis
points and indicates that the Committee assesses the risks to growth and inflation as
roughly in balance. In discussing these alternatives, I will basically be working from
right to left across the two versions of the table.
As Dave Stockton discussed yesterday in response to a question from Vice
Chairman Geithner, the Greenbook projection is a modal forecast. Without
consideration of risks, the Greenbook analysis would seem to support the
Committee’s selection of alternative C. In that forecast, which is conditioned on the
federal funds rate remaining at 4¾ percent, economic growth slows in the near term,
and below-trend growth over the next few quarters closes the small positive output
gap that the staff sees as currently prevailing. Maintaining the present stance of
monetary policy leads to a gradual strengthening of the expansion over 2008 and
2009 and by enough to leave the economy producing at its capacity. Core inflation
stays under 2 percent, while total inflation runs a bit lower, reflecting declining
energy prices. Judging by your projections, most of you would find such a trajectory
for inflation satisfactory, at least for the next couple of years if not over the longer
term. Your projection submissions, however, as well as your comments yesterday,
suggest that many of you see less vigor in aggregate demand than the Greenbook does
as well as appreciable downside risks—an outlook that might argue against
alternative C. The Greenbook provided several alternative simulations involving
greater weakness in housing and larger fallout from financial stress that illustrate
some prominent risks to spending; they suggested that the path of the federal funds
rate might need to run ¾ percentage point or more below baseline should such
weakness in aggregate demand eventuate.
The choice of alternative B could be consistent with a modal expectation along
the lines of the Greenbook coupled with appreciable concerns about downside risks
and a judgment that you need to await additional information before deciding whether
to ease policy further. As noted in alternative B, section 2, of either version, the
statement would in effect explain the decision to stand pat, first, by recognizing that
economic growth last quarter was solid and perhaps conveying the implicit
suggestion that the economy was likely to continue to expand at an acceptable pace,
even if growth were to slow temporarily; second, by noting that strains in financial
markets have eased somewhat on balance; and third, by indicating that the domestic
4

The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4).

October 30-31, 2007

83 of 162

economy apart from housing has proven resilient and that the global economy
remains strong. At the same time, the statement would indicate that the Committee is
concerned about downside risks to growth, explicitly citing the potential effect of
tightening credit conditions. Regarding inflation, the language would be identical to
that used in September. The statement would conclude by indicating that, on balance,
the Committee saw the downside risks to growth as the greater policy concern.
As Bill Dudley noted, the market was all but certain as of yesterday that you will
ease policy today 25 basis points. Today, in response to the economic data released
earlier, intermediate and longer-term interest rates have risen somewhat; however,
futures quotes still suggest that investors now see high odds that you will ease policy
today. Thus, the announcement of an unchanged stance of policy would come as a
considerable surprise to markets. To be sure, the assessment under alternative B that
the downside risks are the greater policy concern and its implication that further
easing might well be forthcoming before long would soften the blow. But a selloff in
bond and equity markets would no doubt ensue. Moreover, financial asset prices
could remain volatile for a time, as investors attempted to recalibrate their
expectations of the probable path of monetary policy going forward.
Concern about such market reactions clearly would not persuade you to ease
policy at this meeting if you judged that an unchanged stance of policy would likely
be more consistent with maximum employment and stable prices, and hitching
monetary policy to market expectations would make for extremely poor economic
outcomes. But especially in circumstances of persisting financial strains, concern
about unnecessarily adding to those strains might incline you a bit more toward
easing, as in alternative A, if you were already strongly leaning that way today based
on your view of economic and financial fundamentals. As I noted yesterday, your
economic projections suggest that most of you believe that the stance of policy should
be eased within the next six to twelve months, and many of you indicated that some
easing was appropriate imminently. You may see several reasons for preferring to
move earlier rather than later. In particular, you may think that a timely reduction in
interest rates could be valuable now in buoying household, business, and investor
confidence. Yesterday the Chairman noted the possibility of a vicious cycle
involving a deteriorating macroeconomic outlook and tightening credit conditions.
By bolstering confidence in the outlook, easing policy as expected could help reduce
concerns about deteriorating economic fundamentals and declining asset values.
Beyond reducing the risks of nonlinear responses, easing policy as expected by
market participants would support growth of aggregate demand over time through the
usual channels.
Of course, you may also be worried about a possible increase in inflation. Such
concerns may reflect a variety of factors—the further sharp increase in oil prices of
recent weeks, the depreciation of the dollar, accelerating unit labor costs, and perhaps
the relatively high level of resource utilization. But given the recent good inflation
performance, you may feel that downside risks to growth are the more immediate
danger and believe that further easing today to address those risks is warranted. You

October 30-31, 2007

84 of 162

may also believe that, should the easing eventually appear to have been unnecessary,
you could act as quickly to remove stimulus as you did to put it in place. If you were
inclined toward easing policy another 25 basis points at this meeting, you would need
to confront the question of the appropriate statement language. In both versions of
alternative A, the first two sentences of section 2 are similar to those proposed for
alternative B. But rather than emphasizing remaining downside risks, the statement
would then repeat most of the “help forestall” language used in September. The
language proposed for the inflation paragraph in both versions is identical to the
corresponding paragraph suggested for alternative B; again, the language shown in
the October 31 version suggests a bit more concern about inflation risks than the
September language. Finally, both versions of alternative A would characterize the
upside risks to inflation as roughly balancing the downside risks to growth. This
indication might well lead market participants to reduce the nearly two-thirds odds
that they currently place on another quarter-point easing in December and might trim
the extent of the overall easing of policy anticipated over the next year or so. Thus,
implementation of alternative A also could prompt some further backup in market
interest rates.
In closing, let me remind the Committee that the September trial run highlighted
the potential for inconsistencies between the results of the projections survey and the
Committee’s statement. Your latest forecast submissions indicated that, while a
minority of you sees the risks to inflation as skewed to the upside, a slight majority
perceives the risks to total inflation as broadly balanced, and a more-sizable majority
judges that the risks to core inflation are in balance. These results could be seen as
incongruent with the draft statements for some of the alternatives. For example,
alternative A references upside risks to inflation. Several considerations might
explain this apparent inconsistency. For example, your responses on skews in the
projections survey may capture only the subjective probabilities that you attach to
various outcomes, while you may see the statement language as capturing not only
the odds but also the economic costs associated with those outcomes. Or perhaps the
upside risks to inflation referenced in the statement should be interpreted as reflecting
the views of all members not just of the majority who saw inflation risks as balanced,
thus encompassing the views of those in the minority who see upside inflation risks.
Finally, I am worried about the possibility that some of you may have provided your
numerical projections under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy but may
not have applied that assumption as well to your individual risk assessments. In your
upcoming remarks, you may wish to address whether there is any tension between
your own views of the distribution of risks and the risk assessments in the draft
statements. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Brian, do I have it correctly that the blue shows the change
between the Bluebook and the current version?
MR. MADIGAN. Yes.

October 30-31, 2007

85 of 162

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So the only changes from the Bluebook in A-3 and C-3 are
that there’s a more expansive description of the inflation risks, and in A-4 there is simply the
phrase “after this action.” Those are the only changes from the Bluebook. Are there any
questions for Brian? President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Brian, we don’t have a long history of announcing the risk assessments
contemporaneously with the decision, so I’m curious as to your take on the likely response. In
alternative B, section 4, it says that the Committee views the downside risks to economic growth
as the greater policy concern, and I think you said that markets would likely see a funds rate
decline as forthcoming. What has been our experience when we have invoked this type of risk
and what has the actual policy been afterward?
MR. MADIGAN. I’m not sure I could answer that without doing a fair amount of
research, President Evans. My sense is that, as I think I indicated in my remarks, for the policy
decision today there is effectively 23 basis points or so of easing still built in. So there would be
a considerable surprise in that dimension. According to a chart that I am looking at, the biggest
upside surprise in the federal funds rate that we have experienced since the era of policy
announcements began in 1994 has been more on the order of 12 basis points. So that dimension
of alternative B would, I think, be pretty significant. I don’t really know how much the
assessment of risks might moderate the shock. I think there would be some moderating effect
there, but it would be limited.
MR. EVANS. So as I thought about this briefly, it seemed to me as though it’s not
unusual for us to say that, because of the risks of higher inflation, we don’t feel we’d take action
in subsequent meetings for quite some time. But when we have had this type of assessment—I

October 30-31, 2007

86 of 162

think there have been only a couple of opportunities—usually we’ve had a decline pretty quickly
thereafter.
MR. DUDLEY. I think the market takes the upside risk to inflation as more what central
bankers have to say.
MR. MISHKIN. The mantra.
MR. DUDLEY. Right, and I think that the downside risk would be viewed as more a hint
of the way that the central bank is leaning. So I don’t think they are symmetric.
MR. EVANS. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. I just wanted to ask you for a little more detail about the market’s
reaction to the GDP numbers and the ADP data. You said that it’s the same. Can you be just a
little more precise? Is there any movement at all in terms of the assessment of the federal funds
rate cut at this meeting?
MR. MADIGAN. A very small one, I think.
MR. MISHKIN. About how much?
MR. DUDLEY. November fed funds futures were up 1 basis point, December was up
2 basis points, January fed funds were up 2 basis points, and then as you go further out they are 4
to 5. So it’s fairly small.
MR. MADIGAN. Breakevens were up about 3 basis points across the curve.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. I have two questions. One just came to mind. We are talking about very
recent futures expectations. In light of what you just discussed, what has been the range in the
intermeeting period in terms of the odds of a 25 basis point cut?

October 30-31, 2007

87 of 162

MR. DUDLEY. I think it has been as low as 30 and as high as—it’s nested, because
there is some probability on 50 and some probability on 25. But if you look at the Cleveland
Fed, I think it has ranged from about 30 to about 80.
MR. FISHER. So it has been all over the lot. My question really is maybe not so much
of Brian but just to inform a decision here, or at least to inform an input. There was some
discussion yesterday of strong hints about the need to have insurance—that is, insuring against
the risk of downside economic growth that might be more dramatic than we would like. We did
cut rates 50 basis points at the last meeting. David, when do you assume that kicks in—other
than the psychological effect? I infer from the numbers in the Greenbook that you see it begin to
have an effect on the kind of economic growth we were supposing sometime in the second half
or at the end of the second quarter of next year. Or what is the lag? We have already bought an
insurance policy. The question is, Is it enough? So I’m curious as to what your assumption is as
to when that actually takes grip in the economy.
MR. STOCKTON. It starts immediately—small. The mean lag is about four quarters, so
you get about half of the effect in the first year and the other half of the effect in the second year;
and that, at least according to the models, feeds in relatively smoothly over that period.
MR. FISHER. Did it bump up your estimate for the second half of next year in terms of
economic growth from where it would have been had we not cut rates 50 basis points?
MR. STOCKTON. Yes.
MR. FISHER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there any other questions? President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. Just a follow-up on your comment about thinking about the release
and of uncertainty and risks around inflation and unemployment—it looks as though the

October 30-31, 2007

88 of 162

nomenclature that we’ve used in the assessment of risks was in part intended to get at the
direction of policy in the future. It does seem a little awkward if the language that we’re using in
the assessment of risks looks different from these fairly stark histograms. Since we haven’t gone
through this experiment before, seeing histograms that aren’t consistent with our statement
seems like an awkward start.
MR. MADIGAN. Well, one point to make is that the histograms aren’t in the public
release. They won’t see those data per se.
MR. MISHKIN. They will be. The histograms will be published—yes?
MS. YELLEN. Not the asymmetry of the risk, but it will be described.
MR. MADIGAN. Right.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I think this emphasizes the importance of the point
that Brian made about the opportunity everybody has to revisit their submissions, particularly in
terms of how they think about the risks to the forecast in the wake of a possible move in
monetary policy. We haven’t talked about this in much detail before, but if the expected path of
monetary policy in the near term changes between when you submit and when we clarify, then
that might change a bit and, I would think, would affect what those histograms might look like in
terms of the balance. It won’t affect them dramatically, but it will affect them a little. I’m not
sure it will make them converge fully to the way alternative A, section 4, is written now.
MR. ROSENGREN. Just to follow up on that—we submitted this last Friday, right? I
don’t know if people will know when we submitted it, but it’s not a huge amount of time
between when it was submitted and when we are making an announcement. So if there were a
larger span of time, I would think that awkwardness wouldn’t be as great.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I think your point about the awkwardness is right.

October 30-31, 2007

89 of 162

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have a process question. In this go-round, are we going to talk just about
the policy decision in the statement, or are we supposed to include the discussion of the
projections?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s a separate agenda item.
MR. POOLE. So it will be a separate discussion. That’s what I thought. Okay.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. Are there any other questions for Brian? If not,
President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While the intermeeting period has seen a
mix of good news and bad news, a substantial amount of good news, the net effect on my nearterm outlook, as I said yesterday, has been negative, stemming largely from the continued slide
in housing. I have come around to the view that the slump in housing activity is going to be
deeper and more prolonged than I had thought. Many of you have read the intermeeting news as
positive on the outlook. My sense of my shift in views is that I have come closer to the median
view of my colleagues around the table about the second-half outlook. Taking all of this on
board, my assessment would be that, even given the 50 basis point reduction in the fed funds rate
at the September meeting, the current funds rate is probably somewhat more restrictive than is
desirable. So I would favor a 25 basis point reduction in the fed funds rate at this meeting, along
with a statement that contains no tilt, as in alternative A; and I endorse the passages in blue that
highlight the inflation risks.
Let me first comment on market expectations. You know, they have to influence our
decision, but we need to be careful about that, obviously. I don’t think we should ever be afraid
of disappointing expectations or putting a new outlier in Brian’s chart. At the same time, those

October 30-31, 2007

90 of 162

expectations are a fact, and we have to take into account the likely effect of our action on
markets. As I think Governor Kohn said yesterday, they do contain within them some market
assessment, some information, that we can’t ignore or that we ignore at our peril. So that had
some influence on my decision as well. I’m thinking that there may be a need for an increase
sometime next year if the economy strengthens more than in the staff forecast. In addition, I
have not lost sight of the risk of inflation increasing. In particular, I’d take this opportunity to
endorse the public statement of Governor Kohn that an increase in inflation would not be in the
public interest. [Laughter]
MR. KOHN. I stand by that.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. That would be intrepid of you.
MR. LACKER. Well, I’m hoping that inflation drifts down enough so that pessimists
about adjustment costs will swing around to endorsing a lower numerical objective for inflation.
If we see signs of firming inflation or firming growth early next year, I would hope for a firmer
policy stance accompanied by appropriate communications. So my preference today is a
component of a preferred policy rule that has us responding with alacrity should things firm next
year. That concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll take just a second here because I realize
how difficult today’s decision is and that it involves balancing contrasting and rather elevated
risks. One risk is that the current housing and financial environment will cascade the real
economy immediately into a slowdown, and that would cost output and jobs and prove after all
to involve little effect on rising inflation. To do nothing in this instance, I realize, would at least
seem to be a poor choice.

October 30-31, 2007

91 of 162

The other risk, however, is that inflation is less contained than we would like to think.
Aggregate demand is at least holding and looks firm. Commodity prices, not just energy, show a
rising trend and are unusually high. The dollar has depreciated, as Brian pointed out, and if it
continues to fall, will add to further inflationary pressures. Unit labor costs are increasing, and
these inflationary factors are real and show themselves to be present in TIPS measures and in
terms of expected inflation, as I mentioned yesterday, in a lot of anecdotal discussions that I have
had. To ease further in this instance would also seem to be a poor choice.
I realize that the intensity of these two countervailing forces complicates our decision,
and I know that I might be only one view on this, among others who have a different view. But
as I see it, we are having to choose a policy that involves tradeoffs around these two choices.
One choice is to ease now. We would take an action that is oriented toward the short run, and
the immediate easing could be looked at as an insurance policy, as I have heard it described,
designed to mitigate further the possibility that the current upheaval in the housing and financial
markets will lead to an unwanted slowdown in the real economy. If the economy strengthens, as
President Lacker has pointed out, we can always reverse that easing—so we tell ourselves. The
other choice is to hold firm now. Inflationary risks, as I’ve described above, are real; and while
they are unlikely to affect us in the short run, they most certainly could affect us in the longer run
if we continue to ease. If inflation above acceptable levels gets entrenched into the U.S. and
global economies, make no mistake—as we all have experienced, this has happened before.
Inflation does creep in. It doesn’t jump in—it’s a little at a time. Also, if we ease today and
things don’t turn immediately, we will be reset for another discussion of what the market expects
when we come to December. The cost to remedy inflationary momentum later is also high—
indeed, as we all know.

October 30-31, 2007

92 of 162

So what is the better choice, then, when adjusted for long-run and short-run
considerations regarding these elevated risks? Personally, I think that we should hold where we
are. When I analyze how the U.S. and global economies are performing and look at the
projections for these economies that we shared here, I judge this to be the better long-run
decision. We moved rates down significantly at our last meeting. Indeed, we front-loaded the
action to ensure a strong result. Also, we are very close to neutral, if not there, I realize, and we
need to be slightly firm if we are to hold inflation and inflationary expectations better in check.
It strikes me that inflation is at the higher end of what most individuals prefer. If we need to
move down, we can do so later. It is, in fact, easier to lower rates than to raise them back up.
Our issue today, I think, remains for the moment principally liquidity, and we should remind the
world that we have stepped up to this issue and reassure it that we are ready to meet the need
further—and other needs, if necessary. But for now the risks on both sides of this policy
decision are elevated, and we need to wait, watch, and be ready to act depending on how events
play out.
As to the statement, then, I prefer alternative B for the most part. I would prefer
something along the lines in paragraph 4 that “financial markets remain uncertain,” and then
“thus the Committee will continue . . .” or paragraph 4 in alternative C. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry. You prefer C-4 to B-4, is that what you said?
MR. HOENIG. I do.
MR. KOHN. Including the balanced risks?
MR. HOENIG. Well, what I really prefer is that we go back to our last statement but say,
“Financial markets obviously remain uncertain, and we will watch them. Thus . . .,” and then

October 30-31, 2007

93 of 162

bring in “the Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other factors,”
without the downside risk.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So that is basically the September assessment.
MR. HOENIG. Exactly.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with President Hoenig that this is a
difficult decision between staying where we are—and I would have downside risks to growth on
that—or moving 25, but with more-balanced risks. I think it’s difficult—we are balancing a
number of very difficult things here. On the one hand, the incoming data, as Dave has
emphasized, have been, if anything, stronger than we anticipated on the real economy and
include data for September and some hints for October in here. On the other hand, many
members of the Committee, myself included, have a sense that the real interest rate is still a little
to the high side of where it needs to be to promote full employment and stable prices over time.
We expect the output gap to move over the next couple of quarters, as housing holds down
growth relative to potential. We expect inflation to stay low and inflation expectations, if
anything, perhaps to edge down as people realize that inflation is going to stay at 2 or below. I
wonder whether the 50 basis points we did last time was enough to offset the tighter credit
conditions that have developed and the market disruptions that are going to impede, particularly,
the secondary markets for nonconforming mortgages for some time. This stuff isn’t going to go
away soon, and it’s going to weigh on demand.
Partly as a result of this sense, many of us think that the risks to growth are on the
downside but are still worried about inflation expectations. The risks to growth on the downside
are compounded, as the Chairman and Brian pointed out, by the sense that financial markets are

October 30-31, 2007

94 of 162

still fragile and there is the tail risk of getting into the feedback spiral between concerns about
the real economy and reactions in financial markets. Not the most likely outcome, but certainly a
tail risk.
As I tried to square several circles at the same time, I came down on alternative A:
reducing 25 basis points but going to risks being roughly balanced. I see this as preemptive but
not open ended. I think that combination of preempting some of the tail risk, getting a little
ahead of the possibility, and buying this insurance is helpful. But going to roughly balanced
risks takes out the open-ended sense that we’re on a path toward ever-lower interest rates. I see
the incoming data for inflation as consistent with this. Inflation has been low even with today’s
data. I think the core PCE has been low; the CPI is up a little but not much. I found the ECI data
kind of interesting this morning. I have been a little concerned about labor costs creeping up,
which you could see from some of the compensation data. But the ECI is a good, consistent
measure over time. It is not totally comprehensive. Also, the fact that there is no increase in the
growth rate of the ECI to me is pretty encouraging that underlying cost pressures are not
building. By emphasizing our concerns about inflation—that the risks are roughly balanced—we
are signaling that we are not buying into the full extent of the market expectations for our easing,
and I think that is a good thing. The “roughly balanced” language will raise the hurdle a bit for
ourselves to ease again in December if we have some weak data, but it won’t raise it so high that,
if the data are really weak, we can’t react in a constructive way to change it.
So putting all of this together and admitting that it is a close call, I think that alternative
A—roughly balanced risks—minimizes the deviations from where we want to be, helps us send
the signal about what we think might be coming and what our concerns are, and comes closest to
furthering economic performance toward our objectives. I certainly agree with President Lacker

October 30-31, 2007

95 of 162

that alacrity will be required. I think I actually called it “nimbleness” in the speech I gave—I
want to quote myself again—and that will be very much in the forefront as we go forward next
year, I agree. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of my life-long purposes has been to
make the world safe for ambivalence and indecision. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. How is that going?
MR. LOCKHART. Well, I’m gaining ground this morning. [Laughter] Having said
that, I prefer that we reduce the federal funds rate target 25 basis points. My thought process is
that the softening of economic activity, at least in some sectors, and the lower estimates suggest
that the neutral rate of interest may be falling. The downside risks to economic growth and the
evidence of lingering liquidity issues are to me good arguments for taking steps that insure
against an inadvertently restrictive policy stance.
With regard to the policy statement, I am going to continue to use the inexperience
excuse as long as I can, even though we have some newer members. But just a few remarks.
The language in the rationale section of alternative A most closely reflects my assessment of the
situation, but I am not entirely comfortable with any of the options for the assessment of risk.
The real economic outlook faces uncertainties on the downside that are difficult to characterize.
Because of that, I am skeptical that we can credibly claim near-term downside growth risks to be
roughly in balance with upside inflation risks, as is done in alternatives A and C. That said, I
worry that the wording in alternative B would be interpreted as a rather significant loss of
confidence in the economy and a signal that another rate reduction is probable in the near term.
At this point, I’d prefer not to send a signal that another rate cut is most likely in December.

October 30-31, 2007

96 of 162

Since our last meeting, expectations were centered on no change in the fed funds target
today until a string of weak housing and earnings reports moved the probabilities strongly in the
direction of a rate reduction. Thus, judging from the evolution of market expectations since our
September meeting, the assessment of risk language in our last statement was sufficient to
convince financial market participants that our decision on the funds rate is being driven by
incoming data. As I said, I think the assessment of risk statement should try to recognize the
uncertainties inherent in our growth forecasts—and those uncertainties are greater than those
associated with our inflation forecast—but without tilting expectations in favor of a future rate
cut. As I said in my remarks yesterday, it is quite possible that we will enter another period in
which headline inflation numbers exceed the trend suggested by core measures. If that is even a
short-lived problem, my opinion is that—and this is based on the Bluebook version—we would
be well served to note that fact by adopting the language in alternative C, section 3. However, I
do note that the new language, as presented this morning, in alternative A, section 3, is quite
helpful because it largely incorporates the language in alternative C. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Two weeks ago I was pretty adamant in my
own mind that the recommendation I would be offering was no change, but I have reluctantly
tilted in the other direction and favor a 25 basis point cut. I have changed my mind because of
really two things. First, in my discussions with our directors, in my phone calls before the
meeting, and around the table yesterday, I think there has been fairly pervasive anecdotal
information indicating a soft economy—not disastrously weak but just soft, certainly softer than
the hard data that have been coming in. Second, the financial markets are still unsettled, and
with the markets putting a very high probability on action, I am concerned about the effects of

October 30-31, 2007

97 of 162

violating that market expectation. I ask myself how big a risk it would be to violate the market
expectation, and I am not really sure. But I am not sure that I want to find out either. It is just
not a risk that I really want to run.
That said, it is very important that we understand—I think everybody does, but I want to
state it—that there can be no equilibrium in the economy if all we ever do is follow the market
expectation. We have to get out front, and we have to help define what that market expectation
is going to be. I think there are a number of things that we could do coming up to the December
meeting not only in the statement but also in speeches and comments that we make. I favor the
alternative A language for the most part, but I am a little concerned about the assessment of risk
statement. If it is really true that upside risk to inflation is mantra, then what is operative in the
statement is downside risk to growth in terms of shaping market expectations about the
Committee’s direction in the future.
As I try to think through the downside risks to growth in the coming weeks or the next
few months, we can’t really do anything about what is going to happen in the remainder of the
fourth quarter or the first part of next year. But when I think about the period over which the
policy action makes a difference, I am not sure that the risks are really skewed to the downside.
We could well see the recovery of normal market processes proceeding, plus the lower interest
rates, giving more or less equal probability in the second, third, or fourth quarter of next year of a
50 basis point upside surprise or a 50 basis point downside surprise in the growth rate of GDP.
So I would like to see us work on the language for paragraph 4. Given that paragraph 3
includes risks to inflation, we might concentrate just on the growth risk, and we might say
something like, “After this policy action, the upside and downside risks to economic growth in
coming quarters are roughly balanced.” Because I think this will be the thing that the market

October 30-31, 2007

98 of 162

keys off of in terms of a hint about our future policy or likely policy direction. I would like to
see us go as far as we can in the direction of saying that we think we’ve done enough, at least for
the time being. Let’s sit, wait, and see what happens, providing that the information comes in
more or less as expected and we don’t have any big surprises on that.
Looking further ahead, we are at a point where we are really within reach of bringing the
inflation rate down to about 1½ percent on a long-run basis. We’re also at a point that, in
coming meetings, we could throw that option away. If we go too far or hang on with lower rates
too long, then we’re going to end up eighteen months from now looking at a situation in which
we have rekindled some inflation pressures. So this is a critical time in terms of not going too far
and also of being willing to take back some of these cuts. I guess the way I look at it is that, if
5¼ percent was the appropriate funds rate in July or June, before the financial distress really took
hold, it probably can’t be too far off where we want to be once the financial turmoil is largely
over. We are going to end up substantially below that if we cut 25 basis points today. So I think
it’s important that we not go too far and that we try to set market expectations that we have this
much longer run view and that we’re not just reacting to the very short run data on the real
economy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The last time we sat around this table, I and
many of you argued for what the markets described as a surprisingly aggressive 50 basis point
rate cut. At that time, the baseline Greenbook forecast was for 25 basis points, 25 in subsequent
meetings, and then flat thereafter. Our rationale was that we were trying to act preemptively,
trying to get ahead of the curve, to limit some of the potential spillover effects from what we
then believed to be a weakening housing market, perhaps a somewhat softer labor market, and

October 30-31, 2007

99 of 162

the financial turmoil. We also argued that higher-than-normal tail risk loomed out there, that it
was associated with the financial market meltdown, and that it warranted aggressive action to
help forestall the possibility of that. In the forecast that we submitted in September, and we all
submitted a forecast, the appropriate policy varied. Nine of us submitted appropriate policy as
being consistent with the Greenbook, which was 25, 25, and then constant. Of the remaining
eight, seven of us had a 50 basis point cut in September, which we did. Many of those, including
myself, had some further cuts to the funds rate but further out in the economy, more like in ’08,
later in ’08, and ’09, as we move toward more-stable inflation, expectations coming down, a
recovered economy, and so forth. I was certainly in that camp as well, and in fact, most people
ended up with a funds rate forecasted at either 4¼ or 4½ percent—little differences but not
much. In September, only two of us anticipated appropriate policy as dropping 75 basis points
before the end of ’07.
Of course, we all have the luxury, fortunately, of changing our minds in response to data
and other things, and certainly all of us are doing our best to read the tea leaves of the economy,
both aggregate and within our regions, and that influences the color and texture that we put
around our forecast. We all work very hard at that, and I respect those efforts. But I think it is
important that, as a Committee, we enforce discipline and systematic behavior on ourselves as
our views evolve, particularly as those views influence policy choices. Without that discipline,
without that systematic behavior, I find it very difficult to figure out how I am going to
communicate to the public about what monetary policy is doing and why. It makes both our
commitment and our credibility, either to inflation or to employment growth, more difficult to
substantiate. It makes transparency in general more difficult. All of those things—commitment,
credibility, and transparency—are important elements of what contributes to a stable economic

October 30-31, 2007

100 of 162

environment. Now I have tried to impose that discipline about policy on myself by focusing on
the incoming data, trying to focus on how those data cause me to revise my outlook for the real
economy, not for tomorrow or next month particularly but for the coming quarters. After all, the
monetary policies we have just been talking about operate with somewhat of a lag. In that sense,
I think there has been a lot of discussion by myself and others around the table that we are datadriven, that we are forecast-based in how we think about our policy choices, and that we try to
take a somewhat longer run view. I think that view is important to communicate to the public.
I suspect that at the end of our last meeting—certainly I can speak for myself—many, if
not most, of us probably would not have anticipated that we would cut again at this meeting.
Perhaps some of you did. Certainly, your appropriate policy paths in our forecast at the last
meeting didn’t suggest that. But we wouldn’t have anticipated cutting unless we thought that the
outlook for the economy had noticeably deteriorated. So what has really happened since the last
meeting? Well, the collective forecasts that we submitted—in terms of risk assessments, ranges,
medians, and however you want to look at them—hardly budged. The Greenbook forecast didn’t
change very much. The economy generally had better-than-expected news on many fronts—not
hugely better but certainly the surprises were on average to the upside for most of us given our
forecast from last time. I thought we generally agreed that the risk of serious financial
meltdown, while perhaps it hadn’t vanished, had mitigated at least somewhat. As a consequence,
neither the Greenbook nor our collective FOMC forecasts moved very much. To the extent that
they did, they actually moved up a little.
Based on that forecast and on the data that came in, I’m in a very troubled position in
figuring out how to justify in my mind additional rate cuts at this meeting. Had this meeting
been held two weeks ago, as President Poole suggested, before the market’s reaction to the write-

October 30-31, 2007

101 of 162

downs in some of the financial institutions, before the fairly dramatic flip-flop in the fed funds
rate futures market about the assessment of a future rate cut, I certainly would not have been in
favor of a rate cut at that time, and I suggest that each of you should ask yourself the question
that Bill did: Would I have chosen to cut rates at that time? I certainly would have also resisted
the temptation, arising from those data and what has happened over the past two weeks, to be in
any great rush to think we needed to call a special meeting of the FOMC to consider additional
rate cuts. My attitude would have been that these financial markets are volatile and they are
bouncing around an awful lot, we understand that there are risks, but let’s wait and get the data
on the real economy and see how it is evolving and make appropriate decisions at the time.
What worries me is that we run the risk of being whipsawed here by market expectations or by
the financial markets that are moving around in a very volatile way. That leaves me with some
concern that we may be putting ourselves in a position of either responding too much to these
volatile markets or being accused by markets of being bullied by the financial markets.
So at this point, my take is to say that we are going to get a lot of data between now and
December. We are going to get two more employment reports, as we have discussed. We are
going to get some more information about retail sales and consumption. I would prefer to keep
my own approach to discipline-based policymaking by looking at the forecast and waiting for the
data to tell me whether my forecast deteriorated significantly. If it has, I will be the first to argue
for an additional rate cut in December if I think it is called for.
Right now we have a difficult time justifying a decision. On what grounds are we going
to justify it, particularly in a more systematic fashion? I think that creates problems for us. As
we have already been discussing, it is creating somewhat of a problem in the language of the
statement, and I will come back to that in a minute. But I also think that, without a very

October 30-31, 2007

102 of 162

articulate rationale in the data and in reasoning that supports a systematic approach to policy, we
run the risk of being capricious or arbitrary. I think we are in a situation, as Kevin Warsh said
yesterday and Tom Hoenig spoke about, when many of us view inflation risks as more fragile
perhaps than they have been recently, particularly more fragile in an environment in which we
are cutting rates. I think that we run the risk, more so now perhaps than in other times, that
inflation expectations might be at risk. I don’t want to raise those inflation expectations. They
are much harder to get down. You can’t act nimbly to deal with movements in expected
inflation.
I also think we have to ask ourselves the question—and this ties into the balance of risks
issue—if we choose to cut today when our forecast hasn’t declined and suppose the data between
now and December look as they have for the past six weeks—kind of in line with what we
expected, not much different one way or another with nothing really falling out of bed or
booming—on what basis in that meeting would we choose or not choose to cut again? At this
meeting we have had a hard time grappling with the criteria that we are using. If we are not very
explicit about those criteria, we could find ourselves in the same boat next time. I think this is
related to Tom’s point that, once we start on the path of making explicit what our expectations
are or what the market is going to be expecting us to do without having a firm basis for saying
we are doing this because of X or Y, we are going to find ourselves in an awkward position in
December.
So I share Brian’s concern about the assessment of risk language in alternative A being
balanced when it seems to be out of touch with the way the Committee has described things.
Again, I think that puts us in an awkward position of trying to balance those two things. So with
that, I appreciate the time, Mr. Chairman. On net, I am troubled by a cut today. I would much

October 30-31, 2007

103 of 162

prefer to wait until December and to assess the data that come in. If a 50 basis point cut in
December is required, so be it; but I feel as though we would have a firmer basis then for making
that decision. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Let the record show I am asking this with a smile.
President Plosser, you are not really suggesting that your colleagues, if they have evolved in their
view, are undisciplined, unsystematic, or capricious in their rationale for that evolution, are you?
MR. PLOSSER. No, I am just saying that the communication of that rationale is tricky,
and I did say that people are making their best efforts to make their forecast. I explained my
view of how I discipline my forecast and how I discipline my policymaking.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Just to clarify about the submission you presented—
you have, as I think you said yesterday, a 25 basis point cut early in the year, in the first quarter?
MR. PLOSSER. First quarter perhaps, but that was conditioned on inflation and
inflationary expectations remaining well behaved.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found the choice between alternatives A and B
to be a tough call. I’ve struggled with this over the past week, and in the end I find the arguments
for alternative A for a 25 basis point rate cut more persuasive. I have several reasons for this
judgment.

October 30-31, 2007

104 of 162

First, as I argued yesterday, further action to my mind is appropriate, even leaving aside the
recent financial shock. With output near potential and inflation near my objective, the stance of
policy should be close to neutral, and while we can debate exactly what the equilibrium real interest
rate is—that’s an important discussion to me—it appears that, even after our action in September,
policy is somewhat restrictive. I agree with President Plosser’s view that we need to maintain some
consistency in our thinking over time, and I would say that I expressed this identical view at our last
meeting and said at that time that I did envision a 75 basis point cut during 2007. So my views
haven’t changed, and the data that we have seen in the intermeeting period haven’t suddenly pushed
me in the direction of this move—instead, if anything, slightly away from it, but I regard those data
as largely uninformative. So my views really haven’t changed about this, but it seems to me that the
argument that we should be moving toward neutral does allow for quite a bit of flexibility in the
timing of an additional rate cut. It doesn’t have to be something that we do in October. We could
do it in December, or it could wait until January. So that argument in and of itself doesn’t
completely persuade me that we have to do it today.
But I do think it would be prudent to act today for a couple of reasons. The first has to do
with the effects of the financial shock of the summer. When we came into the meeting last month,
we faced credit conditions that were quite restrictive, and our goal was to offset that shock to avoid
a significant economic slowdown. I think the favorable inflation results over the previous six
months did give us the flexibility to take strong action, which we did. My judgment is that we have
had some success so far. Financial conditions appear to be easier than they were in September, and
arguably, as I said yesterday, I think we may have roughly neutralized the shock. But an important
element in our success has been the decline in Treasury rates along with the further decline we’ve
seen in the dollar and the increase in equity prices since we last met. Those changes are supported

October 30-31, 2007

105 of 162

by the market’s expectations that we will ease further at this meeting and beyond. In other words, if
we don’t ease today as the market expects, then rates may move up, and that raises concern to my
mind about whether we will have accomplished the goal of offsetting the restrictive effects of the
recent financial shock. A second reason for easing today is the asymmetric nature of the risks we
face in achieving our goals. I do see some upside risk to inflation although I have not read the
recent increase in five-to-ten-year inflation compensation as really reflecting a market perception of
a deterioration in long-term inflation expectations. In my view, the more serious risk is the one that
our Chairman discussed yesterday of unleashing negative nonlinear dynamics in the real and
financial economy that could be difficult to reverse. Conditions in housing markets and their
possible implications for housing prices and, in turn, consumption are at the center of these
concerns. In addition, although liquidity in financial markets has improved, I think the markets are
still rather fragile and subject to further sudden disruptions.
I’m comfortable with the wording in alternative A, including the balance of risk assessment.
Through the fed funds rate being 25 basis points lower, I do see the upside risk to inflation as being
roughly balanced with the downside risk to growth. I think the statement does give us sufficient
flexibility to respond in whatever way we need to, and that includes the possibility of taking back
some of this easing should there be upside surprises. I do think that it’s important to signal to
markets that this is not yet another step in a planned series of continuing rate cuts.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, find myself torn between
alternative A and alternative B and have been anguishing over them much of the last week figuring
out where I come out. The economic outcome detailed in both Boston’s and the Board’s forecasts
with no change in interest rates seems reasonable. The evidence since the last meeting indicates that

October 30-31, 2007

106 of 162

there may have been more strength in the real economy than we expected in the third quarter; and
financial markets have been recovering, but they are certainly not back to normal. The risks are
clearly on the downside, and our forecast expects a weak fourth quarter. So certainly an argument
for alternative B is to cut when it is clearer that the fourth quarter will be weak or we have data of
more-significant collateral damage from the housing sector. The argument for alternative A would
seem to be that we should take out more insurance against the downside risks. The costs for such
action are not great; and given the downside risk, some additional insurance is not unreasonable.
However, we have discussed the modal forecast at some length, but our rigor around the tail is quite
limited, making it difficult to determine how often and how much insurance should be taken out
against downside risk. Thus, I prefer to wait until there are more data that the economy is
weakening, which I think is likely to happen.
Just to comment on the assessment of risks—when I look at the uncertainty in terms of GDP
growth, I think of the histograms. That’s quite stark. If the major concern we have is downside
pressure on prices of housing, which is my concern—that housing prices continue to decline and
housing gets much worse—I think 25 basis points is probably a small premium to pay. But I doubt
that I would change where I would put the weighting even with a 25 basis point cut. I think the
housing scenario that is detailed in the Greenbook will still be there whether or not we cut the 25
basis points, and my guess is that between now and December we’ll have more confirmation that it
is a concern.
Whatever we do in terms of the language, we need it to be consistent and accurate, and I am
a little worried about the language in alternative A being consistent and accurate with what we are
going to portray in our uncertainty of risks if we show those histograms. So if we’re showing the
histograms, regardless of whether or not we have a 25 basis point cut, I think the alternative B

October 30-31, 2007

107 of 162

language is more consistent with at least what we put down. Unless people think that, with the 25
basis point cut, there is a big shift in the uncertainty and the risks to GDP growth, I do worry about
how that will play out in the market and what kind of a tension there will be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. If the language in alternative A, section 4—the assessment of risk—were
simply about the likelihood of rate changes in either direction and didn’t say anything about growth
and inflation, would you view that as inconsistent with the assessments in our projection?
MR. ROSENGREN. No. If the goal is to try to convey that we aren’t necessarily going to
cut rates again, that is different from an assessment that there’s a downside risk that housing will get
much worse. So whatever we put in that should reflect what we actually want to convey and
certainly shouldn’t be inconsistent with histograms that we’re going to be publishing at the same
time.
MR. LACKER. I asked this, Mr. Chairman, because I’ve said this before on a couple of
occasions: The awkwardness about the assessment of risk statement is that it talks about rates but it
talks about them using a code about growth and inflation rather than talking about the rates
themselves.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just for clarification—and, Brian, you can correct me—we are
not going to publish the histogram showing the risks. We will describe verbally, generally
speaking, the Committee’s views. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find myself in agreement with so many things
that have been said already, no matter how the conflict may appear. This is a close call. I think it’s
a tough decision. I have, frankly, gone back and forth in thinking about the nuances here. It is the
case that the data have been better than I expected at the time of our September meeting. The ADP

October 30-31, 2007

108 of 162

report this morning sort of continues that. It didn’t have to work out that way, but 106,000 is a
pretty strong number. I’m still trying to figure out exactly how to project that to payroll
employment. The bad news that we have seen in terms of surveys has hardly been surprising, given
our views and what we would have expected in September. So I found myself grappling with many
of the ideas that President Plosser was talking about earlier in terms of data dependence and our
decision and discussion in September. One view is that 50 basis points in September was seen as
enough, and we would be judging our future actions on the basis of deterioration in our forecast—
data that come in worse than that or some information about risks that are hard to quantify but we
thought would be important. I haven’t seen the impetus for that. So that’s one view. Then the
other view is the risk-management perspective. Maybe many people, President Yellen included,
thought that more than 50 was required but only 50 in September was really achievable without
startling markets. So there’s a tension there.
Mr. Chairman, I really enjoyed your speech in St. Louis, when you talked about different
responses to different types of uncertainty. With the sort of standard Brainard response, when the
economy might be changing but we have a lot of uncertainties, we go slowly and we look at it.
Juxtaposed against that are other types of risk, such as the financial risks, where things could be
moving much more quickly and we don’t fully appreciate the potency of policy and what we can do
against certain tail risks. In that case, the robust control type of approach suggests that we should do
more; then in the event that we find that policy is very effective, we can reverse it. Of course,
reversing it is important—we talked about that last time, too.
It seems to me that we’re close to the limits of initial risk management. That’s how I’ve
thought about this, and I thought that Governor Kohn’s comment that we shouldn’t view this as an
open-ended commitment to risk management was very important. After all, how can you ever

October 30-31, 2007

109 of 162

argue that more insurance won’t help against some catastrophe, some unforeseen tail risk that hasn’t
yet happened? There is a lot of value to setting a benchmark stopping point for how you would
respond to that tail risk. Then if other evidence intervenes to make you reassess the likelihood of
that tail risk or the cost of it, then there’s reason to do more. But I think there’s value to putting the
benchmark out there. Another way to stop this insurance is if we end up balancing the risk. The
actions taken move our inflation risk up, and we’ve had some concerns about that. I’m actually
pretty comfortable with the inflation risks, and people have reminded me that I’m pushing this
pretty far. I’ve taken more comfort from our ability to forecast inflation than perhaps others
would—it seems to have a pretty reasonable trajectory. But as we continue to move toward moreaccommodative policy in the hopes of addressing a tail risk, I think those risks go up, too.
As I looked at table 1 and I struggled with the rate decision, it seemed to me that the balance
of risks was more important, and what got my attention early on was the risk assessment under
alternative A. I thought it was important to project our assessment that risks were a little more
balanced. I can easily imagine that we’ll have reasons to reduce the fed funds rate because we think
that r* is lower, but it’s purely opportunistic to take advantage of that now. We could have done
that several meetings ago, but we can do it opportunistically. So I’m okay with the action of
25 basis points today, and I think that the balanced risk assessment is important. We probably do
need to think about the linkages with our projections; I hadn’t really taken full account of that
myself. That will put me and, I hope, many of us much closer to the views that President Plosser
expressed in terms of data dependence because I think that the risks will be balanced in how the
data continue to roll out in the intermeeting period. So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.

October 30-31, 2007

110 of 162

MR. MISHKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I take the view that a cut today is justified on
the basis that keeping rates where they currently are leaves us with a lot of downside risk. That’s
exactly what I’ve been hearing from other people. If there is, in fact, downside risk, why not move
today? I would be very troubled by not changing and still using the language in alternative B
because it says there’s a lot of downside risk. Then there is the problem of why we are sitting there
and not doing anything. On just the straight economic issues, I think that a cut could be justified. In
particular, I was one of the people who advocated a cut at this meeting. In fact, I was being a bit—I
don’t know what the right word is—flamboyant when I suggested a cut of 50 basis points and then
that we might move back up 25 basis points. I was trying to make the point that I was very
concerned about the macroeconomic risk, the potential for a downward spiral of financial disruption
leading to problems in the real sector and then feeding back on the financial markets, and really felt
that we needed to keep ahead of the curve.
What is key is that the response to our actions on September 18 was almost textbook perfect
in the sense that the markets really got the message that we were not going to be asleep at the wheel.
As a result, the macro risk was taken out of these markets, and we achieved exactly the kind of
signaling that we intended. So clearly I do not feel that we need to get ahead of the curve in that
sense, the way I did last time. Also very important in my thinking about the macro issues is that I
think inflation expectations are contained. We have been able to achieve that. In particular, there is
a bit of concern about inflation compensation having gone up in terms of the spread between
nominal rates and TIPS. But the analysis that I’ve heard from people who are much more
knowledgeable about the way yield curves operate is that the way to interpret this is that there’s an
increase in uncertainty about what inflation would be. I hope that our communications strategy will
help in that regard. In fact, that provision of information will actually help the markets in the

October 30-31, 2007

111 of 162

current environment. Furthermore, the Michigan survey has, if anything, gotten better in terms of
inflation expectations. I always get a little nervous about asking regular people what they think
because if you ask them what they’re watching on TV, they’re never going to tell you that they’re
watching Vanna White. They’ll tell you that they’re watching ballet or the History Channel.
[Laughter] But I don’t see a problem there, and that the ECI numbers came in the way they did also
gives me some confidence on the inflation front.
I am very concerned about Charlie’s issue—I always call President Plosser “Charlie”
because we have known each other such a long time—about being led by the markets. It is very
important that we not get into that box. I worry about that, but I am a bit less worried about it in this
context in that we affirmed last meeting that we were not being led by the markets because we sure
as heck surprised them. So the fact that we don’t surprise them this time to me does not create a
pattern that we’re just doing whatever the market tells us.
I also want to raise a consideration that I think deserves some emphasis, which is thinking
about scenarios of what may happen. This relates to what Bill talked about, but I want to be a little
more explicit. I want to ask myself what might happen as a result of our policy actions today and
what the implications might be for the economy. In particular, let’s think about the case of our
doing alternative B. In that case, I think there is a significant probability that the markets would
react quite negatively and that the macro risk that we took out by our action on September 18 might
creep back into the credit markets. I’m actually very worried about the skittishness of the credit
markets. When you’re in a financial-disruption type of world, things are much more nonlinear. So
I would have no disagreement at all with Charlie on the issue that, if you are in a normal situation,
then you definitely do not want to be led by the markets at all. But I think that we do have to worry
about market considerations a bit more in the current situation, when we could have a negative

October 30-31, 2007

112 of 162

reaction to what we do. That creates problems in the credit markets, and then that weakens the
outlook for the economy and there is an issue about what do we do then. If we then cut in
December and cut more than 50 basis points, that’s really bad. Or if we don’t cut and things head
south, that could be very, very problematic.
But I do not think that cutting today will have very negative effects on inflation
expectations. However, I do think that the issue of going forward is very important, and this relates
to the statement. I strongly agree that we need a much stronger balance and an indication that our
action today—if we do what I suggest, which is to cut 25 basis points—does not mean that we
expect to cut at the next meeting or further out. We really need to make that very clear. The
statement will be one part of it, although I worry very much about the issue that we always put
much too much weight on the statement and that we don’t have other means of communicating.
I’m not sure what to do about this; I’ve been thinking about it and haven’t come up with any good
answers. But there are issues in terms of how other central banks communicate things beyond the
statement that are hard to communicate with fifteen words rather than something more extensive.
So my view—and it is reflected in my projections—is that, if we cut 25 basis points, it’s not
clear to me that the balance of risks is so much to the downside. I think the risks to the downside
have been very substantially eliminated—not that they aren’t still there to some extent. I think they
are but not really as much, and I think that is true of the actions on September 18 and today.
Because I’m never very precise in my language—as you know, I tend to say pitiful things—
somebody will craft this much better than I do. But I’m wondering about the assessment of risk.
Let me make a suggestion, although I’m not sure this is the best way to do it. We need to
emphasize that it’s not just the upside risks to inflation but also the downside risks to the economy
that have lessened. It is also important when we have a 25 basis point cut not to say to the markets

October 30-31, 2007

113 of 162

that we’re so worried about the economy. One possibility might be, for example, to say that “the
Committee judges that after this action the upside risks to inflation roughly balance the somewhat
reduced downside risks to growth.” So we would not be saying that there isn’t some downside risk
but that it’s not really as strong as we thought. It’s certainly not as strong as we thought on
September 18. But I think that, with this kind of reduction in rates, it would reduce the risk. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. It’s a little past 10:30. Coffee is available. Why
don’t we recess until 11:00? Thank you.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let’s recommence with President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Flying home last time I thought it would have
been nice to have been at the Bank of China and cut 37½ basis points. [Laughter] I don’t want to
repeat what has already been said at the table because so much has been said. But it is important to
note that, since we last met, the data on the economy are stronger. Some of us have expressed
concerns about inflation. Credit markets, as I said yesterday, are at least in remission, if they
haven’t fully recovered, and are in better shape than they were. Listening to the arguments, I took
particular note of President Poole’s comment that he’s not sure that he wants to find out what the
market reaction would be if we did not cut rates 25 basis points. I lived through three market
corrections as a market operator, 1974-75, 1987, and 2001. I lived through a dollar crisis as a public
servant in the U.S. Treasury. And I haven’t heard a person yet talk about some of the risk. The
Riksbank, by the way, last night and the Mexicans raised rates; but more important, the Europeans
are talking tough because of their concerns about inflation. I am worried about the pernicious

October 30-31, 2007

114 of 162

effects of inflation. I think President Hoenig hit the nail on the head when he said it’s easier to
lower than to raise.
I would simply counsel, since I don’t have a vote, that we should consider the value of
keeping our powder dry. It’s very dangerous in my opinion for policymakers to be driven into a
cul-de-sac by futures markets. In response to the question I asked earlier, the markets have been all
over the lot. I am worried that we have too much of a discussion about what markets expect of us
since the fed funds rate is designed—as you have made very clear in your speeches, Mr.
Chairman—to affect the economy and should be so driven. So were I to have a vote today, I would
be thinking along the lines of Presidents Hoenig, Plosser, and Rosengren in terms of their
expression. Everybody has been grappling with this issue. We would make a great wrestling team.
We are thinking very hard about these matters. But in the balance of risks that I see, given the
improvement in the data, I’m tempted to consider the value of another cut as insurance against
weakness. Yet we took a huge step last time—we took out a double-barreled shotgun—and it
seems to be reflected in the data that the staff projected. I’m a little worried not so much of being
accused of being asleep at the wheel but of having our foot too heavily on the accelerator if we cut
25 basis points. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, like several of my colleagues who have
gone ahead of me, find myself torn between alternatives A and B. I also wrestled with many of the
issues that President Plosser articulated so well. I left our September meeting thinking that the 50
basis point cut pretty much put us close to where we needed to be given our outlook, and my
outlook hasn’t changed much in the past six weeks. As I said yesterday, I’m not certain about
whether the weakness that I’m hearing or have heard about during this intermeeting period is simply

October 30-31, 2007

115 of 162

evidence of the business conditions that are unfolding as I thought they would or whether there is
more weakness than I anticipated in September and more weakness than I have reflected in my
projection. The Committee has said repeatedly and for good reason that our decisions are going to
be dependent on the incoming data, and as many have already said, the data seem to be confirming
my outlook. But financial markets do remain on edge. Moreover, many of the incoming data are
backward looking and, hence, don’t provide me with great comfort when we’re trying to ascertain
what might lie ahead. The projection that I submitted for this meeting, as I said yesterday, is rather
fragile, and it wouldn’t take much additional market turmoil or deterioration in household and
business confidence to push my near-term growth outlook even lower. So I think this risk is the
predominant one that we face today, and it is a risk that has weighed heavily on my deliberations for
this meeting.
The assessment of risk language in alternative B addresses these concerns, and I was
contemplating supporting no change in the fed funds rate and the language in alternative B.
However, in the climate that we find ourselves, I believe that just saying that the risk to the outlook
is to the downside isn’t enough. I do think that we should be taking out some insurance against
possible further deterioration in the near-term outlook. So I support a 25 basis point cut in the fed
funds rate target today, and I support the language that’s embodied in alternative A. I believe that
the language does acknowledge the likely slowdown in the economic expansion. It also
acknowledges that, if we take this action today, the risks are roughly balanced, and importantly, it
suggests that further policy easing may not be forthcoming. I also like the language that was added
regarding the recent inflation numbers. Finally, as Governor Mishkin pointed out, it is difficult to
express all of these issues in our short statement. It seems to me that we can draw some comfort
from the fact that the minutes will be providing the public with a greater understanding of the

October 30-31, 2007

116 of 162

different views that were expressed today and some of the challenges that I wrestled with. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I commented yesterday, I think there’s a
respectable chance that by the middle of next year or so the economy will be growing again at a
reasonable rate, and because of the lags between our actions and their effects on the economy, there
is not a lot we can do about what happens in the intervening period anyway. It seems to me that
those kinds of considerations are at the heart of something like the case for alternative B. Leave
well enough alone. There has been some progress in the financial markets, and that step—that is,
taking no action today—would in my view be consistent with long-term achievement of the dual
mandate. But I am an economist. So on the other hand, financial conditions are still unsettled, and
it’s difficult to know the degree of restraint that changes in the cost and availability of credit relative
to conditions back in June will have. It might well be prudent—this is the case for alternative A—to
take additional steps today to err on the side perhaps of doing too much since it seems to me that it
is inevitable that a lot of uncertainty is associated with the economic outlook.
Weighing those two cases, I come down in favor of alternative A but with misgivings, and
let me share those misgivings. I think that there is some chance that financial conditions will remain
unsettled for several more months at a minimum, and so in some sense that part of the environment
may not change very much in the next few months. You pointed out yesterday, Mr. Chairman, that
an important ingredient in the Greenbook forecast is a cessation of the drag from housing roughly
around the middle of next year. Let’s suppose that, in fact, turns out to be precisely correct. That’s
all well and good, but we won’t recognize that it has actually happened with any degree of
confidence, given the flow of data, probably before August or September at the earliest even if the

October 30-31, 2007

117 of 162

anecdotes get a little more positive. So I can see a situation in which the circumstances we confront
over the next series of meetings don’t look very different from the circumstances we’re confronting
today. I think we have to be very careful of not letting good intentions on a decision-by-decision
basis get into what turns out to be a policy error as a consequence of an accumulation of those kinds
of decisions. It’s the time-inconsistency problem obviously, and that gives me some pause even
though I come out at the moment in favor of alternative A.
As far as directive language, for a variety of reasons that others have expressed, I am
uncomfortable about characterizing the balance of risks the way they are characterized in alternative
A. I think that a way we might consider going, although it’s not the most elegant solution, is
perhaps just to drop that first sentence under alternative A. We succeeded at the last meeting in
making it clear that we were data dependent, and you had significant swings in probabilities of
funds rate reductions over the intermeeting period. I think this would leave us in that circumstance.
As President Pianalto pointed out, we have the minutes coming out, and we may well have the
communications package, including the narrative, coming out with it. Obviously there’s a threeweek lag, but it seems to me that that would be an effective way of communicating what we want to
communicate and perhaps of putting the attention on that communications package, which I think
would turn out to be valuable.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Gary, I’m a little puzzled here. I’m not sure I understand. What I
understand from your reasoning is that the key issue is that you don’t want to give an impression
that we are going to keep on cutting.
MR. STERN. That’s right.

October 30-31, 2007

118 of 162

MR. MISHKIN. So if you take that first phrase out, you’ve taken out any issue of balance
of risk. My view is that the markets would interpret this as actually indicating that the Committee
would be more likely to cut in the future.
MR. STERN. Well, I don’t know. If you look at the language from the last meeting, we
were careful not to pre-commit to anything, and it seemed to me that the markets understood the
data dependence. I forget the precise numbers, but I guess the probability of a ¼ percentage point
cut ranged from 30 percent to 100 percent, or more when you think of it in terms of bigger cuts, too.
It seems to me that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. That seemed to work out okay.
MR. MISHKIN. But in this case, if we do alternative A, we will have cut.
MR. STERN. Well, I don’t follow that. We cut even more significantly at the last meeting.
MR. MISHKIN. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me be the most recent but, I guess, not the
last to say that this is a close call. I suppose I take more comfort in that than some around the table
because I am pleased at the progress though it is not perfect and we’re not even back to an honest
view of normal in the financial markets. That it’s a close call suggests to me that the data in the
financial markets are normalizing. I guess the alternative of a close call would have been to have
this be an easy call, and I suspect that the only way this would have been an easy call would be if
we continued to have bad data and bad sentiment in the market. So I think we’re in the realm of a
close call and we shouldn’t completely rue that situation. Again, that’s probably a function of the
resilience of the economy, the resilience in the markets, some time and patience, and maybe even a
little good monetary policy. So I’m okay with that, I think.

October 30-31, 2007

119 of 162

The judgment that we make on moving or not moving ¼ percentage point today matters, but
it strikes me as being considerably less important than what the future path of policy is expected to
be in the capital markets. So I think that the most important judgment we make is in the fourth
paragraph rather than the first paragraph. Let me spend a moment on what the financial markets are
telling us with a degree of certainty which, speaking for myself, is quite surprising. Again, I think
they have responded to real data over the past couple of weeks. They haven’t changed their
probabilities based on utterances from the Chairman or from any of us, and I take some comfort in
that. I might disagree with what they’re saying, but I don’t think that they’re just giving us a mirror
image of our own views. So I take what they’re saying and the certainty with which they have
taken on board that we’re going to move today. It’s not determinative. It’s not dispositive, nor
should it be, but the debt capital markets, at least, think that the economy is worse—worse than the
Greenbook and worse than many of us feel. Again, I would say that I have to take that on board
without giving it too much predictive capability.
I think that Brian is right—given the fragility in the financial markets and given the surprise
that we had for them last time, I wouldn’t want our judgments today to add to that volatility, which I
think would be quite possible. In sum, I would say that I support alternative A as written on this
revised page. I think that, absent having strong language in alternative A, section 4, it would look to
some as though the markets dictated this outcome. I think A-4 and robust balance of risk language
is important so that the markets don’t believe incorrectly that we succumb to what their wants are. I
think that previously, including at our last meeting, when we spoke about uncertainty, they seemed
to understand what that was—that it wasn’t that we’re just calling it uncertainty but we really have
cuts ahead. For better or for worse, they’ve now learned a lesson. Uncertainty with even pretty
good data led us to cut this time, if we end up adopting alternative A. So if we use that same

October 30-31, 2007

120 of 162

uncertainty language, I don’t think it would have the effect that it had last time of letting folks be on
both sides of the bet on whether we would have continued actions. So I’m comfortable with
alternative A, paragraph 4. It is a way of addressing market expectations and addressing our
uncertainties by insurance, but being very clear to the markets that they ought not prejudge nor have
we prejudged the outcome next time. The references to inflation risks there and in alternative A,
paragraph 3, are useful to address some of the broader concerns we have about commodities and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar. So with that, I think that alternative A is the right thing to do
and that it does preserve for us plenty of ability to call it as we see it when we meet next. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you. As I discussed yesterday, I take very much a riskmanagement approach. But I also like the way that President Evans characterized that riskmanagement approach as your having to think about the costs and the benefits and very much focus
on the potential costs. So in thinking about the best way to go, I think about if we do or don’t move,
then what are the downside risks to each? We’ve seen, as many people have said, a lot of progress
in the financial markets. We have also seen a little backing up of some of that progress and a
flattening out over the past couple of weeks. In particular, the one set of markets that we haven’t
seen as much progress in as certainly I would like is housing-related markets. That is for me the
most direct channel between financial turmoil and the real economy.
As I described yesterday, my tail risk scenario is sort of a slow-burn scenario. It is not one
in which this financial turmoil will get out of control and we will have an incredible mess so we
need to cut interest rates to prevent it. I think that was more the concern and focus in our previous
meeting. We have seen improvement, although I don’t think we’ve seen normalization, particularly

October 30-31, 2007

121 of 162

in the housing markets. Given that we’ve had some but not full normalization and then given that
we have resets coming and the tightening of credit standards, the elimination of a lot of subprime
lending, the rules that we are going to put out, and the rules that the Congress is considering,
regardless of how carefully we craft them or whether or not the Congress makes progress, the effect
on the housing market will undoubtedly be somewhat chilling. So I see a potential slow-burn
scenario in which it is valuable to be buying some insurance against that as early as possible. These
problems may be peaking toward the middle of next year, because that’s when they have the most
potential to have a negative effect on housing prices, which, as others have described, could have
this sort of simultaneity issue or vicious cycle aspect that could lead things to go down.
Given that we have those conditions and we have that potential going forward, it seems
worthwhile to buy that insurance now. What is the cost of doing that? Of course, it is in terms of
inflation and inflation expectations. As the markets have changed their expectations about what
we’re likely to do at this meeting and even as they have dramatically changed their path of future
policy moves, there’s very little evidence that inflation expectations, at least up to the five-year
horizon, have moved up significantly. There is a question of how to interpret that longer-term
change in inflation expectations; I take it very seriously, and I think we have to try to understand it
better. But I don’t think that there’s an enormous cost in terms of moving now versus six to nine
months from now to buy more insurance against what I see as a challenge from the recent financial
market turbulence. I think there is also a concern, which President Poole raised, that if we have a
fairly large surprise to the markets, it could reduce or even reverse some of the progress that has
been made in some of the markets, potentially forcing us to move more than we would like at the
next meeting.

October 30-31, 2007

122 of 162

So that said, I think it is very important and very valuable that we make a move now. As
other have said, it is a close call because we have to worry about the cost with respect to inflation.
One way to contain that cost, as a number of people have said, is to clarify the path going forward,
to show that what we’re doing now is responding not to current data but to the forecast about the
data. Obviously when the markets were expecting GDP at 3.1 and it comes in at 3.9, we’re not
saying that we’re reacting to current market data by making a cut. But we are thinking about the
potential future effect and then trying to give some guidance through a balance of risk statement.
I’m open to a modification of that statement to try to convey that we think we don’t necessarily
need to do more with respect to the challenges that are coming now but we’re going to continue to
remain vigilant and look at things like the housing market and other markets that have potential to
have negative ramifications for the whole economy. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the economy is
slowing. Even the nonhousing part of the economy is slowing a bit. Housing prices are still
obviously sliding down. We don’t really claim to know much about where they’re going to end up
or where we are in that process, but it seems that they are falling and probably at an accelerating
rate. Our modal forecast—“our” meaning from the submissions—is for an economy that slows
further and runs below trend over several quarters. But if you just look at the size of the bars on the
submissions, the size of that bar about downside risk to growth is very high, much higher than the
bar about upside risk to inflation. There is a huge amount of uncertainty about what equilibrium is
and where short-term interest rates should be over time. But I think it is fair to say that we are now
at the high end of, if not slightly above, most of those estimates of where equilibrium is. Therefore,

October 30-31, 2007

123 of 162

it seems to me sensible that most of our submissions had a downward slope to the path of the fed
funds rate going forward over this period.
The question then is not principally whether to move but when and what signal of a change
or no change should come. I think it is a very close call, and everything that I say I say with a lot of
unease and discomfort. If the choice is to stay firm but to signal more explicitly than we did in
September that we’re likely to move further, that seems to me just a bad choice. I think it is likely
to amplify many of the risks that you are all worried about and it probably would make people more
tentative about coming in and doing what they’re going to do to let this thing work through the
markets because they will be living with our acknowledgement of substantial downside risk without
action and uncertainty about whether we’re going to move. I think you might argue that a decision
not to move with an explicit asymmetry in the balance of risks to growth would lower the path
going forward and add to that uncertainty in some sense.
I do not think that the markets are so fragile now that they could not take an adverse surprise
of this magnitude, even though it is a very, very large adverse surprise relative to recent history. I
don’t think that’s a good argument for moving. I think the best argument is that we’re still in the
midst of what is a very delicate and consequential asset-price adjustment in the U.S. economy with
a fairly dense, thick, adverse tail on the potential implications about the evolution in housing. The
Chairman spoke eloquently early in the year—I think it was early in the year, but maybe it was late
last year—about the pattern of history and the acknowledgement that weakness tends to cumulate,
and you don’t really have a lot of experience with sustained periods of below-trend growth without
falling into a more substantial rise in unemployment rates. Those risks have to be substantially
greater when you have an economy going through this kind of asset-price adjustment.

October 30-31, 2007

124 of 162

I found these charts discouraging, not reassuring, in the sense that we’re anticipating a
slowdown in the rate of growth of credit for the economy as a whole that’s comparable to ’01. I
think the pressure on bank balance sheets is probably—it’s hard to make these statements with any
certainty—greater than it was in ’01. At least a reasonable expectation is that it’s going to be bigger
than it was in hindsight in ’01, and I think you have a much more substantial impairment to the
functioning of what Kevin calls debt capital markets—the industry around the design of
securitization and structured finance, et cetera, which has been so important to the way credit gets
originated and moved. That disruption could take a long time to resolve, and I think that just has to
amplify the density of the adverse tail and the growth outcome, certainly with more uncertainty at
this time.
I think that it is hard, but the better course of valor is to move today, and I like the language
in alternative A. Let me just go quickly through the arguments against it that I find most
compelling. The best argument against is the fear that many of us spoke about—that even though
the inflation numbers have been reasonably reassuring and we haven’t seen substantial erosion in
inflation expectations that we can measure, there is a bit of deterioration in the feel, in the
psychology. We have to be very careful that we don’t add to that through our actions or people’s
expectations about how we’re going to behave going forward. But we should take some comfort
from the fact that the market is pricing in more than 100 basis points of easing over the next two
years. You have to believe that a fair amount of that is already reflected in breakevens, reflected in
what people are willing to pay for insurance against adverse inflation outcomes, and reflected in the
dollar. It doesn’t mean that if we validate part of those expectations you won’t see erosion, but we
should take some comfort from that.

October 30-31, 2007

125 of 162

Just one more thing. We have been through three years of very substantial relative price
shocks in energy prices, commodity prices, and some other things. Those hit an economy that was
growing over the period above most estimates of potential, and we have had pretty good
performance of underlying inflation and inflation expectations in that context. So even though we
look forward and we see what’s happening in commodity prices, energy prices, and the dollar as
posing some potential risk of upside pressure on input costs, that is hitting the economy in a very
different state. The experience of those last couple of years should give us a fair amount of
confidence in the judgments we bring as to how we think about inflation going forward. I think we
have less uncertainty around an inflation forecast than we would have had two or three years ago
and still substantial uncertainty around the growth forecast inevitably given what the economy is
going through. The balances suggest that it is better to move today because of that. As I said, I’m
comfortable with the language in alternative A. I would be comfortable with Governor Mishkin’s
amendment to A—I think that helps a bit. I have a lot of sympathy for all the arguments against the
first sentence in alternative A in any form, but on balance, I would say that we just don’t want to
take the risk that, by omitting some statement like it, we cause people to price in a steeper slope to
that path going forward. It is something that we should try to avoid, and the best way to achieve
that is the language in A. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you all. Well, it has been said many times,
but this is very, very close, and I’ve thought about it quite a bit, obviously. I have a lot of sympathy
for President Plosser’s very clear analysis. There have been good data since the last meeting. We
have talked about the importance of spillovers. We have not so far seen evident spillovers from
housing into other sectors. We did take a preemptive action in the last meeting. Inflation is a
concern. I think not immediately, but some of the factors like input costs are there, and market

October 30-31, 2007

126 of 162

expectations alone are obviously not a reason to move. All of those things are valid, and I have
thought about all of them.
So why do I favor a cut? Most of the arguments have been made. The downside risks are
quite significant, if the housing situation, including prices, really deteriorates. I think part of the
difference between what the market sees about housing and what we see is that we are a little more
sanguine about price behavior than the market is, and a decline in prices has effects both on
consumers and on the credit system. So I think that risk is fairly important and may swamp some of
the other issues. There is some new information that is relevant. The senior loan officer survey and
other information suggest that credit conditions are tightening and that this will have an effect, I
believe, in some significant markets, certainly including housing. Other information, like consumer
sentiment and consumers’ views of the labor market, suggests some slowing and some weakening.
The decline in sentiment in the markets in the past two weeks is very interesting. On one level I feel
as though we failed to communicate somehow; however, I don’t know exactly where the mistake
was. The markets seem to be responding to information about earnings reports and projections of
future activity and so on, both in the financial sector and in the real sector, and as a number of
people have said, I don’t think we can entirely ignore that information. So I think there are some
good reasons on the real side to take out a bit more insurance, as has been said. I agree with the
Vice Chairman that the credit markets probably could stand the surprise, but they have become
somewhat more uncertain, and I think their basic problem is macro uncertainty. It has to do with
concerns about tail risk, and that is something that we can, I think, address a bit.
The point has been made a number of times, first by President Yellen, that the current rate
could be construed as being slightly restrictive and that creates an argument for a somewhat lower

October 30-31, 2007

127 of 162

rate. An additional argument is that the core inflation rate has come down some since last year, and
so the real federal funds rate on that basis has gone up.
Finally, an argument that I would bring to you is about tactics, and the Vice Chairman also
alluded to this. Most of the paths that we submitted include a path for policy that is perhaps slightly
lower than the current one, and the question is how we do this. If we take alternative B, which I
think is the most obvious alternative, on the one hand we don’t take an action and on the other hand
we express alarm about the economy and say we’ll probably be cutting in the future. That makes
calibrating how the longer-term expectations will respond to that very difficult. I think it would, on
balance, tighten expectations a bit because we didn’t act, but it does create some uncertainty. The
advantage of alternative A, even as we take a cut, is that we will, I hope, curb expectations for
sustained additional cuts through several mechanisms. First, in the economic growth paragraph, we
have switched language from actions “intended to help forestall”—very indirect—to “should help
forestall,” suggesting that we are now more confident in our ability to prevent bad outcomes in the
economy. Second, we have—and this will certainly be noticed—taken note of energy and
commodity prices, among other factors, and we have highlighted our concerns about inflation.
Third, the rough balance of risks certainly indicates that we are not eager to cut again quickly unless
the data clearly support it. So a lot of this is tactical, about how to take control of expectations—
you know, how to manage the market’s views of our policies. And I just felt a bit more comfortable
with taking the action but then using that to recalibrate our balance of risks. For what it is worth, 75
basis points of easing has been pretty much the standard Fed medicine for financial crises ever since
1970 or so; in that respect we are in good company. That’s my recommendation—25 basis points
with alternative A. Any questions or comments?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. With the Mishkin amendment or without?

October 30-31, 2007

128 of 162

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What exactly was the Mishkin amendment?
MR. MISHKIN. It was to add a phrase before the downside risks to growth to say, “The
Committee judges that the upside risks to inflation roughly balance the somewhat reduced downside
risks to growth.” It would give a flavor that, in fact, our actions have reduced the downside risk.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I worry about that. For example, by saying that the action
“should help forestall” instead of “is intended to forestall” I think we address that.
MR. MISHKIN. I didn’t feel strongly about this. It was just maybe I’ll do it in speeches
afterward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The other comment that came up, I think President Hoenig
and President Stern mentioned it, is not exactly softening but emphasizing the uncertainty that
surrounds our judgment. So another possibility, and I have always regretted making suggestions on
the statement, is that we could take the first sentence from the September paragraph 4, cut out the
phrase “since the Committee’s last regular meeting,” and say, “Developments in financial markets
have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. However, the Committee judges
that . . .,” and we could put that at the beginning of the assessment of risks. Is that as appealing? I
don’t know. I guess my prejudice is, unless there is strong sentiment, to stay with what we have
because that is what people have talked about.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I think the problem with that is that developments of
financial markets on balance since the last meeting have been reassuring. The panic has receded.
The disruptions are more contained, and so I don’t think that works.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I withdraw that. Any other comments? All right. If
not, Ms. Danker will call the roll. Let’s just note for the record that for the first time we will be
voting on the entire statement.

October 30-31, 2007

129 of 162

MS. DANKER. I will start with the directive from the Bluebook. The language is as
follows:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of
around 4½ percent.”
Then the statement, which I will not read in its entirety, is as written under alternative A in
the revised October 31 table that was handed out.
Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
President Evans
President Hoenig
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
Governor Mishkin
President Poole
President Rosengren
Governor Warsh

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. I need to have the Board for a
moment.
[Meeting recessed]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me just address quickly the last item on the agenda, which
is communications. On October 19, you received a memo from the subcommittee that describes the
latest round of changes to the projections. I won’t repeat what they are, but if there are questions,
we can take them. I don’t believe we received any comments on this round. I’ll talk in a moment
about getting this ready for prime time. But what I’d like to talk about now is, as I discussed in
September, asking the Committee for a consensus to release these projections. They would be

October 30-31, 2007

130 of 162

released with the minutes of the current meeting on November 20, which is one day less than three
weeks because Wednesday is the day before Thanksgiving. So we would release it on Tuesday.
The necessary explanation of the projections—what they mean and how to interpret them—would
be in a speech that I propose to give on November 14. That speech would be preceded by a press
release from the FOMC describing the plan in general terms. You received copies of the press
release. Michelle, do we have other copies? Does anyone need it?
MS. SMITH. It was not changed from what you received. I have extra copies if you need
one.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. If anyone needs a copy, Michelle is happy to give
you one. I would talk in general terms about this approach, why we’re doing it, what the
implications are, and so on. I’d be happy to share my draft remarks with anyone who would like to
look at them. Let me be clear—I do not plan to reveal any of the data from the projections. They
would be released to the public for the first time in the minutes, and so it would obviously be very
important for everyone not to release that information. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Your speech is November 14?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My speech is November 14, and the release of the minutes
will be on November 20. That would give people some time to digest the ideas. Yes?
MR. LACKER. And the press release?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The press release would be on the morning of November 14
before my speech. On previous occasions when the FOMC has announced communication
changes, they have followed the meeting by some weeks. It’s not unusual for that to happen.
There are questions about timing, whether we should think about doing it later. We had
some discussions about this. My own view is that this was the most convenient time. January

October 30-31, 2007

131 of 162

would run into the monetary policy hearings, for example. If there are serious problems in the
markets or anything like that, I am prepared to add material about the markets or to substitute
another speech—to do whatever is necessary to address that issue. But I do think that, besides the
natural rhythm and the fact that we are about as far as we are going to get in fine-tuning this, the fact
that this has appeared in the press suggests that we should just go ahead and get it out soon, if
possible. In a moment I’m going to ask you for your comments, and then I’ll ask you for your
consensus—first, on releasing the material and, second, on the speech and the rollout of the press
release.
Let me just say that, as Brian indicated, we do have until tomorrow close of business to
revise our projections. This counts. This is the real thing. Please take a look at your projections in
light of this morning’s data and in light of the discussion today. In the future we will not be doing
this every meeting, only four times a year. So in that respect it won’t be such a burden as I know it
has been. So I urge you please to do that. Let me now open the floor for any comments or
questions about projections, the rollout plan, or anything. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have two comments. Brian talked about the skewness, which I gather we
are going to describe in words but not use the histogram. I have the following question about the
skewness. I was one of those who said “broadly similar,” and here’s how I would look at it. You
start with some point estimate. Let’s make it simple—next year, fourth quarter to fourth quarter.
You ask yourself how far down you would have to move the point estimate such that the probability
to the right and the left would be about the same. If the amount that you would have to move that
point estimate is a fraction of a standard error, then I would interpret it, roughly speaking, as that
there are symmetrical risks. I just have the suspicion that people who are talking about “weighted to
the downside” are in a way mixing up the first moment and the third moment of the probability

October 30-31, 2007

132 of 162

distribution. So I worry that, as I think Brian was worrying, that this will give a message that’s
going to interfere with the communication that we also want to offer about the policy path. That’s
the best way I can think about it—to ask about how far you would have to move your point estimate
to make the probability to the right or left roughly the same. I would also note that the Greenbook,
for example, has reduced the point estimate for next year ¾ percentage point from June to now,
roughly speaking. Maybe I can even ask Dave about whether he thinks the distribution around the
current point estimate is very skewed, and I could also go on and ask how far down he would have
to move that point estimate to make the probability to the right and left about the same.
The other point that I want to make—and it is really in many ways a much more important
point—is that, when we disclose the 2010 inflation projection and presumably, Mr. Chairman, at the
February monetary policy hearings—assuming that some member of the Congress actually asks you
a question related to monetary policy, which is not a given—[laughter] a very logical question either
then or sometime in the future would be where you personally stand, what your number is in that
projection. I would very much like to know that answer in advance because I would be more than
happy to conform my estimate, which I regard as a target, to the number that you would throw out.
I think there’s an issue here. In an inflation projection for 2010 that varies from roughly 1.5 to 2,
the numbers are materially different, and I think that question is going to come back at us over and
over again. So I won’t say any more about that, but I do believe that I would hate to be in a position
of having to explain why my number is different from yours.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, let me say first on the mode and the median, you make a
good point on the first issue about risks. The question to ask yourself is, Given your most likely
forecast, on which side are the largest and most costly deviations most likely to occur. In which
direction are the risks skewed? That is the way to think about it.

October 30-31, 2007

133 of 162

MR. POOLE. Well, I would keep separate the cost from the distribution itself.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, I don’t think so. I think you ought to put in some costs—
MR. POOLE. I’m not saying I would ignore the costs, but maybe we need to be clear about
what this probability distribution is supposed to mean. I thought that this was supposed to mean
simply the weights that I would give on various possible outcomes in terms of the probability that
the forecast might be 1 percentage point below or 1 percentage point above the central tendency,
however I described it. Now, I agree that a full analysis requires that you also add the costs to those,
but I would interpret that as not being part of the projections process for GDP and inflation but
rather you’d fold that in through the policy decision as to how you weight those various possible
outcomes. But I have interpreted it all along as being really a statement about your probability
distribution on the outcomes unweighted by the severity of the outcome.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I think that the answer would be pretty similar in either
case. So we can discuss this at another time. On your second question, I think I’m kind of a special
case because people will overweight what I say if I give a number. So I would not give a number,
and what I would say is that what matters are the views of the broad Committee, and I don’t want to
distinguish myself from the broad Committee. It is a Committee decision process. If individuals
want to give their numbers, I suppose that’s okay. But I would urge you to consider the externality
a bit, which is that there will be some desire to figure out who is where on the distribution in order
to assess who is holding which type of policy preference and so on. Certainly many of us have
often given our views of what price stability is and so on. I don’t think I want to prohibit that, but
my recommendation would be to be a little fuzzy, a bit careful about being too precise and too sharp
about that number.

October 30-31, 2007

134 of 162

MR. POOLE. Well, it won’t really matter very much with me because I will be out of here
before too long, but I have long been on record as bringing the number down, and so I can’t back
off that. That’s what I believe, and so I’m going to keep that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s fine.
MR. POOLE. But I’ll disappear from the calculus next spring anyway.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your answer. The one worry I have had about
this exercise, which is much better the way it is now expressed and presented—I think it is ready for
prime time—is that we might be divided as to our individual instincts. We do operate as a
Committee. We have said this a million times, but I’d like to reiterate it. To me it’s the last bastion
of integrity here in Washington. To go down a path of who is saying what just threatens to tear us
apart, and I would urge your response on everybody else as well. Thank you for the spirit in which
you answered that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. No comment.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anybody else? President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Has there been any reaction to the Greg Ip story? Have we received
any feedback from the principal audience for the projections?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, and there have been no problems. The response has been
positive.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, Vice Chairman. I’m sorry.

October 30-31, 2007

135 of 162

VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I want to come back to President Poole’s question.
President Poole, you said a fraction of a standard error. How large a fraction of a standard error
would you want to use as a basis? Really, I’m not sure what the standard error is in this context.
But just in terms of how you think about this, how large a fraction of the standard error?
MR. POOLE. Well, I was one of those who put down B—that both the distribution and the
skewness were broadly similar to the past twenty years. So I came out that way. I was trying to
offer a way to think about this issue and, for those who believe that the probability distribution is
way over on one side, a way to think about it: How far would you have to move that point
estimate? I wasn’t trying to give the answer; I was trying to give a way to approach the question.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, maybe we should clarify just this one
point. Did you leave the question about—I don’t know what this chart is called; it is not going to
be in the addendum to the minutes—what those bars show about the balance of risk? Is it about
just the probability of the outcome or about the probability of outcome and the costs or
consequences of the outcome?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. May I ask the staff, do you have institutional memory on
this question?
MR. MADIGAN. I am not sure what the question is exactly. What is the question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is the skew that determines the risks simply the probability
of outcomes, or is it the probability weighted by the cost of certain outcomes?
MR. MADIGAN. Well, I think it is a matter of how the members interpreted it in
responding. [Laughter] The memorandum to the Committee asks whether the risks around your
projection for each variable are weighted to the upside, weighted to the downside, or broadly
balanced.

October 30-31, 2007

136 of 162

MR. KOHN. I think the balance of risk statement in the announcement has had the utility
weight on it; there have been times when the Committee was more concerned about falling to
one side or another. But I at least interpreted the forecast as simply whether there were skews to
one side or another. If I may have the floor to talk a bit to President Poole’s point. I think we do
say in the statement that there are upside risks to inflation and downside risks to growth. So I
would be concerned if the whole Committee shifted to the middle because then I think we would
be contradicting the announcement that we made, so I think your point is good. I mean, you
ought to be sure that you really do think there is downside risk to growth and upside risk to
inflation, or whatever, and adjust it for the policy choice that we made today.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The utility cost is relevant in the statement, and you can’t
take a balance of risks unless you compare them in terms of cost. There is no other metric by
which you can compare them. So in that case, it has to be cost-weighted. But I think it is more
or less equivalent—the univariate answers you are giving about mode versus median.
MR. POOLE. But if we view the projections as being a statement just about the
probability distribution of the various outcomes, this might be an important point for you to
explain in the speech that you give because the whole thing is labeled projections—I guess we
have been calling it a “projections exercise”—and so I have interpreted that as a discussion of the
numbers.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think we won’t go too far wrong by interpreting it as a
probability distribution in the shape of the probability distribution for outcomes.
MR. POOLE. That’s the way I have interpreted it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Lacker.

October 30-31, 2007

137 of 162

MR. LACKER. At the risk of introducing further moments of the probability distribution
into the discussion, have we been instructed as to whether our projection is a mean or a
maximum-likelihood estimate?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think our standard procedure is that it is a modal.
MR. LACKER. A maximum-likelihood estimate.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
MR. MADIGAN. The memorandum to the Committee says, “Please provide your
projections of the most likely outcomes,” et cetera.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry, President Plosser, we have kept you waiting.
MR. PLOSSER. It’s not important. I don’t have any comments. I just wanted to say that
I think the staff has done a great job and the subcommittee has done a great job. This is a very
important step forward for us, and I am strongly supportive of it. I want to thank Governor
Kohn, Janet Yellen, and the other members of the subcommittee for getting us here and you for
taking this step forward. I believe that, as we go through this time after time, it will be refined.
We will stumble over a few things and the language is going to be tricky, but I just want to
commend the Committee for taking this step.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me also commend Governor Kohn, President Stern, and
President Yellen for their excellent work. We really appreciate it. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Thank you. I just want to return to the point that the Chairman,
President Poole, and President Fisher raised. In my conversations, people have expressed
different views at this juncture about what the optimal long-run inflation rate is. People know
that I am a 2 percent kind of guy, and I know good people here who are 1½ percent kinds of
guys. But in talking to people about this, I hear a lot more consensus and that people don’t feel

October 30-31, 2007

138 of 162

strongly. So I would be in concert with what President Poole said. If the Chairman said, “How
about X?”, I would be more than happy to say, “Giddyap, I am with the Chairman.” So, again,
my colorful language. But the key point here is that I think it would be very helpful at this
juncture that people really not emphasize differences but that, in fact, there really is consensus on
this Committee. That takes one of two forms. One is if you had something in the past, that’s
fine; but you can say that you had that in the past but you are actually comfortable with where
the general Committee is, and that way you can soften it. Two is a case in which somebody like
me has not actually publicly talked about an inflation goal. In that case, I would keep my mouth
shut on the issue. In terms of this initial launch—again emphasizing the fact that there really is a
lot of consensus on the Committee because we know that the press loves to create the opposite of
consensus because it sells newspapers—the more we can be supportive and to the extent that we
can look unified on this, the better off we are. I sense that is actually where the Committee is, so
I would encourage it in this process.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. I just wanted a clarification. In the explanation, will we say that the
projections are based on what we have done? For example, today, given that we are having a
policy move and I am not sure that everyone around the table had anticipated that move today in
their path, will we be articulating that these are not the numbers that we came into the meeting
with, but these are the numbers that we think after the policy action has been taken?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, let’s do that because it will be more consistent with the
statement. So let me ask everyone to rethink their risks conditional on our policy move today.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.

October 30-31, 2007

139 of 162

VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Sorry, Mr. Chairman, two points. One is a concern to
which I have no solution. The chart that is now called chart 1, which has evolved over time, has
a slight disadvantage, because it doesn’t have fans around it because we all didn’t like the fans,
of having the sense of a pretty narrow range of likely outcomes for the future. I just wonder
whether anybody is uneasy, given the relatively low probability that we are going to end up
within those over time. I don’t have a solution to this. I was wondering whether, if you changed
the scale—[laughter]. This is a concern with no real suggested solution—I apologize. My
second point is more significant. Bill, I think you asked a good question. Mr. Chairman, another
question that is interesting is, when asked whether the world should interpret the central
tendency of the Committee at a three-year horizon for PCE inflation as the rate that is consistent
with the Committee’s long-run view of price stability, how will you answer it?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It represents the diversity of views on the Committee about
that, with the additional caveat that not everyone may necessarily believe that we will approach
their ideal level of price stability even in three years, conceivably. So it is a mixture of elements,
and that’s what I will talk about. Again, if you would like to look at the speech—
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. No. I think that is consistent with how it is described
and what is discussed, but it just goes to the point that, Bill, you raise, which is for some of you
your optimal horizon is always going to be two years or three years. But you said all that could
be said, I think, about that.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.

October 30-31, 2007

140 of 162

MR. HOENIG. I’m sorry, but I need to understand what you just implied. Are we to go
back now and redo our projections for this meeting under the assumption that we took the action
today?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If you wouldn’t mind, yes.
MR. MADIGAN. And appropriate policy going forward.
MR. HOENIG. Okay. But it’s not what I based my decision on.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Tom, if you took a view about what appropriate policy
was last Friday and you have a chance now to assess, in light of what the Committee did, what
appropriate policy is going forward, whether that has changed, and what implications that change
has for your forecast—isn’t that the way to say it?
MR. HOENIG. But the whole point of the process was to prepare us for this meeting,
and now I am going to go back and reassess the process I went through in light of what took
place in this meeting. If everyone is comfortable with doing that, then I would be happy and able
to do it. At least I understand that we are all going in the same direction that way. So I am fine
with it, as long as that is what, in fact, we’re doing.
MR. PLOSSER. But the Greenbook won’t be changed. This confuses me a bit. I wasn’t
quite clear—I thought I was, but I guess I wasn’t.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We can do whatever we want as long as we all agree to do
the same thing. [Laughter]
MR. HOENIG. If that’s it, then I’ll go back and do it. I just want to make sure that’s
what we all agree we’re going to do. If that is, then fine; but I didn’t have that understanding
before you made that statement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.

October 30-31, 2007

141 of 162

MR. LOCKHART. Is there an inconsistency in adjusting a forecast after the meeting
when the minutes are the minutes of the meeting and the forecasts informed the judgments that
were expressed in the meeting?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, I don’t think so. It is based on the information in the
meeting, including the data we received this morning.
MR. LOCKHART. I’m not sure I see minutes reflecting subsequent actions or
subsequent decisions.
MR. FISHER. We’re releasing this with the minutes?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re releasing it with the minutes. It’s not part of the
minutes.
MR. LOCKHART. Oh, okay. Good point.
MR. HOENIG. It’s like an annual report that has updated information in it. As long as
everyone is doing the same thing.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I hope, President Hoenig, that you won’t be in this situation
too often. [Laughter]
MR. HOENIG. I’ve got a long record, and I haven’t been in this situation too often. But
I have been in this situation before.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions or comments? May I have the sense of
the Committee to proceed with the release? Thank you very much. I appreciate it, and I
appreciate everyone’s hard work and cooperation. I think this is a very important step, and I am
very pleased with the outcome. Let me just describe now the sequence of events. I will now
give you the date of the next meeting, and I will adjourn the meeting. Laricke Blanchard is here

October 30-31, 2007

142 of 162

to talk briefly about congressional issues for us, and the lunch for Cathy Minehan begins at
12:30. Okay? So our next meeting will be Tuesday, December 11. The meeting is adjourned.

END OF MEETING

