January 30-31, 2007

1 of 255

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
January 30–31, 2007
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 30, 2007, at
2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, January 31, 2007, at 9:00 a.m. Those present were the
following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Bies
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Mishkin
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Poole
Mr. Warsh
Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and Messrs. Plosser and Stern, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Lacker and Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and
San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Evans, Fuhrer, Kamin, Madigan, Rasche, Sellon, Slifman, Tracy, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account
Messrs. Clouse and English, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

January 30-31, 2007

2 of 255

Ms. Liang and Mr. Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Gagnon, Reifschneider, and Wascher, Deputy Associate Directors, Divisions of
International Finance, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Dale and Orphanides, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Kole¹ and Mr. Lebow,¹ Section Chiefs, Divisions of International Finance and
Research and Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors
Messrs. Doyle,¹ Schindler,² and Wood,¹ Senior Economists, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Engen² and Tetlow,¹ Senior Economists, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Ms. Weinbach, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Roush,² Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Hambley,¹ Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Judd and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco and Dallas, respectively
Mses. Mester and Mosser and Messrs. Sniderman and Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Cleveland, and Richmond,
respectively
Mr. Cunningham, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
_______________
¹ Attended portion of the meeting relating to the role of economic forecasts in policy communications.
² Attended portion of the meeting relating to the economic outlook and monetary policy discussion.

January 30-31, 2007

3 of 255

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
January 30-31, 2007

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everyone. Let me be the first to welcome
Bill Dudley to the table.
MR. DUDLEY. Thank you. [Applause]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Today is our annual organizational meeting, so we have a
few items to take care of.
MR. KOHN. I’ll start, if that’s okay with you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Go ahead, Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Before we get illegal here, I am honored and pleased to nominate Ben
Bernanke to be Chairman of the Committee.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Objections? [Laughter]
MR. KOHN. I need to interrupt again.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
MR. KOHN. I am as pleased and as honored to nominate Tim Geithner to be Vice Chair.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there any objections? Thank you very much. Ms.
Danker, will you read the list of staff officers of the FOMC.
MS. DANKER. Secretary and Economist, Vincent Reinhart; Deputy Secretary, Debbie
Danker; Assistant Secretary, Michelle Smith; Assistant Secretary, Dave Skidmore; General
Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Tom Baxter; Economists, Karen Johnson and
Dave Stockton; Associate Economists from the Board, Tom Connors, Steve Kamin, Brian
Madigan, Larry Slifman, and David Wilcox; Associate Economists from the Banks, Charlie
Evans, Jeff Fuhrer, Bob Rasche, Gordon Sellon, and Joe Tracy.

January 30-31, 2007

4 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there any questions or comments?
Approved without objection. Next on the agenda is a proposed change to Committee rules. We
received a memo from Scott Alvarez and Debbie Danker, which concerns how a backup would
be appointed in case the Desk Manager was unable to serve. Are there any questions for our
colleagues on that memo?
MR. POOLE. I have a question. It has nothing to do with the changes, but something
struck me this morning as I was reviewing this material again. Let me refer you to the FOMC’s
Rules of Organization, page 1: “If a member or alternate ceases to be a president or first vice
president of a Reserve Bank, a successor may be chosen in a special election by the boards of
directors of the appropriate Reserve Bank or Banks and such successor serves until the next
annual election.” Now, if Jack Guynn, for example, had retired last year in March, Atlanta had
filled the position, and a president had been in place as of September, let’s say, would he have
come back? This says “no” because it says “until the next annual election.” Am I reading that
wrong? I’m not sure that has been even the practice in the past.
MS. DANKER. Our General Counsel can probably comment on that, but I can try.
MR. ALVAREZ. There’s a little lawyer in all of us. [Laughter]
MS. DANKER. I believe the election that statement refers to is if a new president is
appointed and that person is then elected as a member by the boards of directors of the three
Reserve Banks, he or she would serve until the next annual election at this time of year, at which
point the successor would be elected from one of the other Banks.
MR. POOLE. Then I was not reading it correctly; but you understand where my
confusion came from.
MR. ALVAREZ. That’s exactly right.

January 30-31, 2007

5 of 255

MR. POOLE. Okay. So the alternate would serve until the next president was in office.
That has certainly been the practice; my question was about the wording. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there other questions about the memo? I need a vote.
In favor? Opposed? Thank you. Third, we need to select a Federal Reserve Bank to execute
transactions for the System Open Market Account. Governor Kohn, would you like to make a
proposal? [Laughter]
MR. KOHN. I nominate the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, once again.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Comments? Objections? Without objection. The fourth
item is that we need to select the Manager of the System Open Market Account. Governor
Kohn.
MR. KOHN. I’d be very pleased to nominate Bill Dudley as the Manager of the System
Open Market Account.
MR. FISHER. You have to put your head down, Bill. [Laughter]
MR. POOLE. Second.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Without objection. Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I think we should rule out humor. [Laughter] This is
an important annual process, and New York plays an important role.
MR. REINHART. So it will not say “laughter” in the margins. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think we’ve started on the wrong tone here. [Laughter]
Item 5, we need authorization for the Desk operations. We have two items to vote on separately.
On the domestic side, we have a memo from Bill Dudley proposing to change the accounting of
repurchase agreements so they will be booked on the SOMA rather than on the books of the
FRBNY. Are there any questions for Bill? If not, without objection. Thank you. On the

January 30-31, 2007

6 of 255

foreign side, Mr. Dudley is proposing no change to the authorization, directive, or procedural
instructions. Any questions? Without objection. Thank you. Bill, you’re up.
MR. DUDLEY. 1 Thank you. In terms of market developments, I would like to
focus on three major topics. First is the sharp adjustment in market expectations
concerning monetary policy since the last FOMC meeting. Second, I will talk about
the persistence of high risk appetites in credit markets, with a focus on what may be
the most vulnerable market in the United States—the subprime mortgage sector.
Third, I want to discuss the possible factors behind some of the sharp shifts we have
seen in commodity prices since the last FOMC meeting, in particular whether these
price movements reflect a shift in risk appetite among noncommercial investors or
fundamental developments in supply and demand.
First, there has been a sharp shift in market expectations with respect to interest
rates since the last meeting. At the time of the December meeting, the consensus
view among market participants was that the FOMC would begin to lower its federal
funds rate target this spring and that this easing process would continue into 2008,
with cumulative rate cuts of about 75 basis points. As you can see in chart 1, which
looks at the federal funds futures market, and chart 2, which looks at the yield spreads
between the March 2008 and the March 2007 Eurodollar futures contracts,
expectations have shifted very sharply over the past month. There is now no easing
priced in through midyear 2007 and a residual of only about 25 basis points of easing
priced in beyond that. This shift in expectations can also be seen across the Treasury
yield curve. As chart 3 shows, the Treasury yield curve is now slightly above where
it was at the time of October FOMC meeting. Since the December FOMC meeting,
there has been a rise of about 35 to 40 basis points in yields from two-year to thirtyyear maturities. The shift in expectations is reflected predominately in real interest
rates. As can be seen in chart 4, breakeven inflation rates have not changed much
since the last FOMC meeting—the decline in breakeven rates that occurred early in
the intermeeting period has been reversed more recently, and so we are at or slightly
above where we were at the December meeting. This upward shift in real rates
appears to reflect a reassessment by market participants not only about the near-term
path of short-term rates but also about what level of real short-term rates is likely to
prove sustainable over the medium and longer term. The buoyancy of the recent
activity data may have caused some market participants to reassess what level of the
real federal funds rate is likely to prove “neutral” over the longer term.
Regarding the issue of risk appetite, there appears to be no significant change
since the last FOMC meeting. Risk appetite remains very strong. Corporate credit
spreads remain very tight—especially in the high-yield sector (as shown in chart 5)—
and implied volatilities across the broad market categories—equities and interest rates
(see chart 6) and foreign exchange rates (see chart 7)—remain unusually low.
Moreover, the turbulence in some emerging debt and equity markets experienced
1

Material used by Mr. Dudley is appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

January 30-31, 2007

7 of 255

early this month was mostly transient and has subsided as well. So things appear
calm. But what are the areas of greatest risk?
In the United States, the subprime mortgage market appears to be a particularly
vulnerable sector. The vulnerability stems from four factors. First, this market is
relatively new and untested. Chart 8 shows the overall trend of first residential
mortgage originations and the share of these mortgages by type—conforming, jumbo,
subprime, and alt-A, which is a quality category that sits above subprime but is not
quite as good as conforming. As can be seen in this chart, subprime mortgage
originations have climbed in recent years, even as overall originations have fallen. In
2006, subprime mortgages were 24 percent of total originations, up from a share of
about 10 percent in 2003. The second factor is that credit standards in this market
appear to have loosened in 2006, with the proportion of interest-only loans and lowdocumentation loans climbing as a share of the total. As a result, there are some signs
that strains in this market are increasing. As chart 9 shows, delinquency rates have
moved somewhat higher. In contrast, charge-offs remain low, held down by the rapid
house price appreciation that we saw in recent years. Most noteworthy, as shown in
chart 10, the most recent 2006 vintage of subprime mortgages is showing a much
more rapid rise in delinquencies than earlier vintages showed. The third factor is that
most outstanding subprime mortgage loans have adjustable rates. There is significant
reset risk given the rise in short-term rates in 2005 and the first half of 2006 and the
fact that many of these loans started with low “teaser” rates. Fourth, housing prices
are under some pressure, and this could contribute to further credit strains. I see some
risk of a vicious cycle. If credit spreads in the securitized market spike because loan
performance is poor, a sharp downturn in lending could result as the capital market
for securitized subprime mortgage products closes. This constriction of credit could
put downward pressure on prices and lead to more credit problems among borrowers.
The result would be additional credit quality problems, wider credit spreads, and a
further contraction of credit. Fortunately, to date the news is still fairly favorable.
The strong demand for the credit derivatives obligations created from subprime
mortgage products has restrained the rise in credit spreads. As can be seen in chart
11, spreads are still well below the peaks reached in late 2002 and early 2003. Thus,
the economics of making such loans and securitizing them into the capital markets
still work. But this situation could change very quickly, especially if the labor
markets were to become less buoyant and the performance of the underlying loans
were to deteriorate, leading to a surge in delinquencies and charge-offs.
Let me now turn to the commodity markets. The issue I wish to examine here is
whether some of the sharp movements in commodity prices that we have observed
since the last FOMC meeting represent shifts in the risk appetite among
noncommercial investors who have put funds into commodities as a new asset class
versus the contrasting view that these price movements predominantly represent
changes in the underlying supply and demand fundamentals. To get a sense of this,
let’s look briefly at three commodities that have moved the most and are
representative of their classes—copper, corn, and crude oil. As chart 12 shows, the
sharp decline in copper prices appears linked to the large rise in copper inventories at

January 30-31, 2007

8 of 255

the London Metal Exchange. If anything, the price decline appears overdue. For
corn, the rise in prices also appears consistent with declining stocks both in the
United States and globally (see chart 13) as well as the growing demand anticipated
for corn in the production of ethanol. For crude oil, the decline in prices is more
difficult to tie back to inventories. Although U.S. inventories remain high relative to
the five-year historical average (as shown in chart 14), this situation has persisted for
some time without having a big effect on prices. Instead, the shift in oil prices
appears to be driven mostly by longer-term forces. This can be seen in two ways.
First, as shown in chart 15, the change in oil prices has occurred in both spot and
forward prices. The oil curve has shifted downward in mostly a parallel fashion,
which also calls into question the role of unseasonably warm weather as the primary
driver. If weather were the primary factor, then the decline in prices should have
been reflected much more strongly in the spot and very short-end of the oil price
curve. Second, as shown in chart 16, OPEC spare production capacity has been
increasing and is expected to continue increasing in 2007. This growing safety
margin reflects both slower growth in global demand and the expansion of non-OPEC
output. The improved safety margin may be an important factor behind recent
developments in the energy sector.
Finally, there were no foreign operations during this period. I request a vote to
ratify the operations conducted by the System Open Market Account since the
December FOMC meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Bill? President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I was astonished when I saw the note—I think it was in the Wall Street
Journal a couple of weeks ago—that oil consumption actually fell worldwide in ’06 relative to
’05, which really surprised me. I don’t know quite how to explain that because the economies
around the world are pretty strong. I’m assuming that the longer-run price elasticities are taking
hold and that a lot of the traders probably believe the elasticity is zero and they pushed prices up
pretty high. Does that make sense?
MR. DUDLEY. I think that is definitely part of the story. Another part of the story is
that in some countries, especially emerging market countries, the oil was heavily subsidized, and
some of those subsidies are now coming off because continuing to subsidize as the oil price
climbs entails a rather heavy budgetary burden. So you’re also seeing a sort of normalization of
oil prices in a lot of places. Think about the oil that Russia used to sell to Eastern Europe or

January 30-31, 2007

9 of 255

some of the surrounding countries at preferential prices. They are no longer getting those
preferential prices, so there is a demand response. I think it is happening on both sides. There
has been a demand response to higher oil prices, and there has been a supply response coming
out of places like Africa.
MS. JOHNSON. If I may add a footnote—I think you also need to watch the pattern of
how inventories have behaved. When prices were being pushed up in the process from, say, the
end of 2003 to their various local peaks, the incentive to hold inventories rose. At some point in
2006, inventories were very high—we had basically filled every bucket we could find with crude
oil—and inventories feed back. It’s a dynamic. Price changes create the demand for inventories.
The real-time value of inventories feeds back on the price. So I think you saw some of that
going on as well in 2006 in terms of driving the price versus driving usage. Purchase for
inventory is not well measured. We have inventories only for the OECD, so separating
production from consumption is not perfect because we can’t always capture the inventories and
they are measured as consumption in some cases.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Bill, if you talk to the producers and the refiners—you’ll find out that I
like to do that kind of thing—there has been some concern, although one can’t measure it with
any precision, that the so-called city refiners in London or on Wall Street, meaning the
speculators, do affect prices. We have had some discussions with your predecessor, but I’m
curious as to what your views on that phenomenon are.
MR. DUDLEY. As you know, this topic is undergoing a lot of further research. The
academic literature that I’ve surveyed has yet to uncover a strong causal relationship between a
climb in speculative open interest and the effect on price. One reason that is hard to imagine

January 30-31, 2007

10 of 255

happening to a powerful degree in the end is that the speculators really don’t want to take actual
delivery of the physical commodity, and so the price really should clear in the spot market on
what’s happening to underlying supply and demand. But this topic certainly remains under
investigation by a number of researchers. I don’t think we have the definitive answer to the
question at this point.
MR. FISHER. But we’re still working on it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Bill, could you or Dave remind us what share of the
total outstanding stock of mortgages consists of subprimes or what share of the housing stock do
we think is financed at the subprime level? My recollection is that the share is still small even
though it has been a large part of the recent flows.
MR. DUDLEY. It’s quite a bit smaller share of total outstanding because the average life
of the subprime mortgage loan, I’m told, is only two or three years. In other words, if your credit
quality improves, you will refinance out of your subprime mortgage into a higher quality
mortgage. So originations are 24 percent, but the actual number of subprimes that are actually
outstanding is much lower.
MR. REINHART. We reported in yesterday’s briefing that subprime borrowers
constituted only about 13 percent of all mortgages outstanding.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Ex post subprime mortgage-backed securities seem to have been
overvalued in the sense that they underestimated default risk for some market segments. So the
presumption would be that such information gets taken on board and reflected in the prices of
new mortgage-backed securities and that it would translate into higher credit spreads at the retail

January 30-31, 2007

11 of 255

level. In your remarks you seemed to suggest that there is a chance that this process of
adjustment might cause markets not to work. I’m wondering what you meant by that.
MR. DUDLEY. It’s not that markets won’t work. It’s just the economics of originating
subprime loans and selling them into the market would no longer work. In other words, at some
point, if the actual capital markets are not willing to accept those subprime mortgages at the right
price, then the ability of the person to originate the mortgages and sell them into the market goes
away. Now, would this wreck the market? Well, it depends, because some subprime originators
can carry these loans on their own books. But the industry is quite fragmented, with a lot of
these issuers not having the ability to carry these subprime loans on their books. So that part of
the subprime origination market would go away. Some of the monoline subprime originators
would be unable to exist if there weren’t a securitized demand for those assets.
MR. LACKER. So quantities would go down.
MR. DUDLEY. You could think of the situation as credit availability to that sector
diminishing, which could have feedback effects on price. That’s the risk.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there other questions? We need a vote to ratify
domestic operations.
MR. KOHN. So moved.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Without objection. We turn now to the economic situation.
Mr. Slifman.
MR. SLIFMAN. 2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll wait for my colleagues to come
to the table. We’ll be using the chart package that you all should have on the
economic outlook. Separating the signal from the noise in the recent economic data
has not been easy—what with the motor vehicle anomaly, the defense spending pullforward, and the transitory swings in oil imports. We tried to cut through the clutter
by highlighting in the Greenbook real private domestic final purchases, or PDFP—
that is, the sum of consumption, residential investment, and business fixed
2

Material used by Mr. Slifman, Mr. Wascher, and Mr. Gagnon is appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

January 30-31, 2007

12 of 255

investment. We think this aggregation, which is shown on line 3 of the table in
exhibit 1, currently is giving a fair representation of the thrust of aggregate demand.
The data that we have received since the December meeting have been stronger than
expected. As a result, we have revised up our estimates of the growth of PDFP in
both the fourth and the first quarters to annual rates of about 2 percent—roughly the
same rates as those in the middle two quarters of 2006.
The remaining panels of exhibit 1 highlight some of the indicators that have
informed our judgment about the current pace of activity. Starting with the labor
market, the middle left panel, increases in private payroll employment averaged
119,000 in the fourth quarter, close to the average pace in the preceding two quarters.
As you may remember, at the last FOMC meeting we commented on the stronger
signal for activity coming from the labor market compared with the spending data.
That tension seems to have been largely resolved, not because of weaker employment
but because of stronger spending—especially consumption. Retail sales increased
briskly in November and December; accordingly, in this Greenbook, we boosted our
estimate of fourth-quarter real PCE growth, the middle right panel, to an annual rate
of about 4½ percent. The fundamentals for consumption remain quite solid: steady
employment gains, recent declines in energy prices that have raised real income, wellmaintained consumer sentiment, and further increases in stock market wealth. That
said, at least according to some of our models, the fourth-quarter pace of consumer
spending was stronger than would have been consistent with those fundamentals.
Our forecast for the growth of real PCE in the first quarter, at 3.6 percent, reflects a
bet that some of the surprising fourth-quarter strength will carry forward for a while.
Turning to housing, sales of new and existing homes—which are not shown in the
exhibit—appear to have stabilized in recent months, and the ratio of new home
inventories to sales has moved down a bit. As shown in the bottom left panel, the
apparent stabilization of housing demand may now be starting to show through to
permits and starts for single-family homes. Of course, the unusually warm weather in
December makes a definitive assessment at this time particularly difficult. In the
business sector, investment spending slowed appreciably in the fourth quarter. In
particular, shipments of nondefense capital goods, the red line in the panel to the
right, have been unexpectedly soft recently, including the December figure that we
received after publishing the Greenbook. Part of the recent weakness in this category
appears to be for purchases of equipment related to construction and motor vehicle
manufacturing. With orders remaining above shipments, we expect real equipment
spending to rise modestly in the first quarter.
Exhibit 2 takes a closer look at some recent developments, starting with an
examination of the effects on the industrial sector coming from the recent sharp
declines in the production of light motor vehicles and residential investment. By our
reckoning, production of light motor vehicles, the top left panel, tumbled nearly
20 percent at an annual rate in the third quarter of 2006 and dropped further in the
fourth quarter. Meanwhile, we estimate that residential investment, shown to the
right, plunged at an annual rate of about 20 percent in both the third and the fourth
quarters. In thinking about the effects of these developments on industrial

January 30-31, 2007

13 of 255

production, we need to keep in mind the upstream effects. As noted in the bulleted
items in the middle left panel, the drop in production of light motor vehicles affects IP
not only through its direct effect on light motor vehicle manufacturing but also
indirectly through its influence on production in upstream industries such as primary
metals, tires, and, nowadays, semiconductors. In the case of construction, of course,
all the IP effect comes through the influence on upstream industries—lumber,
concrete, plumbing fixtures, and so forth. The table to the right shows the estimated
effects on IP growth, including upstream effects, associated with the declines in the
production of light motor vehicles and residential construction illustrated in the top
panels. We have used input-output relationships to estimate the direct and upstream
effects and then translated these effects into their IP contributions. Lines 2 and 3
show that, after we account for upstream influences, motor vehicles and residential
construction were sizable drags on IP in the third and fourth quarters. Yet, as shown
in line 4, the drag from those two sectors was not the whole story. Even so, we think
the more likely track from here forward involves modest growth rather than a
cumulative weakening of industrial activity, in part because we think that most
producers have been moving reasonably promptly to address any emerging inventory
problems.
The bottom panels widen the scope from the industrial sector to the economy as a
whole and address the question of whether developments in less-cyclical industries
have been helping support economic activity. My colleague Stephanie Aaronson
divided the establishment survey employment data into three categories—highly
cyclical industries, moderately cyclical industries, and acyclical industries—based on
the correlation of individual industry employment changes with the GDP gap. The
bottom left panel presents some history, with the highly cyclical grouping plotted by
the black line and the moderately cyclical plotted in red. To keep the chart easier to
read, the acyclical group is not plotted. The chart shows what you might have
expected ex ante: Fluctuations in both series are highly correlated, but the amplitude
of swings in the moderately cyclical is more damped. The panel to the right puts a
microscope on the past few years—note the change in scale. As you can see, despite
the step-down of employment gains in the highly cyclical industries, employment in
the moderately cyclical industries has continued to grow apace. This suggests that the
softness we’ve seen lately in residential construction and some parts of manufacturing
has not spilled over to other parts of the economy.
That conclusion is an important factor that has shaped our view about the longerrun outlook for the economy—the subject of exhibit 3. As shown in line 1 of the
table in the top panel, later this year the growth rate of real GDP is expected to move
back up toward our estimate of the growth rate of potential, and it stays there in 2008.
This basic pattern is unchanged from the last Greenbook. The bullets in the middle
panel highlight some of the major forces shaping this projection. The most important
is our forecast that the restraint from housing will diminish this year and that its
contribution to GDP growth will turn slightly positive next year. Second, the recent
declines in oil prices, plotted in the bottom left panel, have raised real income; we
believe that the drag from the earlier increases in oil prices should dissipate in the

January 30-31, 2007

14 of 255

near term, and over time the stimulus from the recent price declines should begin to
predominate. Third, federal fiscal policy, the bottom right panel, also is a bit
stimulative, although the impetus is projected to ebb over the next two years. Finally,
given our conditioning factors, the assumed path of the nominal federal funds rate is
consistent with a real funds rate that closes the output gap over time.
Exhibit 4 focuses on the components of PDFP. As I noted earlier, the leveling-off
of home sales, the uptrend in mortgage applications, and the improvement in
homebuying attitudes suggest that housing demand may be leveling off. The top
panel shows the historical relationship between housing demand, as measured here by
sales of new homes (the red line), and housing construction, shown here by singlefamily housing starts (the black line). The shaded areas highlight previous housing
downturns as well as the current situation. As you can see, cyclical recoveries in
sales and starts have generally been fairly coincident historically. You’ll have to take
my word for it, but this has been the case even when the inventory of unsold homes
has been high. Accordingly, we think that the recent stabilization of sales should be
accompanied soon by a stabilization of starts. Then, as sales move up, so should
starts. The middle panels focus on the consumption forecast. We expect real PCE,
the red bars in the left panel, to increase 2¾ percent this year and next. The forecast
reflects two main crosscurrents. On the one hand, real income growth, the blue bars,
is projected to be robust, reflecting, in part, continued increases in real wages as well
as further employment gains. On the other hand, the wealth-income ratio, plotted by
the black line in the panel to the right, falls in our forecast as house prices appreciate
only about 1 percent per year. With slower gains in wealth, and spending gradually
coming back into line with fundamentals after the current period of unexplained
strength, the saving rate should rise.
The bottom panels present some details on the outlook for business fixed
investment. As illustrated in the bottom left panel, total real outlays for equipment
and software, excluding the volatile transportation equipment component, are
projected to increase about 6 percent both this year and next. You can see from the
red portion of the bars that the bulk of the support comes from spending for high-tech
equipment as telecommunications service providers further expand their fiber optic
networks and as businesses continue to invest in information technology equipment
and software. We expect the contribution from the other equipment category (the
blue portion) to narrow this year and then to edge up in 2008, largely reflecting the
pattern of changes in the growth of business output. The bottom right panel shows
our forecast for nonresidential structures excluding drilling and mining. The
incoming information on construction outlays for nonresidential buildings and the
forward-looking indicators that we monitor suggest that spending growth has
downshifted. Accordingly, after rising 12¾ percent in 2006, real outlays for this
component of nonresidential structures are expected to decelerate to a pace of 5½
percent this year. Our projection for 2008 brings growth in this component of
nonresidential structures down to its long-run average. Bill will now continue our
presentation.

January 30-31, 2007

15 of 255

MR. WASCHER. The top panel of exhibit 5 summarizes our assumptions about
the supply side of the economy. As indicated in line 1, we assume that potential
output growth will edge down over the forecast period, from 2.7 percent in 2006 to
2.5 percent in 2008. This slowing primarily reflects our assumptions about trend
hours growth (line 2), which steps down from about ¾ percent last year to ½ percent
in 2008 because of a steepening downward trend in the labor force participation rate
and a gradual slowing of population growth. Although we are comfortable with these
assumptions—and, indeed, have not made any changes to them in this projection—
we do see risks on both sides of our point estimates. For example, as shown in the
middle left panel, many outside forecasters are basing their projections on a
significantly higher estimate of potential output—in some cases above 3 percent per
year. We suspect that these differences, at least in part, reflect different views about
the underlying trend in the labor force participation rate.
The participation rate and our estimate of its trend are shown in the middle right
panel. As indicated by the black line, labor force participation has risen about
½ percentage point since its trough in early 2005. Some forecasters appear to have
taken this increase as a signal of faster labor force growth going forward. However,
we see it as largely a cyclical response to steady employment growth and a tighter
labor market, and we expect it to be reversed in the near future as the pace of hiring
slows and the underlying demographic forces show through. In part, our view
reflects the fact that the participation rate tends to rise above its trend when the
unemployment rate is low. Periods in which the unemployment rate was below the
staff’s estimate of the NAIRU are denoted by the yellow shaded areas in the chart,
and the current gap between the actual participation rate and our estimate of the trend
does not appear to be outsized relative to historical norms. In addition, as shown in
the bottom left panel, the increase in the participation rate over the past couple of
years has been fueled by a rise in the percentage of individuals who moved directly
from out of the labor force to a job; this flow also exhibits noticeable sensitivity to
labor market tightness. That said, some groups have behaved differently than our
models would have predicted. On the one hand, the participation rate of older
individuals, shown by the red line in the bottom right panel, has risen steadily for
some time, presenting an upside risk to our forecast. On the other hand, participation
among teenagers (the black line) has remained surprisingly low, and there are
undoubtedly downside risks to our forecast of an upturn for this segment of the
population.
Exhibit 6 describes another source of tension in the recent data that may have
implications for our estimate of potential output. As shown in the top left panel, our
standard Okun’s law simulation (the red line) suggests that the unemployment rate
(the black line) fell more last year than would have been expected given our current
estimate of real GDP growth in 2006. In the baseline forecast, we assume that an
increase in the unemployment rate causes that gap to disappear gradually, an
assumption that does not seem unreasonable given that the error in Okun’s law at the
end of last year was within the bounds of historical experience. However, other
interpretations are possible as well. One possibility is that current estimates of real

January 30-31, 2007

16 of 255

GDP understate economic growth last year. One piece of evidence in support of this
hypothesis is shown in the top right panel. We currently estimate that real gross
domestic income rose 4 percent in 2006, about ¾ percentage point more than real
GDP. As shown by the green line in the top left panel, if we replace real GDP growth
with our estimate of real GDI growth over the past year and re-run the Okun’s law
simulation, the actual unemployment rate in the fourth quarter lines up very closely
with its simulated value.
An alternative interpretation of the recent error in Okun’s law is that potential
output growth was weaker last year than we have assumed—perhaps because of a
downshift in structural productivity growth. The middle and bottom panels address
this possibility. As shown by the difference between actual productivity growth (the
black line in the middle left panel) and a simulation from our standard model (the red
line), labor productivity decelerated much more last year than the model would have
expected. As shown in the panel to the right, a purely statistical model based on a
Kalman filter would have responded to the incoming data since March of last year by
cutting its estimate of structural productivity growth by a full percentage point. In
contrast, because we place less weight on the recent data that have not yet been
through an annual revision, we have reduced our own estimate by only 0.6 percentage
point. The bottom panels provide a couple of reasons for our reluctance to lower our
estimate of structural productivity growth as much as the statistical model would have
lowered it. First, as shown on the left, labor productivity in the nonfinancial
corporate sector was quite strong last year. In part, the better performance of
productivity in this sector reflects the fact that its output is measured from the income
side of the accounts and thus incorporates the difference between GDI and GDP
noted above. In addition, this component omits some sectors that are notoriously
difficult to measure. Second, as shown on the right, a measure of productivity that
excludes the residential construction industry also held up fairly well last year,
suggesting that much of the deceleration in nonfarm business productivity may be
cyclical. As shown in the middle panel, all told we expect actual labor productivity
growth to step back up to an annual rate of about 2½ percent by the middle of this
year as businesses reduce the pace of hiring in lagged response to the slower rate of
output growth in recent quarters.
The implications of this forecast for the labor market are shown in the top panels
of exhibit 7. In particular, gains in nonfarm payroll employment—shown by the
black line in the top left panel—are projected to slow to about 60,000 per month by
the second half of this year. This pace is somewhat below our estimate of trend
employment growth—the red line. As a result, the unemployment rate—shown in the
top right panel—drifts up to just under 5 percent, our estimate of the current level of
the NAIRU. To help gauge whether the estimated gap between the unemployment
rate and the NAIRU is sending an appropriate signal about the degree of tightness in
the labor market, I have included some other measures of slack in the remaining
panels of this exhibit. As shown in the middle left panel, the job openings rate from
the BLS’s JOLTS (Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey) rose over the second
half of last year to its highest level since early 2001. Because the job openings rate

January 30-31, 2007

17 of 255

has such a short history, its equilibrium level is difficult to estimate. However, we
can learn something by combining the openings rate and the unemployment rate to
form the Beveridge curve shown to the right. The curve is estimated using data from
the first quarter of 2001 through the fourth quarter of 2006, with the openings rate on
the vertical axis and the unemployment rate on the horizontal axis. The relationship
between job openings and unemployment appears to have been fairly stable in recent
years, which suggests that the NAIRU has not changed materially over that period.
Moreover, the latest data point is in the far upper left portion of the graph—the
segment of the curve indicative of a tight labor market. Two other margins of slack
are shown in the lower two panels. The bottom left shows the percentage of
employed persons working part time because of slack work at their firm or because
they couldn’t find a full-time job. This measure has moved down over the past
couple of years and is currently below its average level in the second half of 1996—
an earlier period when we thought that labor markets were roughly in equilibrium.
Also, as shown to the right, the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing remains a
little above its long-run average level.
Exhibit 8 presents the inflation outlook. Despite our view that labor and product
markets are tight, other influences on our inflation projection have been more
favorable than we were expecting at the time of the last Greenbook. Perhaps most
notably, the recent data on core consumer prices—shown in the top left panel—have
been lower than expected. Core PCE prices were about unchanged in November and,
based on the latest CPI reading, we expect an increase of only 0.2 percent in
December. As a result, as shown in the second column of the table, we have marked
down our estimate of core PCE inflation in the fourth quarter by ½ percentage point,
to an annual rate of 2.1 percent. As shown in the top right panel, the lower path of oil
prices led us to revise down our projection of consumer energy prices. These lower
prices directly pull down our forecast for total PCE prices; they also imply somewhat
smaller indirect effects from energy costs on core prices over the forecast period. As
shown in the middle left panel, a higher exchange value of the dollar in this forecast
led us to reduce the projected path of core nonfuel import prices. The combination of
these various influences led us to shave our projection for core PCE prices—line 4 of
the middle right panel—by 0.1 percentage point in both 2007 and 2008, to 2.2 percent
and 2.0 percent respectively. As before, the slight downward trajectory to core
inflation reflects our projections of waning indirect effects of the earlier increases in
energy and other commodity prices, declining relative import prices, and a
deceleration in shelter costs.
In light of my earlier discussion of the risks to our assumptions about potential
output growth, the bottom panels present one alternative simulation from the
Greenbook, in which we assume both a higher trend for the labor force participation
rate and slower growth in structural productivity. Specifically, we calibrated the
simulation so that overall potential output growth was essentially the same as in the
baseline forecast, but with structural productivity growth ½ percentage point weaker
and trend hours growth ½ percentage point stronger. As shown in the bottom left
panel, this change to the composition of potential output growth has little effect on

January 30-31, 2007

18 of 255

aggregate activity and the unemployment rate. However, the implications for
inflation—the middle panel—are noticeable, with core PCE inflation moving up
toward 2½ percent next year because of the effects of lower structural productivity
growth on trend unit labor costs. Joe will now continue our presentation.
MR. GAGNON. Your first international exhibit (exhibit 9) covers recent market
developments. As shown by the green line in the top left panel, oil prices dropped
further this month, bringing the West Texas intermediate spot price back to preKatrina levels. The IMF index of nonfuel commodity prices (the red line) was little
changed this month after a year of remarkable increases. Readings from futures
markets imply a flattening out of nonfuel commodity prices and only a moderate
increase in oil prices going forward. The top right panel shows that our real tradeweighted dollar indexes declined on balance last year. In recent weeks the dollar
rebounded modestly against the major industrial-country currencies (the red line), but
we estimate that it continued to decline in real terms against the currencies of our
other important trading partners (the green line). As usual, our forecast calls for a
small downward trend from current levels, reflecting our belief that the risk of
significant depreciation is slightly greater than the risk of significant appreciation,
owing to the unsustainably large U.S. trade deficit. The bottom panels report equity
market indexes, with industrial countries shown on the left. The lines are set to equal
100 in March 2000, the previous peak month for the Wilshire 5000. Equity prices
have risen broadly across the industrial countries over the past two years and are now
just above their March 2000 levels in the United States, the United Kingdom, and
Japan, but not in the euro area (the red line). For major emerging markets, on the
right, equity indexes are well above March 2000 levels. In Mexico (the blue line),
equity prices have more than tripled over this period. In Thailand (the green line), the
government’s recent attempts to slow capital inflows and relieve upward pressure on
the currency have taken their toll on equity prices, but contagion to other emerging
equity markets has been minimal. Overall, commodity and financial market
developments are consistent with expectations of strong global growth.
Exhibit 10 focuses on financial flows between emerging markets and industrial
countries. As shown in the top left panel, the major developing regions have
continued the downward trend in their reliance on external borrowing. Fiscal deficits
have declined in most countries, and many governments have turned increasingly to
local, rather than external, borrowing. The panel to the right shows that yield spreads
on dollar-denominated sovereign debt of emerging market countries have dropped to
historically low levels.
But emerging markets, in the aggregate, have gone much further than just
reducing their borrowing. In recent years, emerging markets have experienced record
outflows of official capital (the gold bars in the middle panel). These official
outflows are composed of the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, the
servicing and paying down of sovereign debt, and the purchase of foreign assets by
government-run investment funds such as the Kuwait Investment Authority. In all
the emerging market regions, official capital outflows have recently exceeded current

January 30-31, 2007

19 of 255

account surpluses (the blue bars), which are themselves at record levels. For
example, the IMF estimates that in 2006, governments in emerging Asia invested on
balance $270 billion outside their borders, a sum that greatly exceeds their combined
current account surplus of $185 billion. Most of these official flows have taken the
form of additions to foreign exchange reserves, as governments have built up war
chests against future financial crises and sought to counter upward pressures on their
currencies.
The bottom panel looks at these flows from the point of view of the industrial
countries, plotting aggregate emerging market net official flows (the gold bars)
relative to industrial-country GDP, with negative values denoting net flows into the
industrial countries. The statistical accounts do not report the destinations of all these
flows, but the available evidence suggests that the overwhelming majority is destined
for the industrial countries. Before 2003, net official inflows or outflows from the
emerging markets had never exceeded 1 percent of industrial-country GDP. But
since 2003, things have changed. Net official outflows from emerging markets are
now estimated to equal 2½ percent of the combined GDP of the industrial countries.
As shown in the panel, the timing of this unprecedented increase in net official flows
corresponds well with the puzzling decline in real short-term interest rates in the
industrial countries (the green line) that persisted long after industrial-country GDP
growth (the purple line) rebounded from the slowdown early in this decade. The
evidence suggests that aggregate policy-driven capital flows from the emerging
markets may be an important factor behind low real interest rates in the industrial
countries. Moreover, low real rates are not limited to short-maturity instruments.
The top panels of exhibit 11 show that ten-year indexed bond yields are also low
and have been for several years in the major industrial countries. These rates have
ticked up over the past month or two, but only by a small amount. Long-term
inflation compensation (shown in the middle row of panels) remains contained.
Indeed, in Japan and Canada (the two panels on the right) inflation compensation has
moved down in recent months. In the euro area and the United Kingdom (the two
panels on the left), where inflation compensation lingers above policymakers’ targets,
we project modest additional policy tightening early this year, shown in the bottom
row of panels.
Despite recent and expected future inflation rates close to zero, the Bank of Japan
seems poised to tighten gradually over the next two years. In Canada, policy is
expected to remain on hold. If these projections prove to be the peak policy rates for
this cycle, they will be the lowest cyclical peaks for short-term interest rates in these
countries for at least forty years. Nevertheless, we judge that these policy stances are
likely to be consistent with low and stable inflation this year and next. The large
capital inflows and low real interest rates in the industrial countries have contributed
to rising housing prices in many of these countries. Higher home prices in turn have
stimulated housing construction. The top panel of exhibit 12 shows that the extent
and timing of the house-price boom differs markedly across countries. The
Netherlands (the blue line) was one of the leaders of the global housing boom, with

January 30-31, 2007

20 of 255

prices rising continuously since the early 1990s, though at much slower rates in recent
years. Japan (the green line), on the other hand, is a notable exception to the trend of
rising house prices in recent years, reflecting the lingering effects of the bursting of
the 1980s asset bubble and Japan’s extended economic slump. The middle panels
focus on two countries that experienced strong house-price increases (the purple
lines) early in this decade but where house-price increases subsequently halted, at
least temporarily. In both Australia and the United Kingdom, as in the United States,
residential investment (the green lines) responded positively to higher house prices.
In Australia, on the left, real house prices have been flat for the past three years, and
residential investment has declined gradually about 1 percentage point of GDP,
though it remains above its historical average. In the United Kingdom, on the right,
house prices stabilized in 2005 and picked up again modestly last year. Despite lower
house-price inflation, residential investment has continued to rise toward historically
high levels. The relevance of these foreign experiences for the United States is
difficult to gauge, but they provide some support for Larry’s forecast that the
downturn in U.S. housing is nearly over.
In light of the signals from financial and commodity markets, as well as other
real-side indicators, we project continued solid growth in the foreign economies at
rates that are not likely to strain resources or to put upward pressure on inflation. As
shown in the bottom panel, total foreign growth (line 1) is estimated to have stepped
down last year from 4½ percent in the first half to about 3½ percent in the second
half, and it is projected to remain around 3½ percent over the forecast period. This
projection is about 1 percentage point stronger than the staff’s projection for U.S.
growth, shown at the bottom of the panel. The foreign industrial economies (line 2)
overall are projected to grow at about the same rate as the United States, Japan a bit
slower (line 4), and Canada a bit faster (line 5). The emerging market economies
(line 6) are projected to grow at nearly twice the pace of the industrial economies
over the forecast period. We expect that emerging Asia (line 7) will continue to grow
very rapidly and that Latin America (line 8) will grow at a solid, though not
exceptional, rate. Our forecast assumes that the Chinese government will take
additional measures if necessary to reduce the growth rate of investment, and we
project that Chinese GDP growth will be slower this year than last. But the risks to
our growth forecast for China are probably greater on the upside.
Exhibit 13 provides an assessment of what all these foreign influences mean for
the U.S. economy. Overall import prices, the black line in the top left panel, fell
sharply last quarter and are projected to continue to fall in the current quarter,
primarily owing to the drop in the price of imported oil. As oil prices stop falling and
begin to move gradually back up, overall import price inflation should turn positive.
Prices of imported core goods (the red line), which exclude oil, gas, computers, and
semiconductors, rose at a rate of nearly 4 percent in the middle of last year, primarily
owing to sharply higher prices of nonfuel commodities. With commodity prices
projected to stabilize and with only a small depreciation of the dollar in our forecast,
prices of imported core goods should increase at a subdued pace over the next two
years.

January 30-31, 2007

21 of 255

The contributions of exports and imports to U.S. GDP growth are shown in the
lower panel. We now estimate that the external sector made a positive arithmetic
contribution to growth last year, the first positive annual contribution since 1995.
Import growth stepped down from previous years as U.S. GDP grew more slowly.
Export growth benefited from robust foreign economic activity, but exports turned
out even stronger than our models project. Line 1 in the top right panel shows that,
for the first eleven months of last year at an annual rate, exports of goods grew
10½ percent from the previous year in real terms. Lines 2 through 4 show that three
categories of capital goods—aircraft, machinery, and semiconductors—contributed
nearly half of total export growth. Although it is possible that blistering growth rates
in exports of these goods may continue, we base our forecast on a return of export
growth to a rate more consistent with historical relationships. With the vast majority
of aircraft production being exported in recent months and with aircraft factories
running at high utilization rates, further large increases in exports from this sector, at
least, do not seem likely.
Returning to the bottom panel, we project that the negative arithmetic contribution
of imports (the red bars) to GDP growth will outweigh the export contribution (the
blue bars) in 2007 and 2008 by about ¼ percentage point (the black line). This
projection is driven by the historical tendency of U.S. imports to grow at a much
faster rate than U.S. GDP. In addition, the larger value of imports relative to exports
means that, even if imports and exports were to grow at the same rate, the negative
contribution of imports would be greater than the positive contribution of exports.
The projected strong growth rates of foreign GDP, discussed in your previous exhibit,
are not large enough to outweigh these factors over the next two years. On balance,
relative prices have little effect on net exports over the forecast period, as the real
trade-weighted dollar has moved in a relatively narrow range over the past couple
years and is not projected to move substantially over the forecast period. And now
Larry will complete our presentation.
MR. SLIFMAN. The final exhibit presents your forecasts for 2007 and 2008. I’ll
be mercifully brief. The central tendency shows real GDP increasing 2½ to 3 percent
this year and roughly the same next year, with the unemployment rate holding in the
range of 4½ to 4¾ percent during both years. The central tendency of your
projections sees the core inflation rate falling ¼ percentage point over the next two
years. That concludes our prepared remarks, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be happy to take
your questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. That was very interesting. I have a couple of
questions about your counterfactuals. In exhibit 6, you look at the simulated rate of
unemployment, assuming that gross domestic income is the true measure of output, and you find
that unemployment fits Okun’s law. But then below you also use GDI to measure productivity.

January 30-31, 2007

22 of 255

You’re not doing the same thing in both simulations, right? If you assume that GDI measures
output and use it to calculate both Okun’s law and productivity, I think the puzzle comes back. I
think you just increased potential output, and you’re back to where you started.
MR. WASCHER. That’s right. The potential output measures are based on a GDP
concept, and productivity in the nonfarm business sector is the measure of structural productivity
that we’re using for potential GDP. The upper panel is just to illustrate what might happen if, for
example, the real GDP numbers for last year were revised up to show the same growth rate that
GDI shows now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. The other question is about exhibit 8, where you
consider a simulation with a decline in productivity and an increase in labor participation and
you get a higher rate of core inflation. In that simulation, the decrease in productivity and the
increase in participation offset each other, on both the aggregate demand side and the aggregate
supply side, and the result is, of course, that the unemployment rate doesn’t change so that
demand-supply balance is unchanged. I assume the reason you get inflation is that nominal
wages are sticky, and therefore, as productivity slows, labor costs go up and firms can push them
through. I guess I would question whether that’s realistic, for two reasons. One is that this
increase in unit labor costs is clearly temporary, and I think we tend to believe that longer
increases are needed to affect pricing. The other reason is that with the demand-supply balance
unchanged, why would firms be able to pass through those costs in this scenario when they
couldn’t raise prices absent that increase in unit labor costs?
MR. WASCHER. Well, real wages wouldn’t be different, but the adjustment could come
either through flexible nominal wages or faster increases in prices. In the FRB/US model, which

January 30-31, 2007

23 of 255

is used to generate these simulations, trend unit labor costs do cause an increase in the rate of
price inflation, which is what you see here, and that helps equilibrate the labor market.
MR. STOCKTON. For a given level of resource utilization, you’re getting more cost
pressures, and you’re getting more upward pressure on prices. So it’s not a matter of their
absorbing all of it in their profit margins when they’ve got that increase in costs. You’re
absolutely right. In our basic framework, we don’t think that actual year-to-year unit labor costs
influence overall price setting. It is in some sense a trend unit labor cost measure, and that
actually was incorporated in FRB/US through a moving average or a set of lags. So there is still
some upward pressure on trend unit labor costs coming about through the slower productivity
growth, some of which in essence would be perceived to be lower trend productivity.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You also have to assume that the Fed accommodates with
increased nominal GDP growth as well.
MR. STOCKTON. Correct.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there other questions for our colleagues?
President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Just to follow up on your point and go to exhibit 12, about foreign GDP
growth rates, which Joe talked about. In terms of any pressures on unit labor costs that you see
developing, I didn’t quite catch your statement, or I may have misinterpreted it, but basically I
thought I heard that these growth rates are not likely to lead the inflationary pressures.
MR. GAGNON. That’s correct.
MR. FISHER. So I would be curious as to what your observation is in terms of trend unit
labor costs in our important trading partners.

January 30-31, 2007

24 of 255

MR. GAGNON. Actually, I’m not sure of the answer about unit labor costs per se, but
these growth rates are close to what we think these countries can sustain without exceeding their
capacity limit.
MR. FISHER. So it’s a gap analysis.
MR. GAGNON. They are close to what we think their potential rates are, and they don’t
seem to be above or below their potential rates by very much in the aggregate. There are a few
exceptions, of course—Argentina, perhaps, and Venezuela.
MR. FISHER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Stern.
MR. STERN. I want to see if I understood something you said that pertained to exhibit
13. I think you said that U.S. exports were stronger than expected—stronger than the models
would have predicted in ’06—even though growth abroad turned out to be quite strong. Is that
right?
MR. GAGNON. Yes.
MR. STERN. By about what order of magnitude? I’m just trying to determine whether
this was really significant or we’re talking about a tenth or two.
MR. GAGNON. Well, the export contribution to GDP growth last year was about
⅓ percent, and I would have to check, but I’m guessing that it might have still been zero if we
hadn’t had this surprise. It would have been close to zero. I can check on that.
MR. STERN. Well, you can let me know later.
MR. KOHN. May I follow up on that?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.

January 30-31, 2007

25 of 255

MR. KOHN. On the same chart, Joe, I was wondering whether there is any evidence that
the foreign demand for our exports, that elasticity, is coming into closer alignment with our
demand for imports. That difference has really been driving the trade imbalance, and I was
looking for little clues that this wasn’t all special factors, that maybe they’re catching up to us in
their appetites for imports.
MR. GAGNON. This topic is actually close to my heart in terms of research, and I wish
I could say it was so and maybe it will be so. [Laughter] I thought it was so around 2000, when
we had really strong exports we couldn’t explain, and then it all went away with the recession of
2001-02, and it’s only now coming back. But I looked at a lot of other countries, and it does
seem that you can explain these differences between export and import elasticities based on
potential growth rates. The one country that seems to fit the worst is the United States, and I
have never understood why the most important country is the one that doesn’t fit. I won’t go
into details, but there are theoretical reasons to believe that, indeed, you shouldn’t expect such
elasticities to be structurally different.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I have two questions. The first is about our inflation
forecast. We’ve discussed several times the basic question about whether the now-prevailing
level of long-term inflation expectations in markets is likely to provide support for forecasts of
further moderation or likely to constrain the prospects for further moderation in core inflation.
My recollection of that discussion, although a little hazy, is that expectations might be a bit of a
constraint. Am I right in my recollection? Has your view on that changed?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, your recollection is correct, I think. That was probably just a
hazy answer, not a hazy memory on your part. In some sense our basic view is that getting to

January 30-31, 2007

26 of 255

2 percent is the gravitational constant that we currently see. We haven’t really seen any evidence
to suggest any significant shift in that view in recent months. Something below that number, on
a sustained basis, is harder for us to see. In some sense, implicit in this forecast is that, at the end
of 2008 and into an extended Greenbook forecast, we get 2 percent without creating an output
gap that would actually drag things down further. Then the question is how quick the dynamics
might be to take you to 2 percent. The view in our forecast is that the movement would be slow
over the next two years. But one could imagine a faster adjustment, especially if it were aided by
a stronger dollar and by weaker oil prices. So there are reasons for thinking that the adjustment
would be faster, but it’s also possible that some of the recent incoming data have given us a bit of
a head fake. Maybe we’re not quite as far along in the process of getting back to 2 percent, and
maybe we’re too optimistic in that regard.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. This is a different question for Joe. Your exhibit 10
describes broad trends in net official capital flows from emerging markets to the United States and
global real interest rates. Has your view about the relationship between them changed? I thought
we had sort of the conventional view. The accepted view within the System was a little skeptical
that there was much of an effect, and I didn’t think the research that looked at the relationship
between these two things suggested that the effect was that large. Has your view about that
changed, or is this exhibit consistent with it?
MR. GAGNON. The relationship between the official flows and the current account
surpluses?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. No, between official flows and global—really industrialcountry—real interest rates.

January 30-31, 2007

27 of 255

MR. GAGNON. People often talk about China’s reserve accumulation affecting U.S.
interest rates, but they are only two countries in a big world and you may think that the United
States, Europe, and Japan have relatively open financial markets with a lot of mobility. If you look
at all the industrial countries together and the flows to all of them together, however, maybe there’s
less mobility between the industrial countries as a group and the emerging markets as a group. That
might be more believable. That—along with the fact that these flows are big, even when you
distribute them over all the industrial countries—is what makes me think that there may be an
effect. That may raise a doubt in your mind. It’s not just to the United States or just to Europe; it is
in the aggregate.
To answer President Stern, it looks to me—and I’ll double check with our experts—as
though, according to our forecast, our model would have predicted negative real net exports last
year. So all the growth is a surprise.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Just to clarify the response—overpredicted what?
MR. GAGNON. The positive contribution from net exports last year, about ⅓ percentage
point, is entirely a surprise. In fact, it would have been negative, if I am reading our model
correctly.
MS. MINEHAN. So it was an upward surprise in terms of what your model would have
predicted.
MR. GAGNON. Yes.
MS. MINEHAN. I’m interested in the risks you see around the GDP growth rate in your
forecast. I note a couple of things. First, some of the growth rate depends upon consumers getting
the message that they really ought to be saving for the future instead of spending as they have been.

January 30-31, 2007

28 of 255

I wonder why they’d do that this year if they didn’t do it last year. Second, I notice that, if you
compare the Greenbook GDP forecast with the central tendency of the members of the Committee,
growth is a good deal slower—0.3 or 0.4 slower, which in this realm is a lot. I’m interested in how
you see the upside risk to this, particularly given that, even with your slower growth rate, you get to
zero output gap relatively quickly.
MR. SLIFMAN. Let me first comment specifically on our consumption forecast and the
larger question that we raised. Dave may want to add some comments. With regard to our
consumption forecast, as I had mentioned and as we suggested by the alternative simulation that we
showed in Part 1 of the Greenbook, clearly the unexplained strength that we’ve been seeing in
consumption spending in the second, third, and fourth quarters is an upside risk to the forecast.
We’ve carried some of that through into 2007, as we noted in the Greenbook and I noted in my
briefing, and we think that it will eventually correct. We base that forecast just on the historical
patterns in the data. In the past when spending had gotten out of line with what we think of as being
the fundamentals for consumption, it eventually corrected over time. There are a couple of
possibilities. One is that we’ve got the timing wrong and that the correction is going to take longer,
in which case there would be more consumption. Another possibility—and this goes back to the
point Bill made—is that we could be wrong with regard to income growth. That might be revised
up, and we will find that a lot more income growth is out there. Now, taking our forecast rather
than the alternative simulations at face value—yes, we are slower than the FOMC. I suspect that
part of the reason may be that the staff has a lower estimate of potential output growth than most
members of the Committee probably have in their minds; we can’t know for sure, but I suspect that
it probably goes a good way toward explaining the difference.
MS. MINEHAN. You’ve got seven alternative scenarios there, if I recall correctly

January 30-31, 2007

29 of 255

MR. SLIFMAN. We were busy.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes, you were. All kudos to you guys. Four of the simulations have
slower GDP, higher unemployment, and a lower fed funds rate. In a couple of cases you had, even
in the context of slower growth and higher unemployment, somewhat higher inflation. Then you
have three or so that show stronger paths. I’m wondering, do you weight these alternative scenarios
equally? You know how DRI (DRI is the wrong name now, but I mean the successor company)
does it: They give their baseline forecast a certain rate of probability, and then they give alternative
rates of probability to the various scenarios. Do you have a sense of that? Would you weight the
stronger consumption scenario somewhat higher than the rest or no?
MR. SLIFMAN. I don’t think so. Personally, I could think of equally plausible reasons that
we could get stronger aggregate demand growth or somewhat weaker aggregate demand growth
over the next year. We highlighted one possibility in the Greenbook with regard to the weaker
investment scenario. Another could be the housing forecast: Housing could turn out to be weaker
than we’re forecasting. So, on the aggregate demand side, I’d give them equal weighting. With
regard to the aggregate supply side, I suspect there, too, the weighting probably is equal. It’s a little
harder for me to judge. I don’t know whether Bill wants to add something.
MR. WASCHER. I think that’s probably right.
MR. STOCKTON. At the time of the last FOMC meeting, we were feeling as though the
incoming spending data were coming in pretty darn close to our expectations and were pretty
consistent with our story about entering a period of below-trend growth. As we noted, and
President Moskow quizzed us about, the big fly in the ointment with respect to our story was the
labor market and its ongoing strength. Since then, as Larry noted, the spending data have moved
toward the labor market data rather than the labor market data moving toward the spending data.

January 30-31, 2007

30 of 255

The developments have certainly brought into sharper focus the upside risk associated with buoyant
consumer spending. If we made an important policy-magnitude type error, it might be that the third
quarter was just a period of low measured GDP growth but basically we haven’t moved much
below trend. I think that you would need to take that risk very seriously as you thought about the
current setting of policy.
There are some critical reasons for remaining patient about whether, in fact, we have or have
not moved below trend. I think that we still haven’t seen the full effects of the housing shock that
we had in the second half of 2006. I suspect that we are going to see more of the employment
effects associated with that going forward. I don’t think that we’ve seen the full multiplier
accelerator effects of that, and we certainly haven’t seen, if our estimated econometric models are
anywhere close to right, the lagged effects of the slowing house prices and consumer wealth that we
think will be part of the reason for motivating a higher saving rate. So we’ve raised the forecast,
and we’ve raised it significantly, but I don’t think we’re yet surrendering the notion that this current
setting of policy can produce a period of modestly below trend growth. Now, I think that the upside
risk continues to be the labor market strength.
As Larry said, even given the overall dimensions of the housing shock, we’ve been
encouraged about our story of stabilization. But I remember that, as we went into the investment
shock earlier in this decade, we just didn’t have enough imagination about how bad things could
get, and we kept thinking that we were seeing signs of slowing or stabilization, that the new
technology was still great, and that there should be reasons or underlying motivation for investment.
Perhaps what we’ve seen recently as stabilization are the beneficial effects of the drop in long-term
interest rates that occurred from last summer into the fall and pulled some people forward, but really
we may not have fully made the adjustment yet. The overhang of unsold homes out there is very

January 30-31, 2007

31 of 255

large, and we could be underestimating the size and duration of that. So even given the recent
stronger data on spending, I still don’t see all the risks on that side of things. I still think there are
some significant downside risks that you ought to be at least concerned about.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to follow up on Vice Chairman
Geithner’s first question—on inflation. It seems to me that most of the factors that are leading to
lower inflation in this forecast period are temporary—energy prices, owners’ equivalent rent, and
import prices. The longer-term factors are the pressures in the labor market that we’ve talked about
and maybe some follow-through from the earlier accommodative financial conditions that we’ve
had. As you said, chart 6 of the Bluebook, when you look past the forecast period, doesn’t show
inflation coming down. Inflation actually goes up a bit with both the 1½ percent target and the
2 percent target. Doesn’t this mean that expectations have moved up a bit when you see inflation go
up in ’09 and beyond?
MR. STOCKTON. Many of the factors that you’re citing as temporary on the downside
regarding inflation we see as having been temporary on the upside regarding inflation as well. The
higher energy prices and the pickup in import commodity prices were some factors explaining how
we got above 2 percent, and their dissipation is principally the reason that we go back to 2. Now,
for the extended Greenbook scenario that we show in the Bluebook, one reason for the upward
pressure on inflation beyond the near term is that part of the construction of that forecast is an
assumed 3 percent depreciation of the dollar that has to go on almost forever. So we have built in
some upward pressure on inflation. We have to do that in the model simply to begin making some
progress on the external balance. Whether that happens in 2009, in 2015, or tomorrow would be

January 30-31, 2007

32 of 255

hard to say, but it is one reason that the pickup is not principally the dissipation of the temporarily
good factors. It’s really more of that built-in dollar-depreciation effect.
MR. MOSKOW. So that’s a key variable.
MR. STOCKTON. To go back to what I said to the Vice Chairman, implicit in that longrun scenario is a 2 percent inflation expectation that is sort of pegging inflation. Obviously we
could be seriously wrong about that. We could also be seriously wrong about the degree of resource
utilization in the economy right now. That 2 percent comes about because we don’t have a big
positive or negative output gap either now or going forward. If the NAIRU is more like 4½ percent,
then you might, in fact, make some progress in long-run inflation expectations. If the economy
slows, you push the unemployment rate to 5 percent, and you get a bit of output gap, then you might
get some good behavior there. Another issue with which I know you’ve been grappling is that
headline inflation has been high in recent years. If that condition were to persist, it could lead to
some deterioration in inflation expectations that might raise us from 2 to something above 2 going
forward. We haven’t seen the evidence of that in measures of inflation expectations either from
surveys or from financial markets, but that’s something we’re watching to see whether or not our
story is right.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you. I have a question that is related to this issue, but it comes out
of the Bluebook. I think I understand how this model is working, but then I get a surprise, and I
realize I really don’t understand how it works. I noticed in the Bluebook that there was a jump of
50 basis points in the Greenbook-consistent estimate of the real funds rate. At the same time in the
model and the simulations, you keep the fed funds rate constant, which would be slightly below

January 30-31, 2007

33 of 255

what that Greenbook real rate might suggest. The unemployment rate remains somewhat below
your NAIRU estimate, and yet you still have inflation modestly declining. I’m trying to figure out
how that works. Is there something that I’m not understanding, or can you clarify the mechanism
by which those things fit together?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, I can speak to the Greenbook-consistent measure, and perhaps
Vincent will want to talk a bit about the simulations of the Bluebook. One thing that you have to
keep in mind is that the Greenbook-consistent measure of R* is the level of a real interest rate that
would be required for the output gap to return to zero in twelve quarters. In some sense, given that
is what’s built into the Greenbook forecast, the current level of the real interest rate is delivering that
particular outcome. It’s not that we have those longer-run estimates of R*, which are, in essence,
the monetary policy that is assumed to return the economy to equilibrium over the next three years
and then beyond that to stabilize the economy. That’s a different construction. The Greenbookconsistent R* is answering a very specific question that is of limited value. Those longer-run
simulations give you a clearer picture of where we think real interest rates would have to be to
equilibrate the economy over the longer haul, not just over the short run.
MR. REINHART. The 0.5 percentage point increase in the Greenbook-consistent R* is
really due to a collection of factors. In the model, the estimated bond premiums come down a little,
and the equity premium came down over the intermeeting period. That just means you need a
higher real interest rate to get the same level of policy restraint. Also, they take the model and force
in the errors to get the Greenbook simulation. Effectively the model is less enthusiastic about the
economy than the Greenbook, and so the model errors tend to raise R*. As to why inflation is
coming down, we do have the lagged effects of the drop in energy prices, inflation expectations are
contained, and the output gap is closing.

January 30-31, 2007

34 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I’ll follow up on the question of Vice Chairman Geithner and President
Moskow about the gravitational point of 2.0 percent. I remember asking you about the NAIRU and
getting a response that suggested I should think of a cloud of probabilities surrounding that estimate.
I’m essentially asking you for your characterization of the cloud you have in your mind around the
idea that 2 percent is the number to which core inflation is going to have some gravitational pull.
What comes to mind here is that Vince told us several meetings ago that 2 to 2½ on core PCE
inflation was the range that he thought expectations were lying in, and TIPS numbers and survey
numbers haven’t come down much since then as I recall. I am also interested in your commentary
on the kind of technical adjustment factor that traverses the CPI, which the TIPS are based on, and
the core. When you plot that, it moves around a lot. So I’m wondering whether you have sharp
views about that going forward or how you’d characterize your uncertainty about that factor in
helping us understand what the TIPS spreads imply about gravitational points.
MR. STOCKTON. I’m not sure I have an empirically based response. We can actually
estimate from the model a confidence interval around a parameter estimate of the NAIRU, which as
I indicated, is wide; but I don’t have a similar thing for inflation expectations. However, I would
argue that, if you just look at the confidence intervals around inflation forecasts over the longer
haul, they are pretty wide. Obviously you control inflation over the longer haul. If you would tell
me what your tolerance is for five years from now, given our ability on a year-to-year basis to
forecast inflation, plus or minus 1 percentage point, actual inflation would fall plus or minus 1
percentage point around whatever you tell me your longer-run inflation objective would be. In
terms of the measures that we look at—and I think those probably have not changed much since
Vincent presented them in the Bluebook a while back—0.5 percentage point is just on the difference

January 30-31, 2007

35 of 255

in the measures alone; it is not actually a measure of uncertainty around any individual measure. So
it’s wide. I don’t know if you would want to add a confidence interval around that.
MR. REINHART. The intervals are, no doubt, wide. In the materials we sent to you in
October, when you were talking about your inflation goal, a staff memorandum looked at the gap
between the CPI and the PCE price index. From 1994 to 2004, the minimum is minus 0.2, and the
maximum is 1.2. They do move around. We found in the regressions that we reported in the
Bluebook box that they’re not very precise at all. The standard errors were quite large. So I think
the answer is that we don’t have a measure of inflation expectations that we could put much
confidence in.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Seeing that there are no further questions, I propose that we
start the economic go-round. Remember, we do have the two-handed option if anyone cares to
exercise it. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Recent data on economic activity have been
loaded with upside surprises for most spending categories and also for labor markets. Our response,
like the Greenbook, has been to boost our estimate of growth last quarter and our forecast for
growth this quarter. For 2007 as a whole, we have revised up our projection for real GDP growth
about ¼ percentage point, to about 2¾ percent, which is just a bit below our estimate of the trend,
which is a bit higher than the Greenbook. This performance continues to reflect the so-called
bimodal economy with weakness in housing and autos coupled with strength almost everywhere
else.
Looking beyond the first quarter, we interpret recent data as suggesting that the drag from
both weak sectors is likely to diminish, providing impetus for an acceleration of activity later this
year. Even so, the Greenbook forecasts, and we agree, that other factors will likely offset this

January 30-31, 2007

36 of 255

acceleration so that GDP will grow slightly below trend in 2007. In particular, the Greenbook
hypothesizes that the growth of consumer spending will slow, with the saving rate rising from
minus ¾ percent at the end of last year to plus 1 percent at the end of next year. This forecast
strikes us as quite reasonable. House-price appreciation has slowed dramatically, and the impetus it
has given consumption should diminish over time. In addition, the Greenbook notes, and Larry
emphasized, that consumer spending has grown more rapidly than fundamentals can explain, and
it’s sensible to predict some unwinding of this pattern. Such an outcome, however, would represent
a noticeable change in the trend of the saving rate. So to me the possibility that the saving rate will
not, in fact, rebound to the extent anticipated in the Greenbook constitutes a serious upside risk to
the outlook. Of course, the staff has emphasized this.
An alternative simulation in the Greenbook illustrates that if spending instead advances in
line with income, the unemployment rate would decline noticeably further from a level that is
already low. It is precisely because we are starting from a situation in which labor markets are
already arguably tight that the upward revisions to growth during the intermeeting period
particularly concern me. Some period of below-trend growth may ultimately be necessary to
address inflationary pressures emanating from the labor market.
In December, I emphasized the puzzle presented by the combination of an apparently
sluggish economy and a robust job market. Upward revisions to estimated growth in the fourth and
first quarters resolve a portion of that discrepancy. Even so, Okun’s law still suggests that the
excess demand in labor markets as reflected in the low unemployment rate is abnormally large
relative to that in goods markets as reflected in estimates of the output gap. The current low
unemployment rate may turn out to have benign implications for inflation. For example, labor
market tightness may well diminish somewhat over time, given that the lags between output growth

January 30-31, 2007

37 of 255

and labor market adjustments can be quite variable. Another benign possibility is that the
unemployment rate may be overstating the tightness of labor markets. For example, some
indicators of labor market conditions, like the Conference Board index for job market perceptions,
suggest a bit of softening. Indeed, available indexes of labor compensation do not provide
compelling evidence of cost pressures emanating from the labor market. However, compensation
data are mixed, and I must admit that the signal from them is somewhat confusing.
While I remain concerned about the risk that labor market pressures could boost inflation
over time, I’m still fairly optimistic about the outlook for inflation overall. Core inflation has come
down in recent months, which is welcome, although we must be careful not to overreact. Recent
favorable data could reflect the dissipation of pressures from energy prices and owners’ equivalent
rent; these sources of disinflation are inherently transitory, and once they are fully worked through
the system, we will be left with the influence of more-enduring factors, such as the extent of excess
demand or supply in labor and product markets. If these markets are, in fact, unduly tight, we could
eventually see rising inflation. Inflation expectations also matter for the inflation outlook, and I see
the stability of inflation expectations as contributing to a favorable inflation prognosis. As I
previously mentioned, my staff and other researchers find some evidence that inflation has become
less persistent over the past decade, a period during which inflation and inflation expectations have
been low and stable. Both survey and market-based estimates suggest that longer-term inflation
expectations remain stable and well anchored.
So to sum up, I continue to view a soft landing with moderating inflation as my best-guess
forecast, conditional on maintaining the current stance of policy. We expect core PCE price
inflation to edge down from 2¼ percent last year to about 2 percent in 2007. While there are risks
on both sides of the outlook for growth, I’m a little more focused on the upside risks after the recent

January 30-31, 2007

38 of 255

spate of strong data. It’s encouraging that the recent inflation news has been good. However,
there’s a great deal of uncertainty about inflation going forward, and to me these risks remain biased
to the high side.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, some of my colleagues have told me they
expected me to brag today because both teams in the Super Bowl are from the Seventh Federal
Reserve District, but I assured them I would not do that. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I notice that they’re not playing in the Seventh Federal
Reserve District, though. [Laughter]
MR. MOSKOW. Some day we’ll have the Super Bowl at the Seventh Federal Reserve
District. But turning to the business at hand, business activity in our District continues to expand at
a somewhat modest pace, but the tone of my business contacts was more positive than at our last
meeting. Manufacturing activity in the District is currently a bit soft. The Chicago purchasing
managers’ index fell from 51.6 in December to 48.8 in January, and this number will be released
tomorrow morning.
Many of my contacts are expecting a significant pickup in activity in the second half of the
year. We heard this from manufacturers of building materials, agricultural equipment, construction
machinery, autos and steel, temporary-help firms, and even from several retailers. Though a
number of manufacturers thought that the recent softness was temporary and reflected the need to
work off some modest inventory buildups, they said the final demand for their products remains
solid. The steel industry is a good example of this kind of dynamic. Industry production has fallen
sharply since the summer; but when I recently talked to the head of a major steel company, he noted
that demand from end users had remained quite stable, and he expected it to stay that way. The

January 30-31, 2007

39 of 255

production cutbacks were mainly the result of inventory fluctuations at the service centers, which
buy bulk quantities of steel to process and distribute to final customers. The analysts in the industry
are divided on when this inventory correction will be complete, but even the pessimists think that it
will be done by late spring. With the steady demand from end-use customers, my contact thought
that production and prices would definitely be rising by the second half of the year. There was an
article in the paper today that mentioned that Nucor is trying to raise prices by $20 a ton in March.
My auto contacts had mixed views about 2007. Last year was especially tough for the Big Three.
High gas prices shifted sales from SUVs to cars, and then the mix of sales shifted from retail toward
fleet sales, where their margins are lower. GM thought that gas prices probably have fallen enough
to stabilize the market share of light trucks and that retail sales were now down near their long-term
trend levels. Ford was not as sanguine about either of these developments. Finally, the strength of
foreign demand and the weaker dollar seem to be showing through to increased export demand for a
number of our District’s manufacturers, and this situation supports the comments in the chart show.
The national economy is clearly showing more underlying strength than we thought in
December. Moreover, the downside-risk scenarios now seem less likely. The housing markets look
to be nearing the bottom, and the spillover to other sectors now seems likely to be minor or is being
offset by other positive factors. Importantly, tight labor markets and lower energy prices are
boosting consumer spending. We continue to expect that growth will be modestly below potential
in the first half of the year, but like my business contacts, we expect activity to pick up in the second
half and growth to be a touch above potential by 2008. Unlike the Greenbook, this projection is
conditioned on market expectations for interest rates, which impart some degree of accommodation
next year. So currently I see the risks to the growth forecast as being fairly well balanced. On the

January 30-31, 2007

40 of 255

downside, we could be wrong about the stabilization in housing, and on the upside, consumer
spending could remain robust or demand from abroad could accelerate.
Overall, the recent data on inflation have been positive. As a result, the forecasts from our
inflation models are lower by a tenth or two. The models estimated using data only since 1984
predict that core PCE inflation will be flat at 2.3 percent through 2008. So I’m less optimistic about
inflation than the Greenbook. In my mind, there are two key questions concerning the inflation
outlook. First, what happens in 2009 and beyond? As we were discussing before, in chart 6 in the
Bluebook, for whatever reason, inflation is moving up, and I think that’s a concern. Second, there’s
the issue of longer-run inflation expectations. In the Greenbook forecast, by the end of ’07, inflation
would have been at or above 2¼ percent for a year and a half with no change in the fed funds rate
and a reasonably strong economic environment. I think markets might interpret this inaction as a
signal that we’re satisfied with 2¼ percent inflation, not the 1 percent to 2 percent comfort zone that
many of us have said we prefer. This view was shared by the participants at our recent gathering of
academic and business economists—we have an advisory committee that meets a few times a year.
Indeed, several academics thought we were already at this point. In their minds, the current policy
stance and inflation picture revealed that we were satisfied with inflation stabilizing at or a bit above
2 percent. The business economists also were predicting that we would find ourselves in the
position of needing to increase rates some time this year in order to put inflation on a pronounced
downward path.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Trends evident in the District economy for some
time fundamentally are continuing. Specifically, employment is increasing moderately and steadily.
Most components of aggregate demand are expanding, and I would note, in particular, strength in

January 30-31, 2007

41 of 255

nonresidential construction. There has been no significant acceleration of inflationary pressures or
of wage pressures. The housing sector is subdued, but the District data on sales and starts suggest
stabilization, as do the national data. The data on the inventory of unsold homes perhaps are
contradictory to that statement because there are still a lot of unsold properties; at least those data
suggest that it will be some time before there is any pickup in housing activity. In any event, as Bill
Dudley mentioned, mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures are rising, albeit starting from a fairly
low level, and though that probably won’t have a significant effect on economic performance, it
could be a political issue in Minnesota and elsewhere in the District.
As far as the national economy is concerned, it seems to me that the incoming data over the
past several months underscore a couple of things. First, the data demonstrate, again, the underlying
resilience of the economy. Second, they bolster the case for sustained growth over the next year or
more, accompanied by steady to diminishing core inflation. Let me elaborate briefly on those
observations. The economy apparently grew better than 3 percent in real terms again last year,
despite the significant run-up in energy prices, the appreciable decline in housing activity, and
problems in the domestic auto industry. As I think about the prospects for ’07, I see little in the
broad scheme of things to suggest that overall real growth over the next year will be much different
from that over the past year or, for that matter, much different from that experience from ’03
through ’05. It also seems to me that our earlier concerns about the possibility of a further
acceleration of core inflation have diminished, largely on the basis of the incoming information on
inflation, thereby through the process of elimination heightening the outlook for steady to declining
core inflation. I actually think that case is pretty good, partly because some of the factors that
boosted core inflation were transitory and partly because inflation expectations, as best I can judge,
have remained well anchored. That’s the message I get, at least from financial markets, from labor

January 30-31, 2007

42 of 255

markets, and from conversations with our directors, other business people, and so forth. So for me,
overall the near-term to medium-term outlook both for real growth and for inflation is constructive.
I’ll stop there.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The New England regional
economy continues to grow at a moderate pace with relatively slow job growth, low unemployment,
and moderating measured price trends. Consumer and business confidence is solid, and while retail
contacts reported an uneven holiday season, manufacturers were generally upbeat about business
prospects. Skilled labor continues to be in short supply and expensive. In every one of the New
England states, there is concern over the long-run prospects for labor force growth, given their
mutual low rates of natural increase, out-migration of 25 to 34 year olds, and dependence on
immigration for labor force growth. New England is an expensive place in which to live, and
concerns abound about how to attract and retain the highly skilled workers that are needed for its
high preponderance of high value added industries. Obviously, there’s nothing new or particularly
cyclical about the foregoing comments. But I’ve been to quite a few beginning of the year “let’s
take stock of things” conferences in all the states recently, so perhaps I’ve become more impressed
than usual by the medium-term to long-term challenges facing the region. In the short run,
however, the positive overall trend of the regional economy does seem to be a powerful offset to the
continuing decline in real estate markets. At our last meeting it seemed as though New England’s
real estate problem was more significant than that in the rest of the country. But now it appears that
both are similarly affected whether one looks at prices, sale volumes, inventory growth, or declining
construction. As with the nation as a whole, there are signs of stabilization; but at least in New

January 30-31, 2007

43 of 255

England, making any judgment about the imminent revival of real estate markets in midwinter is
foolhardy at best.
On the national scene, the data have been more upbeat since our last meeting. Apparently
the holiday season was a bright one, with consumption likely growing at a pace of more than
4 percent in the last quarter. That’s remarkably strong given the continuing decline in residential
real estate and proof—to reiterate what President Stern said—that the U.S. economy continues to be
unusually resilient. Supporting consumption are tight labor markets, lower energy prices, tighter
though still reasonably accommodative financial conditions, strong corporate profits and some signs
of revival in business spending after declines related to housing and motor vehicle expenditures, and
continuing strong foreign growth. Even inflation has moderated a bit, with three-month core price
increases in both the PCE and the CPI trending down. Our forecast in Boston and that of the
Greenbook are virtually indistinguishable. The last quarter of ’06 was stronger than expected. The
first quarter of this year will be slightly better as well, but after that, the trajectory remains the same
as it has been for the past two or three meetings. An increasing pace of growth in ’07 and ’08 as the
housing and motor vehicle situations unwind, a slight rise in unemployment, and a fall in core PCE
inflation to nearly 2 percent by the end of the forecast period. In many ways, this is the definition of
perfection, a forecast that is seemingly getting better each time we make it, with growth a bit higher,
unemployment a bit lower, and inflation ebbing slightly more. The underlying mechanics that
produce this outcome are relatively straightforward, but I wonder whether we should have a
heightened sense of skepticism about such a halcyon outlook. Let me focus on two reasons for such
skepticism.
First, all other things being equal, inflation could be less than well behaved. One reason that
inflation ebbed in earlier forecasts was that slower growth brought about a small output gap and

January 30-31, 2007

44 of 255

rising unemployment. Now, the output gap is virtually eliminated, and unemployment remains
below 5 percent. Ebbing inflation is solely the product of recent favorable inflation readings, which
are assumed to persist: lower energy prices, declining import prices, and falling shelter prices. It’s
hard to tell at this point whether the recent readings on core inflation are the result of fundamentally
lower inflation pressures or just luck or maybe a combination of the two. I think a similar range of
uncertainty applies to oil prices and the strength of the dollar. With virtually no output gap, it seems
to me that, while the baseline best guess might be lower inflation, for all of the reasons discussed in
the Greenbook one should approach that analysis with some caution.
Second, demand could well be stronger. The baseline forecast assumes that consumers
somehow get the message some of us have been trying to deliver about the need for an increase in
private saving. The saving rate moves from a negative 1 percent to a positive 1 percent, the highest
saving rate in several years. As I noted before, I have to ask myself why this is likely to happen
over the next coming months when it hasn’t in the wake of the housing situation in 2006. Clearly,
the downturn in residential real estate, an important political issue in all our Districts and certainly
devastating for subprime borrowers in particular, hasn’t affected consumer spending in general. In
fact, household net worth as a share of disposable income remains quite high, buoyed in part by a
likely overestimate of real housing values but also by rising equity markets. The timing of the
needed increase in the personal saving rate could well be further out in the future, creating some
version of the buoyant consumer alternative scenario instead of the baseline. Again, with no output
gap, the potential for increased inflationary pressure is obvious.
In sum, the Greenbook forecast remains in my view the most likely baseline. There are
downside risks, as I mentioned before, for the seven alternative scenarios do anticipate some
downside risks; but if the housing situation is beginning to stabilize, I find it hard to believe that

January 30-31, 2007

45 of 255

broader anxiety about it will affect business spending or the consumer as some of these scenarios
contemplate. The bigger risk may well be that business spending picks up in light of consumer
strength, unemployment stays low, growth exceeds our current projections, and resource pressures
become more intense. I am concerned that risks to inflation have grown somewhat since our last
meeting. I think I’m still in a “wait and see” mode, as I do believe there are downside risks to the
evolution of housing markets. But if the Greenbook growth forecast is right, the best risk
management on our part may have to be to seek tighter policy sooner rather than later.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Minehan, just to clarify, I think that the
forecast of consumption is not based on the idea that the saving rate has to rise. Rather,
consumption is modeled using underlying determinants, like income and wealth, and an endogenous
indication of that is that saving rises.
MS. MINEHAN. Right.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anyway, you gave the impression that higher saving was itself
something that was going to happen naturally.
MS. MINEHAN. As I look at the forecast in the Greenbook, the higher saving rate—money
out of income that’s expected to be there going into savings—is one element that makes
consumption lower than it would otherwise be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But the saving rate is not driving the consumption forecast.
Rather, the consumption forecast is driving the saving rate.
MS. MINEHAN. In the forecast, yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Well, Mr. Chairman, first on our cheaper, more affordable, and perhaps
luckier Eleventh District economy, we estimate that employment growth ran at a rate slightly

January 30-31, 2007

46 of 255

greater than 3.2 percent last year and our output growth exceeded 4 percent. We do see some
possible slowing, but there is still very strong momentum in the Texas economy and to an extent in
the New Mexican economy, despite a lower rig count.
What I’m about to talk about is not based on the buoyancy of the Eleventh District economy
but on my talking with CEOs as well as the economic projections of our own staff. I’ve talked with
twenty-five CEOs for today’s discussion. I’ve added two, and just for the record they are the CEO
of Disney and the CEO of MasterCard.
First, my retail contacts, with one exception, report a pickup in dollar volume and foot
traffic that began with the second half of December and has continued. As a result, the Wal-Mart
CEO for the United States is much more optimistic and is now forecasting volume expansion of
about 2 to 3 percent. My contact from JCPenney, which is in an income range that is double that of
Wal-Mart, reports a similar pattern of behavior that started the Friday before Christmas and has
carried forward and says that the consumers “feel good about the economy.” The one exception,
incidentally, is 7-Eleven, and I would be upset, too. Tobacco constitutes 30 percent of their sales,
and Texas just levied a $10 tax on a $30 carton of cigarettes. Otherwise, the retailers seem to be
much more optimistic than they were when I last reported. A not unimportant factor in this report
has to do with the phenomenon of gift cards. In the public release of Safeway is an interesting piece
of data: Their gift card business, which is called Blackhawk, grew 100 percent last year and
dropped $100 million to the pretax bottom line. Wal-Mart reports—and this is not yet public
information—a peak gift-card balance for this season of $1.2 billion. Now, mind you, 70 percent of
the card use occurs before February 1. So this business has extended the retail season, and it may
well have affected the buoyancy that I’m hearing from retailers in terms of their current activity.
MasterCard confirms the pickup in consumer activity, particularly that it began late in the Christmas

January 30-31, 2007

47 of 255

season, and its CEO reports from his contacts certainly much less “noise” about a possible recession
and sees that risk abating. Just to jump forward, we forecast, based on economic research,
economic growth in our District of 2.7 percent for 2007, which is what MasterCard happens to be
projecting—so I found that CEO to be instantly credible. Disney reports extremely strong
advertising growth. They expect the year-over-year growth to be 20 percent in terms of their firstquarter network advertising, with strength in every sector except for autos, according to the CEO.
They also report record foot traffic at their parks over the holidays. In contrast, UPS reports a weak
start to December but a strong finish in the last seven days of the year, with year-over-year numbers
for January not as robust as expected—running around 1 percent. The rails also report a bit slower
volume, as the CEO of one of the large rail companies said. There are clearly shifts taking place.
For example, lumber shipments of Union Pacific and Burlington Northern are down 25 percent year
over year, reflecting the falloff in the construction of homes. Both CEOs caution that company
year-over-year numbers are like comparing apples and oranges, given the robust growth in the first
quarter of 2006. I did talk to two of the top five housing CEOs and a third one, a smaller company.
They seem to confirm the sense of the staff in that they feel that the housing situation is bottoming
out, but they continue to caution that any reading of the housing industry between Thanksgiving and
the Super Bowl is of questionable value.
MR. MOSKOW. The one with two teams from the Seventh District. [Laughter]
MR. FISHER. Yes. But here are some data to put this statement in perspective. The
contact from the largest company reports that cancellation rates, which were running at 50 percent
in their most stressed markets, particularly in California and Florida, have come back to 20 to
25 percent—relatively good news. One aspect worth noting is that they are getting relief from their
subcontractors—they estimate, on average across the industry, about 10 percent cost relief. Another

January 30-31, 2007

48 of 255

predictable behavior pattern becoming manifest is that the large contractors with very strong
balance sheets are looking to buy the distressed smaller contractors. David, I agree with you that we
haven’t seen all the downturn in housing yet in terms of its effect on the economy, but we may well
come out of it with an even more tightly consolidated industry. The bottom line on growth from the
Eleventh District perspective is a Wagnerian summation—that is, the economy’s growth dynamic is
not as bad as we thought it was sounding when we last read the score. I would summarize it by
saying that the tail in terms of the risk of recession has become much slimmer.
However, my conclusion is the opposite with regard to inflation—that is, on reflection and
working with our staff and listening to CEOs, I think the tail in terms of risk of higher inflation has
fattened, and this is reflected in several reports. Just very quickly—because of my Australian
DNA—Anheuser-Busch decided to raise beer prices 2 to 3 percent at year-end. That doesn’t bother
me. What bothers me is the price of skilled workers who drink that good beer in terms of what’s
happening for wages and total compensation of skilled and unskilled labor. You know that I have
talked about the massive projects that Texas Utility plans for coal to gas conversion and whether
they get the so-called Dirty Dozen that they’re planning or just a handful. I did go over with the
CEO the studies that McKinsey, BCG, and Bechtel have provided for them, and some interesting
data points came out that I want to summarize. In the summer of ’05, they estimated that all-in
labor costs for these plants, which they estimated per plant, would take 4.6 million worker hours at
$36.25 an hour. Today they don’t believe they can get the job done for less than $44 an hour; and
because of worker quality issues, they now believe it will take 5.2 million worker hours for each
plant. So if you have a 21 percent per hour increase and a 13 percent increase in hours, one
wonders about the ability to see a short-term reduction in skilled and unskilled labor costs. These
numbers, by the way, take into account the recent slippage in oil rig activity, which is down for the

January 30-31, 2007

49 of 255

fifth straight week, and also the slowdown in housing and some initial slowdown in commercial
construction. It dovetails with reports like that of BP’s to us that they decided to pay all their
salaried operators, to whom only two years ago they were offering incentive packages to leave,
$25,000 bonuses per year for the next two years to stay. Fluor’s CEO reports that they are having
the largest year in their history of hiring college graduates, and the 900 mechanics who work for a
large truck dealer with which I regularly talk are now fetching $35 an hour.
Another piece of data comes from a study by McKinsey and BCG, and I want to talk about
it very briefly in terms of the intermodal transportation system of our country. The shippers tell me
that port congestion is very high. The fleet utilization rate is running at about 95 percent. You
know that I like to talk about Panamax ship rates because of their size and liquidity. Prices have not
eased since we last met, and the interesting factoid is that the ten-year-old fleet is available for
purchase at the same price as the fleet expected to be delivered two and a half years from now.
These ships run $39 million apiece before their add-ons, which tells you that there’s a short-term
tightness. If you talk to the rails and the effective two operators—there’s really a duopoly in this
country between Burlington Northern and Union Pacific—their pricing is based on opportunity
costs because they do not foresee the ability to expand their networks. This may well facilitate an
upward price spiral as all the infrastructure projects currently on the drawing boards begin, whether
TXU’s or some other liquefied natural gas companies’ projects that we have heard about.
A couple of other points with regard to inflation that I think bear watching: These inputs are
anecdotal, but I think we have a pretty good survey in terms of the oil and gas operators. Most of
the major oil and gas operators would not be surprised to see $40 oil and to see a range between $40
and $60 oil—that fits with the Brown-Yücel model that we developed in Dallas—and for natural
gas prices to ease to a level of about $5 in the spring. That’s the good news.

January 30-31, 2007

50 of 255

I want to mention two other negative news items. One was referred to earlier, and that
regards corn prices. The price for corn was $2.30 a bushel last year, if you looked on the graph that
Bill, I think, presented earlier. Corn is now running $4.00 a bushel, and the food production
companies we talked to project the price to be $5.00 by the end of the year. Now, this is good for
farmers. It’s good for John Deere. It’s not good if you raise a chicken, a cow, or a pig, and it’s
certainly not good if you’re a human who eats at Whataburger, one of my other new contacts. I
won’t use the language that the CEO used, but he reports that his margins are coming under
pressure.
The second development may be a bit more disturbing; it concerns the cost of imported
goods from China into Wal-Mart’s network. According to Wal-Mart’s CEO for international
operations and their vice chairman, Chinese import prices into Wal-Mart’s network were
depreciating at an annual rate of between 2 and 5 percent. Recently, however, the rise in China’s
labor costs for their suppliers net of the increase in productivity is leading to import price costs that
are increasing at a rate of approximately 1 percent. To me this development raises an issue that I
think President Moskow touched on regarding our views on inflation and perhaps rates going
forward, which we’ll talk about tomorrow. At home, we’re seeing unacceptably high and sustained
wage developments for certain critical components of labor, which I mentioned earlier. Abroad
from Germany to China, we’re seeing economic growth rates that are well above sustainable trends,
which is why I asked the question about your gap analysis earlier. My own staff calculates that, if
you do a gap analysis—that is, if you compare current growth to what they estimate trend growth to
be—there is no significant inflationary pressure. However, if you analyze capacity utilization rates
in the G7 countries and in the BRICs, we are getting closer, given the economic growth that has
been experienced, to more heavily used capacity and to igniting inflationary pressures. The bottom

January 30-31, 2007

51 of 255

line for inflation from our perspective is that what was once a tailwind generated by globalization
may be closer to becoming a headwind than our models indicate and our limited understanding of
the effect of globalization otherwise leads us to understand. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, just a quick question. I couldn’t quite gather
whether you were saying that commercial construction is overall slowing. You mentioned that
once, but then you talked about a variety of projects.
MR. FISHER. It appears to be slowing in certain areas and in our District but is nonetheless
running at a stout rate. It seems to have come off somewhat but, given the large projects that are
planned, the numbers work out to show increasing pressure on the labor that’s available to construct
those projects.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have the sense that since our last meeting
we’ve received a wealth of data but not necessarily a wealth of information. Between the data that
have come in and the conversations that I’ve had with my District contacts in the past six weeks,
I’m a little more confident about the outlook for real growth, and I view the inflation outlook as
unchanged. Housing is an example of having more data, but not necessarily more information.
Though some aspects of the residential housing data have been encouraging, neither futures on
housing prices nor reports that I have received from people in the business suggest that the
slowdown in that sector will end any time soon. Despite that, it still looks as though the spillovers
to consumer spending and financial markets have been limited. At our last meeting, there was also
some uncertainty regarding the health of the manufacturing sector. For the most part, the
intermeeting data have been favorable for the manufacturing sector. The industrial production
numbers, for example, have been strong, but manufacturing employment remains flat.

January 30-31, 2007

52 of 255

The usual story that makes sense of these disparate trends is the continuing strength in
manufacturing productivity. But I’d like to mention another element in the picture—others have
mentioned it this morning—and that’s the skills mismatches. My directors and business contacts in
the manufacturing sector tell me that they have jobs available but that they face great difficulty in
filling those jobs because they can’t find people with the right skills. Interestingly, as was
mentioned in the staff presentation earlier, the JOLTS data show openings as rising, and that’s also
true in the manufacturing sector. Openings have been rising over the past two years. This news
really isn’t so good per se, but it does suggest that at least some of the sluggishness in
manufacturing job growth is coming out of the structural elements in the labor markets and is not
purely a cyclical decline in aggregate demand. In a somewhat related vein, according to the
National Association of Colleges and Employers, college placements are up 17 percent this year, the
strongest showing since 2001. The story is that relatively high profits and good business prospects
are driving up demand. We also understand from the Ohio governor’s office that last year, although
sales tax receipts were lower, income tax receipts were stronger than expected.
These bits and pieces combined with some of the positive news in the aggregate data reports
in the past couple of months make me somewhat less worried about the downside risks to economic
growth than I was at the last meeting. I don’t want to go overboard on this. I had that feeling
several times last year only to be subsequently moved in the other direction. It is hard to tell
whether some of this good news has been related to weather—that is, some spring activity might
have shifted into the fourth quarter.
On the inflation front, both the official data and the anecdotal stories from my contacts
continue to provide some encouragement that core inflation will moderate over the next year, but
the data are not yet entirely convincing. My staff has noted that for most of 2006, especially in the

January 30-31, 2007

53 of 255

later half of the year, the growth rates of individual CPI components exhibited a bimodal
distribution. On an expenditure-weighted basis, most components were either falling in price or
rising at a troubling rate. Very few CPI components were rising at a pace that the CPI tells us is
about average. This pattern is highly unusual, and I don’t know what to make of it, except to say
that it does make it more difficult to tell which way the inflation trend is leaning.
My only material difference of opinion with the staff baseline projection concerns the
assumption about labor supply. Economywide, there is some reason to think that aggregate labor
supply is more abundant than the Greenbook baseline contemplates. Labor force participation rates
for most demographic groups have been running stronger than the staff has been expecting,
indicating that the growth of potential output could lie somewhat above the Greenbook estimate.
That’s what I am assuming, and therefore I get a slightly better combination of output and inflation .
In the end, my outlook for the economy hasn’t changed. The general contours of the
forecast for a modest slowdown in growth coupled with a very gradual decline in core inflation
make sense to me. However, I have lowered just slightly my assessment of the risk that real growth
will fall short of my projection, and I have not changed my risk assessment of inflation. There’s
still a notable risk that year-over-year changes in inflation might remain stuck where they are today
as opposed to drifting down half a point or so over time as I would prefer. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in our District lost a bit of
momentum in January. Retail sales contracted in recent weeks as automobile dealers noted waning
interest and buyers of big-ticket electronic goods stayed home, perhaps to watch the big screens
they purchased during the holidays. [Laughter] Another source of slowing was a further pullback

January 30-31, 2007

54 of 255

in the factory sector. I should mention new orders in our District slipped in recent weeks, on top of
December’s modest contraction, and factory hiring edged lower for the second straight month. On
the plus side, services firms continued to report moderate growth in revenues and employment.
Despite this mixed picture, however, a wide variety of firms remained optimistic about their
prospects six months out. District labor market conditions remained tight, and skilled workers
continued to be in strong demand in large metropolitan areas. Businesses tell us that they are
pushing up wages as a result.
Real estate activity is, on balance, hanging in there. Anecdotal reports indicate fairly firm
home sales across many areas in December, and we’re hearing more reports of pockets of strength
in some suburban housing markets around D.C., though assessments from other areas continue to be
somewhat downbeat. We have also heard that homebuilding activity rose somewhat in a number of
District metropolitan areas in recent weeks. Commercial real estate prospects remained relatively
bright, with leasing activity firm and a solid number of projects on the books for ’07. Price
pressures at District firms seem to have moderated somewhat, confirming the national trends.
The national data flow since our last meeting has been encouraging. The Greenbook now
predicts a higher trajectory for real GDP. I agree with the Greenbook’s short-term outlook.
Declining housing construction is still depressing the real growth rate now, but demand has
stabilized, I think, and inventories may be topping out. Each batch of housing data has bolstered my
confidence in the trajectory we sketched out last fall—namely, that the drag from housing will
mostly disappear by midyear with spillover having been relatively limited.
Consumer spending has been quite resilient. Evidently, favorable income prospects have
trumped weakening housing prices. The fundamentals for business investment remain favorable
with the cost of capital low and profitability high; and the latest news—that unfilled orders for

January 30-31, 2007

55 of 255

capital goods are continuing to increase—fits in well with the view that equipment investment is
likely to be a source of strength going forward. The Greenbook has real growth later this year and
into next year returning to trend, driven by strength in business investment and solid consumer
spending. I agree with that outlook with the caveat that my estimate of trend growth is higher than
the Greenbook’s.
The inflation news since the last meeting has been encouraging as well. Core CPI inflation
was 1.8 in the fourth quarter, and core PCE inflation was estimated to have been 2.1 percent. It’s
tempting to extrapolate this favorable news forward as the Greenbook does and forecast a gradual
downward drift without further overt action by the Committee. That outcome is certainly plausible,
especially if oil prices cooperate and remain contained within recent trading ranges. But I remain
apprehensive. First, core inflation has exhibited fairly substantial high-frequency swings over the
past couple of years. So it will take many more months for me to be very confident that inflation is
trending down. Second, and related, over the past three years large swings in energy prices have
been followed by swings in core inflation with a short lag. Indeed, the cross-correlation between
core and energy components of the PCE price index seems to have increased in the past few years.
The recent dip in core inflation may therefore be the transitory effect of last summer’s decline in
energy prices, and the December uptick in core CPI may signal that it’s behind us now. A
downward drift in inflation thus is likely to depend critically on the absence of upward movements
in energy prices. Note that the staff follows the futures market in assuming, as I calculated it, a
13 percent rise in oil prices by the end of 2008, which suggests continuing upward pressure on core
inflation. Third, expectations could well exert a gravitational pull in an upward direction rather than
the downward direction as claimed recently in a popular newsletter and also as the staff indicated
underlies their forecast. Personally, I place the center of gravity a little higher, above 2 percent.

January 30-31, 2007

56 of 255

The twelve-month change in core PCE inflation has been above 2 percent, as we all know, since
March 2004, and none of the usual measures of expectations either from surveys or TIPS markets
are much below 2½ percent for the CPI. So even though the recent inflation news has been
comforting, I think there’s a good reason to continue to worry about it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Conditions in the Third District have
continued to evolve much as they have for most of the past several months. Economic activity is
still expanding. I think I can use the word “moderate”—I don’t think anybody else has used that
yet, and our contacts expect the pace to be maintained in the coming months. There has been little
change in the pattern of activity over the sectors. Retailers in our region indicated that their holiday
sales were about as they expected or somewhat better. Housing continues to weaken at a somewhat
orderly pace, but there are signs of stabilization of demand. Inventory has remained elevated, and
construction continues to decline. However, the weakness in residential construction is being offset
by continued strength in nonresidential construction. Office vacancy rates continue to decline in
Philadelphia and in the near suburbs as well. The net absorption of office space has increased for
the past twelve quarters. Manufacturing activity in the region hit a soft spot in the fall, as I indicated
in previous meetings, but our most recent Business Outlook Survey, in January, presented
somewhat positive but also somewhat mixed signals. The general activity index returned to positive
territory with a reading of plus 8, indicating a slight increase in manufacturing activity, and there
was a significant rebound in shipments. New orders, however, remained close to zero. That’s
somewhat of an aberration because new orders and shipments tend to move very much together, and
so there are some inconsistencies there, which is why I said the situation is a bit mixed. According
to our survey, however, the firms expect a rebound of general manufacturing activity and orders

January 30-31, 2007

57 of 255

over the coming six months. Indeed, most of our business contacts see moderate growth in the
region continuing for the foreseeable future. Their positive attitudes are consistent with the recent
positive news we’ve had about conditions in the nation. Firms remain concerned about their ability
to hire both skilled and unskilled labor. Labor markets are tight for many of the reasons that
President Minehan described in New England; we have some of the same things going on in the
Third District.
Regarding national conditions, the unusually warm weather in December may have
temporarily buoyed some of our numbers; but based on incoming information, I’ve become
increasingly confident that the national economy has a positive underlying momentum. At the time
of our last meeting, there was a contrast between the mixed data on consumption and production
and the relatively strong indications from the labor market. The picture that appears to be emerging
from the latest economic information is one of stronger underlying growth that has been temporarily
weakened by housing and autos. There is little, if any, evidence that the housing and auto
corrections are spilling over into the other sectors of the economy. We’ve been looking for those
spillovers for the past six months and have yet to see any significant evidence that they are
occurring or are about to occur. Of course, spillovers may yet materialize with a long lag, but that
likelihood to my mind is diminishing as we have begun to see some hopeful signs of stabilization in
housing. Labor market conditions remain firm, and manufacturing indicators improved in
December as did capital goods orders. Although I didn’t talk to the chairman of Disney, I did talk
to a small manufacturing firm with total revenues that come to $2 million. He has been very
positive about the outlook. His sales depend a lot on construction, and he said that, after the most
miserable August and September he had ever seen in his twenty years of running the business, the
pickup began in late November, continued through December, and has continued into January as

January 30-31, 2007

58 of 255

well. Other contacts from banks, particularly credit card issuers to whom I’ve talked, suggest that
banks are seeing numbers coming across their books on credit card purchases continuing to be
strong even after Christmas. So that also is good news.
All of this suggests that the downside risks to growth have receded since our last meeting. I
believe this is the market’s assessment as well, as expectations of future policy firm. My outlook is
that the economy will return to trend growth, which I put at about 3 percent this year, and will
continue at that pace into 2008. Of course, as everybody has indicated, that’s a little stronger than
the Greenbook’s outlook, and it is, again, based on my view that potential growth or trend growth is
somewhat higher than the Greenbook has stated. I expect the unemployment rate to rise slightly,
maybe to 4.8 percent by the fourth quarter of this year, and then to stabilize into next year. I think
this is going to be accompanied by employment growth of nearly 1 percent, and again, that’s what
accounts for the difference in the trend growth.
I anticipate a decline in core PCE inflation of about 0.4 percent by 2008. I would like to
underscore that this forecast is not driven by a lower pass-through of oil prices, which have
declined. My reading of the empirical evidence, including work done by some people on the
Philadelphia staff, is that it’s very difficult to attribute movements in core inflation of six months to
twelve months or longer periods to changes in oil prices. In fact, there’s growing empirical
evidence that neither movements in oil prices nor Phillips curve type factors significantly improve
our root mean square error forecasts of core inflation two or more quarters ahead. I note that this
refers to forecasts of six months or longer and not to short-run high-frequency movements. This
suggests that we should be careful in the language we use describing the reasons for our projections
of future inflation to avoid perpetuating views of inflation processes that we can’t empirically
substantiate.

January 30-31, 2007

59 of 255

In my view, core inflation will not come back down until monetary conditions, which I
believe have been very accommodative over the past few years, have tightened sufficiently. The
Greenbook forecast has a slightly smaller decline in core PCE inflation to about 2 percent in 2008,
but incorporates a less restrictive monetary policy than I believe is likely to be appropriate given my
view of the strength of the underlying economy and of the fundamentals that we are seeing. Indeed,
over the past two meetings, my feeling was that the slowdown in economic activity that we might
be seeing, combined with a constant fed funds rate, might have been enough to bring inflation back
to a more acceptable level. Now I’m less convinced that price stability will be achieved without
further action on our part some time later this year. But I will leave that discussion to the policy goround. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Mr. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Charlie, I’m not sure I understand your thinking. You
said that you expect what sounded like a pretty significant moderation in core PCE, but that’s on a
monetary policy assumption that implies further tightening.
MR. PLOSSER. That’s right, somewhat tighter, somewhat more aggressive than what’s in
the Greenbook.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Though I don’t want to pin you down, that sounds sort of
modest. You are saying that with another 25 basis points you’d get what core PCE inflation over
the forecast period?
MR. PLOSSER. The path I was thinking about as I was doing the forecast and trying to
determine the appropriate policy here—my desire is to get inflation down lower, and that’s reflected
in my forecast—is one in which the fed funds rate goes up somewhat from where it is today,

January 30-31, 2007

60 of 255

perhaps to 5½ or 5¾ percent. But then by the end of ’07 and into ’08, it’s coming back down again
to more of a steady-state level, and then we can talk about what the real neutral rate is.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Just in orders of magnitude—if we did another 25 or 50
basis points and there were some sort of associated changes in overall financial conditions so that
that was reinforced, you’d get a core PCE inflation forecast that would go how far down? Would it
go to 1.5?
MR. PLOSSER. Well, there’s some uncertainty about that. I think it would get to between
1.5 and 2 percent.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. It’s 4:30. Why don’t we take a fifteen-minute
coffee break?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Would you come to order, please? Thank you. We are ready
to recommence with the go-round. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, now that I have everyone’s attention, [laughter]
I’m going to start with some information on the District and then talk briefly about the national
economy from my perspective. Let me begin by saying that the District’s activity did slow over the
second half of 2006 in line with the national economy itself. The slowdown was most apparent in
housing and manufacturing. However, the most recent data that we have from November and
December indicate a pickup in some of the activity. Moreover, reports from our directors and our
business contacts suggest a considerable degree of optimism among them going forward, more than
we expected actually. One area in which we are seeing signs of improvement is housing itself.
While new construction activity does remain subdued in our region, sales activity has picked up,
and the inventory situation appears to be improving in our major markets. Nonresidential

January 30-31, 2007

61 of 255

construction remains strong and is offsetting some of the weakness on the residential side. District
employment growth has risen in recent months, and labor markets remain tight for us. In addition to
continuing shortages of skilled workers in a large number of technical and professional areas, we
have recently received reports that the hospitality and recreational sectors are experiencing difficulty
in finding lower-skilled workers as well. We have also received numerous reports from directors in
District businesses indicating higher year-end wage and salary increases.
The situation in agriculture is somewhat mixed. The sharp increases in crop prices,
especially corn, driven by exports of ethanol and exports of corn itself, have caused the USDA to
boost estimates of 2007 farm income rather significantly. However, higher crop prices are also
eroding profitability of livestock producers and processors in our region, which is a fairly important
sector.
One important sector in which activity appears likely to slow in 2007 is energy. The District
economy has benefited tremendously over the past few years from the rise in energy prices, which
has spurred increased production of traditional products—and that includes oil, gas, and coal—as
well as alternative fuels like ethanol and biodiesel. According to reports from a couple of our
directors, however, the recent decline in energy prices has already led to a reduction in drilling
activity and is likely to cause some cutbacks in new investment in alternative fuels as well.
Turning to the national outlook, I, like others, have noted the recent strength in the economy
and have raised my estimates of growth for the fourth quarter and somewhat raised them for the first
quarter. I continue to expect growth to rise over 2007 modestly toward what I think is potential, in
the neighborhood of 3 percent. However, now I expect it to occur a little more quickly than I did at
the December meeting. Accordingly, recent economic information has led me to reassess the
balance of risks to the outlook. I believe the downside risks from the further slowing of housing

January 30-31, 2007

62 of 255

have diminished somewhat. Moreover, I share the view that the recent weakness in manufacturing
activity reflects a better balancing of production and inventories rather than a fundamental
weakness. Going forward, the improved outlook for energy prices should support consumer
spending by improving consumers’ disposable income, and we may see additional fiscal stimulus
resulting from the more-favorable budget positions of the state and local governments.
Finally, in terms of the inflation outlook, my views have not changed materially since the
last meeting. I’ve been encouraged by the recent inflation data, and I continue to expect inflation to
decline over the forecast period. I expect the core CPI to be in the 2.3 percent range and core PCE
inflation to be about 2 percent for 2007. However, as others have noted, core inflation is too high,
and considerable uncertainty remains about whether the recent progress will be sustained.
Particularly, it is not clear how the opposing trends of lower energy prices and greater resource
pressures may play out over the next few quarters. Consequently, it seems to me that there is upside
risk to the inflation outlook. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought I’d focus a little more today in my
comments on the State of Florida as it relates to the housing sector. We’ve heard a lot more positive
comments in just the past few minutes about housing. So let me offer a contrarian view, if you will.
Florida accounts for about 41 percent of our District employment and 6 percent of overall U.S.
employment. As for housing, Florida represented 8 percent of U.S. home sales in 2005 and 6
percent in 2006 as sales and construction continued to decline. To put these numbers in perspective,
single-family existing home sales in Florida have dropped 40 percent since January 2005 versus an
11 percent decline in the United States as a whole. Anecdotal reports are that builders are
continuing to work down existing inventory and are not starting new projects. In most areas of the

January 30-31, 2007

63 of 255

state, starts have fallen even more than sales, which should lessen the run-up in housing inventory
over the immediate future. Permit issuance for single-family homes is down 54 percent in Florida
since January 2005 compared with 28 percent in the nation as a whole. There are certain
encouraging signs from reports noting, as mentioned earlier, that buyer traffic is better in some
areas, and several of the building contacts that we spoke with expect or, perhaps I would note more
accurately, are hopeful that new home sales will improve by the second quarter of 2007.
Home prices have declined modestly but remain well above the levels implied by the pre2003 trends in most areas. This places housing affordability at a relatively low level by historical
standards. As I noted at previous meetings, the demand in coastal markets is being constrained by
the steep rise in homeownership insurance that has caused monthly housing costs to rise sharply,
even as house prices moderate. We’ve heard reports that in markets where prices accelerated the
most in recent years, such as south Florida, employers are struggling to recruit staff because of the
high housing costs, with some firms electing to leave south Florida and others beginning to convert
corporate owned land to corporate housing just so that they can recruit employees. As I reported at
our last meeting, the decline in housing activity continues to have a negative effect on housingrelated sectors specifically in the South because of our concentration in the carpet and other related
industries. Housing-related employment is no longer a net contributor to year-over-year
employment growth in the United States, even though overall job growth has remained very firm.
District banks reported that credit quality has softened but remains at very strong levels.
However, banks are beginning to be a bit more vocal in expressing concern with regard to the
possibility that builders will face financial problems in the coming months. In addition, banks
express concern about the number of speculative condominium projects in south Florida. District
banks have lower earnings targets for 2007, and the expectation is that bank merger and acquisition

January 30-31, 2007

64 of 255

activity and layoffs will increase in the coming year. Some banks are even putting out the “for sale”
sign in the hope of cashing out now, noting that things could get ugly over the next two years in
some areas.
Outside the housing sector, indicators of economic performance in the District were mixed.
Reports on holiday-related sales were on the positive side, whereas tourism remains relatively
mixed across the District. Reports from the manufacturing sector were also mixed, with a weakness
in the housing-related industries offset to some extent by the expanding activity in industries related
to defense and energy.
For the U.S. economy as a whole, the drag from housing that we experienced over the
second half of 2006 does not appear at this time to pose a serious threat to the overall economy,
although some forecasters anticipate below-trend real GDP growth for the end of 2006 and the first
quarter of 2007. Most would say that this situation is temporary and would anticipate that real GDP
growth will rebound and be close to the trend rate of 3 percent for the rest of 2007. Our staff
projections of real GDP growth have had about the same tone as those of the external forecasters.
Our staff believes real GDP growth will be sustained in 2007 by job creation that should match the
experience that we’ve seen in 2006.
Measured core inflation was well in excess of 2 percent at the end of 2006. The staff
forecast is that core inflation will continue to hover just above 2 percent for all of 2007. The
expectation is that price growth in services will continue to dominate core inflation going forward.
In my comments I’ve focused a bit more on housing. I would just close by noting that my
continued concern would be the lack of impetus to drive down inflation over the long term. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Poole.

January 30-31, 2007

65 of 255

MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to start by saying that it’s hard to
compete with my colleague Richard Fisher, with his stable of contacts. I have perhaps just a
slight amendment on Wal-Mart. My contact there said that he has observed in recent years a
changing pattern of holiday shopping, with shoppers procrastinating and putting their shopping
closer to Christmas, and that might have moved some sales from November to December; also
the growth of the gift card business moved some of those sales into January. Those
circumstances might explain a bit of what we’re seeing. He said that it looks as though the
January same-store sales growth will come in at 2½ to 2¾ percent. I’m sure that’s consistent
with Richard’s information. My contact points out that, although those numbers are a little better
than what they had anticipated a month or two ago, they are still 200 basis points below the
original plan, which was set about a year ago. For February their plan is 4½ percent, but he
believes that anything north of 3 would be good performance. His view is that he doesn’t see a
lot of momentum one way or another, that things are pretty steady, and that there’s been no
particularly significant change in the situation.
My FedEx contact sees business as very steady. There was a very strong peak season,
pretty much on projection. The one negative he sees is in the less-than-truckload business, and
that confirms information coming directly from a trucking industry source as well. Basically, the
outlook is good, steady, and very confident. As for capital expenditures, FedEx is expecting to
have 15 percent above this fiscal year in the next fiscal year, which starts June 1. My contact
does not see any particular labor market pressures. My UPS contact said that the company is
cutting its cap-ex, and they are actually cutting capacity. He said that they are cutting out twelve
flights, I think it was, that they had just added in June. The cuts are basically a consequence of a
careful analysis of their express business, which showed that a lot of it is just unprofitable,

January 30-31, 2007

66 of 255

particularly the shipping of packages to individual homes. They are renegotiating contracts with
online retailers and mail order retailers, and they’re trying to shed some of that business.
My trucking industry contact says that things just don’t look very sound. Freight volume,
which would be full truckloads, is actually off 4 percent year over year in January. Shipping
rates are flat, but there are intense pressures from their clients to cut rates. Driver turnover is up
because the drivers are not getting enough business to eat well, and so they are shopping around
for other companies. So they are losing some drivers, but they’re not too worried because they
have plenty of drivers at the moment. The intermodal business is holding up well, my contact
said.
I’d like to just make one brief comment on the national outlook. I think it’s pretty clear,
and it’s reflected around the table, that the outlook for real GDP is a bit stronger than it was at
our December meeting, and depending on your perspective in reading the data, maybe the
inflation picture is a bit better, too. But I would emphasize that, compared with past revisions of
the outlook, these are really marginal and not material revisions. There hasn’t been any really
big news here. We don’t want to get carried away with a flow of data that is only slightly
stronger.
Let me also comment, along the same lines, about what has been going on with longerterm interest rates. At the time of our December meeting, the constant-maturity ten-year rate
was 4.49. At least that’s what I have in my spreadsheet. On Friday, it was 4.88. There has been
a lot of comment to that effect. I think that change is due partly to the string of marginally
stronger news and partly to a change in the market’s assessment about our likely future behavior.
The market has simply taken out the expectation of a rate cut in the near term. The market has
looked again at where we are to a much greater extent than we ourselves have. Thank you.

January 30-31, 2007

67 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.
MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Do you think that’s because they have changed their minds about our
reaction function or about how the shocks are likely to come in between now and then?
MR. POOLE. I suspect that it’s a combination. But I also think that a number of us in
our speeches have been saying things such as that we think policy is at about the right place. If
we repeat that often enough, the markets begin to think that we’re not about to cut rates.
MR. LACKER. So what about our statement in October? Did they miss that?
MR. POOLE. I guess that it’s a consequence of the interaction between what we’ve been
saying and the flow of data. You have to be careful about double-counting here, but the flow of
data has perhaps convinced the market that what we were saying is right because the market, I
think, had developed a somewhat different sense of where the economy was going than they had
thought that we held.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Does Mr. Lacker have an alternative explanation?
MR. LACKER. I think he’s right. He is suggesting that his belief is that the reaction
function they hold to hasn’t changed much in the past month or two but that the shocks have
come in more consistent with our assessment of how they were going to come in. Is that fair?
MR. POOLE. Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few quick points.
We feel somewhat better about the outlook for growth and inflation, but we haven’t really
changed our forecasts for ’07 and ’08. So just as we expected over the past few cycles, we

January 30-31, 2007

68 of 255

currently expect GDP to grow roughly at the rate of potential over the forecast period, which we
believe is still around 3 percent, and we expect the rate of increase in the core PCE to moderate a
bit more to just below 2 percent over the forecast period. We see somewhat less downside risk
to growth and somewhat less upside risk to inflation than we did, but the overall balance of risks
in our view is still weighted toward inflation—the risk that it fails to moderate enough or soon
enough. The basic nature of the risks to both those elements of our forecast hasn’t really
changed.
As this implies, our forecast still has somewhat stronger growth and somewhat less
inflation than the Greenbook does. The differences, however, are smaller than they have been.
We see the same basic story that the Greenbook does in support of continuing expansion going
forward. We have similar assumptions for the appropriate path of monetary policy—at least two,
perhaps several, quarters of a nominal fed funds rate at current levels. The main differences
between our view about the economy and the Greenbook’s relate first, as they have for some
time, to the likely growth in hours; we’re still not inclined to build in a substantial reduction in
trend labor force growth. Second, our view is that inflation has less inertia, less persistence, than
it has exhibited over the past half-century. Third, we tend to think that changes in wealth have
less effect on consumer behavior than does the staff.
We have seen a general convergence in views in the market, as we just discussed, toward
a forecast close to this view, close to the center of gravity in this room, and a very significant
change in policy expectations as well. We can take some comfort from this, but I don’t think we
should take too much. Markets still seem to display less uncertainty about monetary policy and
asset prices and quite low probabilities to even modest increases in risk premiums than I think is
probably justified.

January 30-31, 2007

69 of 255

Let me just go through the principal questions briefly. Is the worst behind us in both
housing and autos? Probably, but we can’t be sure yet. If we get some negative shock to
income—to demand growth—we’re still vulnerable to a more adverse adjustment in housing
prices with potentially substantially negative effects on growth, in part because of the greater
leverage now on household balance sheets. How strong does the economy look outside autos
and housing? Pretty strong, it seems. We see no troubling signs of weakness, despite the
disappointment on some aspects of investment spending. What does the labor market strength
tell us about the risk to the forecast? It seems obvious that on balance it justifies some caution
about upside risk to growth and more than the usual humility about what we know about slack
and trend labor force growth. But I don’t think it fundamentally offers a compelling case on its
own for a substantial change to the inflation forecast or the risks to that forecast.
Is there any new information on structural productivity growth? Not in our view. We’re
still fairly comfortable with the staff view of around 2 percent or 2½ percent for the nonfarm
business sector. I’m not a great fan of the anecdote, but I’ll cite just one. If you ask people who
make stuff for a living on a substantial scale, it’s hard to find any concern that they are seeing
diminished capacity to extract greater productivity growth in their core businesses. That’s not a
general observation, just a small one.
Have the inflation risks changed meaningfully in either direction? I think the recent
behavior of the core numbers and of expectations is reassuring. The market doesn’t seem
particularly concerned about inflation, and the market is therefore vulnerable to a negative
surprise, to a series of higher numbers. Can we be confident we’ll get enough moderation with
the current level of long-term expectations prevailing in markets, with the expected path of slack
in the economy, and with the range of potential forces that might operate on relative prices—

January 30-31, 2007

70 of 255

energy, import, and other prices? Again, I think this forecast still seems reasonable, but we can’t
be that confident, and we need to be concerned still about the range of sources of vulnerability of
that forecast. Another way to frame this question is, Is the inflation forecast consistent with the
current expectations for the path of monetary policy acceptable to the Committee? We haven’t
fully confronted that issue because we don’t get much moderation with a monetary policy
assumption that’s close to what’s in the markets. But I don’t think there’s a compelling case to
act at this stage in a way that forces convergence on that. In other words, how tight is monetary
policy, and how tight are overall financial conditions today? I don’t think there’s a very strong
case for us to induce more tightness or more accommodation than now prevails. There’s a good
case for patience and for giving ourselves a fair amount of flexibility going forward, within the
context of an asymmetric signal about the balance of risks and a basic judgment that we view the
costs of a more adverse inflation outcome as the predominant concern of the Committee.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In preparation for submitting my forecast, I
looked at my previous forecasts—a humbling but instructive experience usually. [Laughter]
Going back a year, I found that, based on the staff’s estimate for 2006, inflation and growth had
each turned out within a quarter point of my projections. I’m quite certain that this is not a
consequence of any particular expertise on my part. Rather, it is indicative that, in a broad sense,
the economy is performing remarkably close to our expectations. President Poole was making
this point. Even going back a few years to when we started to remove accommodation, despite
large fluctuations in energy prices in recent years, huge geopolitical uncertainties, and a housing
boom and bust the dimensions of which we really didn’t anticipate three years ago, the economy

January 30-31, 2007

71 of 255

is in the neighborhood of full employment, and core inflation is at a fairly low rate by historical
standards.
Now, the surprises last year were the surge of inflation in the spring and early summer.
That has not been entirely reversed. The extent of the slowdown in productivity growth, both in
terms of trend and of actual relative to the lower estimated trend, and the related decline in the
unemployment rate suggest that we are entering 2007 with a higher risk of inflation than I had
anticipated a year ago. Given this risk, it is especially important that economic growth be no
greater and perhaps a little less than the growth rate of potential, and that is my forecast—a small
uptrend in the unemployment rate. The issue I wrestled with was how fast the economy will be
growing when the drag from housing abates. In early December, the debate might have been
about whether demand would be sufficient to support growth as high as potential. But given the
stabilization of housing demand, the strength of consumption, and ongoing increases in
employment, I asked myself whether we might not find the economy growing faster than its
potential beginning in the second half of 2007 and in 2008, thereby adding to inflation pressures.
A couple of forces, however, gave me a little comfort in supporting my projection of only
moderate growth. One is the modest restraint on demand from the recent rise in interest rates,
especially the restraint on the housing market, and the dollar exchange rate. Another is the
likelihood that consumption will grow more slowly relative to income and will lag the response
to housing as housing prices level out and as energy prices begin to edge higher. Consumption
late last year was probably still being boosted substantially by the past increases in housing
wealth and by the declines in energy prices, which combined with warm weather to give a
considerable lift to disposable income. On the housing wealth factor, I think our model suggests
that it takes several quarters for a leveling out in housing wealth to build into consumption. In

January 30-31, 2007

72 of 255

fact, the data through the third quarter suggest that prices were really just about leveling out in
the third quarter. So it may be a little early to conclude that, just because we’re not seeing a
spillover from the housing market to consumption, there isn’t going to be any. I expect some,
though modest, spillover. Moreover, some of the impulse in the fourth quarter was from net
exports. These were spurred in part by a temporary decline in petroleum imports and an
unexpected strength in exports. Those conditions are unlikely to be sustained. In addition,
business investment spending has been weaker than we anticipated. Now, I suspect this is, like
the inventory situation, just an aspect of adapting to a slower pace of growth, and investment will
strengthen going forward. But it does suggest that businesses are cautious. They are not
anticipating ebullient demand and a pressing need to expand facilities to meet increases in sales,
and their sense of their market seems worth factoring into our calculations. Finally, the fact that
I would have been asking just the opposite question seven weeks ago suggests that we’re also
putting a lot of weight on a few observations, [laughter] whether regarding the weakness then or
the strength more recently.
I do continue to believe that growth close to the growth rate of potential will be consistent
with gradually ebbing inflation. For this I would round up the usual suspects, reflecting the
ebbing of some temporary factors that increased inflation in 2006. One factor is energy prices.
Empirical evidence since the early 1980s to the contrary notwithstanding, the coincidence that
President Lacker remarked between the rise and fall in energy prices in 2006 and the rise and fall
in core inflation suggests some cause and effect. The increase in energy prices into the summer
has probably not yet been completely reversed in twelve-month core inflation rates, so I expect
some of that to be dying out as we go into the future. Increases in rents are likely to moderate as
units are shifted from ownership to rental markets. The slowdown in growth relative to earlier

January 30-31, 2007

73 of 255

last year seems to have made businesses more aware of competitive pressures, restraining pricing
power. When we met last spring, we had a lot of discussion about businesses feeling that they
had pricing power—that they could pass through increases in costs. I haven’t heard any of that
discussion around the table today.
The recent slowdown in inflation is encouraging but not definitive evidence that the
moderation is in train. The slowdown could have been helped by the decline in energy prices,
and that decline won’t be repeated. Goods prices might have been held back by efforts to run off
inventories, and that phenomenon, too, would be temporary. As I already noted, the initial
conditions—the recent behavior of productivity and the relatively low level of the unemployment
rate—suggest upward inflation risks relative to this gentle downward tilt. To an extent, the staff
has placed a relatively favorable interpretation on these developments. They haven’t revised
trend productivity down any further. They expect a pickup in realized productivity growth over
this year. They see a portion of the strength in labor markets as simply lagging the slowdown in
growth—a little more labor hoarding than usual as the economy cools, along with some
statistical anomalies. Thus, in the Greenbook, the unemployment rate rises, and inflation
pressures remain contained as activity expands at close to the growth rate of potential.
President Yellen at the last meeting and Bill Wascher today pointed out two less benign
possibilities. One is that demand really has been stronger, as indicated by the income-side data,
and that the labor and product markets really are as tight as the unemployment rate suggests. In
this case, the unemployment rate wouldn’t drift higher with moderate growth. Businesses might
find themselves facing higher labor costs and being able to pass them on unless we take steps to
firm financial conditions. The second possibility is that trend productivity is lower. In this case,
actual productivity growth might not recover much this year. Unit labor costs would rise more

January 30-31, 2007

74 of 255

quickly. Given the apparent momentum in demand, we might be looking at an even further
decline in the unemployment rate in the near term. Now, my outlook is predicated on something
like the staff interpretation, but I think these other possibilities underline the inflation risks in an
economy in which growth has been well maintained. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like several of you, I’m going to focus on
housing and what we’re seeing in the banking sector and in mortgage performance. Since the
last meeting, I am feeling better about the housing market in the aggregate. It looks as though
home sales are stabilizing for the fourth quarter. On the whole, home sales actually did go up a
bit. The inventory of new homes for sale has now fallen for five months through December, and
mortgage applications for home purchases continue to move above the levels of last summer,
when they hit bottom. The National Association of Realtors is estimating that existing home
sales have already bottomed out, and homebuilder sentiment improved in three of the four past
months. But even if sales really have stabilized, the inventory of homes for sale still must be
worked down before construction and growth resume in this market. Given that some existing
homes have likely been pulled off the market in light of slower sales and moderating housing
prices, this inventory correction period will probably continue into 2008. I think this is
particularly true in markets such as Florida, as First Vice President Barron mentioned, where a
large amount of speculative investment occurred during the boom period—with three to five
years of excess construction from the investor side. So those homes still have to be worked
through.
Asset quality in the consumer sector as a whole is very good. We have come through one
of the most benign periods. The exception, as Bill mentioned in his presentation earlier today, is

January 30-31, 2007

75 of 255

the subprime market. When you dissect it, you see that prime mortgage delinquencies are flat
and subprime mortgages at a fixed rate are flat. The whole problem is in subprime ARMs, which
are running into difficulties. The four federal regulatory agencies are looking harder at some of
these subprime products. We started reviewing 2/28 mortgages, and now we’re looking at and
testing some other products. We’re finding that the issues are getting more troublesome the
further we dig into these products. To put the situation in perspective, subprime ARMs are a
very small part of the whole mortgage market. As Vincent mentioned, subprime is about 13
percent, and the ARM piece of the subprime is about half to two-thirds, so we’re talking perhaps
around 8 percent of the aggregate mortgages outstanding. We’re seeing that the borrowers who
got into these during the teaser periods now are seeing tremendous payment shocks. For
example, 2/28s that are going from the fixed two-year period to the adjustment period basically
had their interest rates double, so they’re going from a 5 percent handle to a 10 percent handle,
and the borrowers don’t have the discretionary income to absorb that. This type of mortgage was
sold to a lot of subprime borrowers on the idea that they are lending vehicles to repair credit
scores. You will show that you are going to pay during the early period, and then you can
refinance and get a lower long-term rate, so you’ll never pay the jump. But we’re finding that
some of these mortgages have significant prepayment penalties, and so to refinance and get the
better terms, some borrowers are getting into difficulty. Because of the moderation in housing
prices, these borrowers haven’t built up enough equity to absorb the prepayment penalty. So the
problem stems from a combination of factors. There are a lot of spins on these products, but
we’re trying to take an approach based on principles in looking at what’s really happening.
I also want to mention that, although the ownership of the mortgages is very diffuse and
so we’re not seeing any real concentrated risk, particularly in banking, we do need to pay more

January 30-31, 2007

76 of 255

attention to where the mortgage-servicing exposures are. The servicing of these mortgages that
are securitized is concentrated in certain institutions. Clearly, when you have such a high level
of delinquencies and potential defaults, all profitability in servicing is gone. So there could be
some charge-offs in these securitized mortgages. Also, I think all of you have noticed the
number of mortgage brokers that have closed up shop in the past six months because they
couldn’t get enough liquidity or capital to repurchase the early defaults of these recent pools.
That is really shrinking the origination pocket. I should also say that, with the exception of the
subprime ARM mortgages, we feel very good about overall credit quality.
When I look at the economy as a whole, I also see that except for housing construction
and autos, the rest of the economy is sound. The recent growth in employment and the strong
wage growth give me comfort that the income growth of consumers is there to mitigate some of
the wealth effects that we may have with moderating housing prices. But I also share the
concerns that some of you mentioned here, and that President Yellen spoke of in a speech, about
the issue regarding productivity trends and wage growth, and determining how fast the economy
is growing. Productivity is going to have to grow faster to absorb the higher wage growth,
particularly as employment growth continues strong, and I think the slack in the skilled labor
force is getting very, very limited.
When I think, in aggregate, about the data since our last meeting, I feel a little better
about inflation because it appears to be moderating, but I’m not jumping for joy because we need
a few more months. However, the growth information has been, instead of mixed as at the last
meeting, generally stronger, and that does make me feel better. In net, then, based on the recent
information, I’m even a bit further along on the side that the risks have moved higher for
inflation than on the side of the risk of a slowdown in the economy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

January 30-31, 2007

77 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought I’d provide just a couple of
perspectives, first on the 2006 economy and then, by extrapolation, on the trends in ’07. With
respect to 2006, I think the economy outperformed market expectations and Greenbook
expectations, for probably at least four reasons. The first is the underlying strength of the
employment market, which has been much discussed today. Second, the strength and durability
of household finance, which, as Vice Chairman Geithner said, turned out to be far more
determined by W-2 income than some of the household balance sheet items like home equity and
stock market effects. But we need to take another look at that trend in 2007. Third, the
economic outperformance in ’06 had much to do with the resilience of the U.S. capital markets
as evidenced in credit spreads and other financial instruments, particularly in the face of some
rather seismic events—one-time, potentially systemic events like the Amaranth Advisors
collapse; cyclical price spikes with respect to commodity prices that may well have been
somewhat demand-driven; a series of supply shocks driven by oil; and a seeming transition to
slower growth in the middle of the year. Fourth were the continued powerful sources of liquidity
that smoothed the transition over the several bumps in the road.
I also looked at what the most reliable and the least reliable indicators of the state of the
economy in ’06 were to see whether those signposts might hold for ’07. I think the tax receipt
information that we saw in ’06 was telling us that incomes were likely ahead of trend—tax
receipts for ’06 were up a total of 11.6 percent. Corporate profits, which were up 92 percent in
the past four years, had another remarkable year, up in the mid-teens. Stock prices, obviously
closely related to corporate profits, were up 84 percent in the past four years and up about 15
percent in 2006. Credit spreads continued to trend tighter; high-yield spreads were down about

January 30-31, 2007

78 of 255

100 basis points from September. Another couple of reasonably reliable indicators for ’06 were
the household survey of employment, which suggested early and often that employment growth
was likely to be ahead of expectations, and merger and acquisition pipelines, which suggested a
degree of confidence in the markets by business leaders and other folks involved in finance.
A less reliable indicator for 2006 growth was the shape of the yield curve, and the
suggestion from most of us around the table to the markets was that the yield curve wasn’t
predicting much by way of recession in the short term. Another less reliable indicator was the
consumer confidence and business confidence surveys, which seemed to snap all over the place,
perhaps more because of geopolitical events and some short-term data than any really driving
profile. With respect to inflation, it is hard to find any indicators that were very good at telling
us its path, but I do think that the TIPS spread, even when there was much talk in the spring and
the summer about rising inflation, seemed to stay relatively well anchored and not to move too
much based on some of that noise in the data. So that indicator seems to have been reasonably
good. As was mentioned earlier, monthly CPI and PCE core measures seemed to be moving
around rather significantly, so it was hard for us to determine too much from them as 2006 went
forward.
Taking all of that into account, as I think about 2007, I find that analyzing those
indicators is not without significant peril, but let me attempt doing so. The trends appeared
supportive of strong, balanced economic growth for 2007, and although inflation expectations
are well anchored and recent high-frequency data appear promising, I remain much more
concerned about inflation prospects than about growth. Having said that, I do think that as an
institution we go into 2007 with probably even heightened credibility on the inflation front and
in terms of our perspectives on the economy, which should help us over the next twelve months.

January 30-31, 2007

79 of 255

Two key themes summarize my views on 2007. First, strong employment trends should
continue to support consumer spending. Second, strong corporate balance sheets and balanced
global growth should support capital expenditures. Now, of those two themes, I would note that
I have considerably more confidence in the former than in the latter. I’ll spend another moment
on that shortly. The tone of the markets appears to be exceptionally strong. Spreads have
tightened, even as yields have trended back to 5 percent. Over November and December, we had
three weeks, each with more than $11 billion being priced in the high-yield market. Just to give
some perspective on that fact, for the year 2000 there was a total of $50 billion in the high-yield
market. But what has happened in the past six weeks that might be able to inform our
judgments? Double B spreads have tightened about 25 basis points, single Bs have tightened
50 basis points, and triple C spreads have tightened 70 basis points in the past six weeks, all of
which continues to signal to me that the economy maintains a relative strength and that investors
feel confident about the bets that they’re making. In summary, I would say there are significant
tails on both sides of this rather strong base case for the economy, but the economy is more
likely to track above the expectations of the Greenbook.
Let me spend a couple of moments on the consumer. Contacts from two large credit card
companies to whom I spoke last week expect and have seen in January the same kind of strength
that they saw in December. The first three weeks of January look to be a continuation of the late
but positive trend in the fourth quarter. For what it’s worth, the contacts’ own projections are
that the first quarter will be rather strong, much like the fourth quarter ended up being. Today,
we’ve all tried to wrestle with what the Greenbook referred to as the “unexplained strength” of
household spending during 2006 to determine its effect on ’07. Let me spend a couple of

January 30-31, 2007

80 of 255

moments on a hypothesis that the contacts proffered regarding that strength, which the
Greenbook references in its “buoyant consumer” simulation.
What that strength may well prove is that employees worked more, earned more, and had
more savings from their household balance sheets to fund consumption than the data to this point
are suggesting. I think that could turn out to be the case in 2007. First, people worked more.
The benchmark payroll survey on total job creation may well be revised upward again
significantly, like the revision of last year. Gains in service jobs may well be less counted than
some of the losses in other kinds of jobs—another bias for upward revisions. The JOLTS data to
which President Pianalto referred continue to be very positive, suggesting a real dynamism in the
economy that may well be accelerating. Participation rates may continue their recent spike as
new workers selectively choose to enter this marketplace. Average hours worked moved up in
the fourth quarter to an annual rate of 2.2 percent, and that trend could continue. So monthly
employment gains have not proved much harder to achieve as we approach what we thought was
full employment, and the NAIRU may be lower than estimated. Second, people certainly may
well have earned more. Average hourly earnings were up 4.2 percent for ’06, an acceleration
that was rather widespread from ’05 measures. Though the data on compensation continue to be
mixed, they do seem to be trending in that direction. The divergence between profits and
compensation suggests to me at least that there is large upside potential for unemployment to
stay low and for wages to accelerate, perhaps in a catch-up for wage gains that we didn’t see
earlier in the cycle. Third, as a result of working more and earning more, I suspect that workers
may continue to spend more, particularly with the gift of what seems to be relatively low oil
prices, in the mid-fifties. The oil price seems to me to have less of a risk premium and now

January 30-31, 2007

81 of 255

appears to reflect some elevated supply and at least modestly lower demand. In sum, with
respect to the consumer side, I am reasonably well confident.
I’ll spend just a moment on the business side of the equation. Fourth-quarter profits
appear to be quite good, with two-thirds of companies beating estimates. As many of these
companies are challenged to have double-digit earnings in 2007, they may look for other avenues
in which to buy those earnings—in the M&A world—or increase cash outlays through share
repurchases from their excess cash on the balance sheet to maintain earnings per share growth in
the double digits. Another alternative is that they might choose to increase cap-ex as many of us,
including myself, would have expected them to do earlier in this cycle. Doing so could have a
negative effect on short-term earnings but would show some real confidence in their long-term
investment and growth plans. As already mentioned, shipments and orders fell in the fourth
quarter, and our working explanation is that much of that fall is really an inventory adjustment.
We’ve had that discussion for a while. I would expect business investment and industrial
production to pick up. If it doesn’t do so in the first quarter, my confidence about this side of the
economy, about this leg of the stool, will be significantly reduced. Between now and the next
time we meet, we will have a better sense of whether that turn on the business side of the
economy is real or whether we just saw a false start in December. So I think we’ll be able to
come to a much firmer view when we meet in six weeks. All in all, I remain reasonably
confident and optimistic about the forecast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much. Well, the data have come in so far according
to plan, and you can thank Chairman Bernanke for doing that. I think he has some special
relations with the BEA and others. [Laughter] Exactly as we had hoped they would and said

January 30-31, 2007

82 of 255

they would, the data show moderation in growth with a prospect for accelerating growth through
2007 and moderation in inflation—again, according to plan. I think my views are similar to
those that President Stern put forward: The economy has shown an enormous amount of
resilience.
I want to talk about a few possible puzzles in the way the data have evolved and could
perhaps deviate from plan as we go forward. One puzzle is the great strength of the consumer.
The consumer has been very, very strong for the past five years, and it seems that no matter what
has happened—whether a housing downturn, an equity-market downturn, or a September 11—
the consumer has come through rather strongly and continues to be strong. We certainly have
had a slowdown in the housing market, and maybe we’re waiting to see its effect on the
consumer, as Don Kohn mentioned. But it may just be that some special factors have come in;
for example, we have had very strong international economic growth, and perhaps that will
persist. When you talk to officials and business people outside the United States, whether in
emerging market economies, in the Gulf region, or in industrial economies, they are extremely
optimistic, much more so than I have ever before seen, and that may continue. Obviously, there
is a risk factor here. The recent strengthening in equity markets perhaps offsets some of the
reduction in the asset values of homes. Lower consumer energy prices, of course, have been an
offsetting factor, and labor market strength and increases in compensation have been very
important. But there’s an upside risk that we will continue to have very, very strong
consumption instead of having our error correction go back toward more saving.
Second, with respect to investment, we have had orders above shipments for quite some
time, but we have had investment actually declining, or at least not growing as we would expect.
Overall in this recovery we have had weaker investment growth, and we have had very high

January 30-31, 2007

83 of 255

profitability. That raises another puzzle for me: Why have we seen somewhat weak investment
over the long run and especially more recently, given that most measures of consumer
confidence and business confidence have been positive, equity markets seem to be positive,
spreads seem to be low, and so forth. Why are we not seeing more investment? Investment may
turn around in the next quarter or so, and then we’ll be out of the woods. But I think the
conditions that we predict will lead to an investment turnaround have been there for quite some
time, and we haven’t seen the investment turnaround; and that is a puzzle to me.
Third, with respect to inflation, obviously we are all pleased that the numbers have been
coming out with greater moderation. But I have a discomfort about exactly what is driving that
moderation. We have good short-term stories about how the slowdown in energy prices in the
second and third quarters and some other temporary factors with respect to owners’ equivalent
rent could be bringing down inflation. But when we consider a longer period and try to look at
the systematic data, we don’t see those kinds of relationships. Are we just in some sort of regime
shift? Are those correlations not very good because we just haven’t had a lot of variation in the
data over the past ten to twenty years, and so those forces are actually there, but we just find it
very difficult to pull them out econometrically? For me that is a puzzle, to be able to tell a shortterm story with each of these pieces, but when I go to the staff and ask, “Well, what is the
systematic evidence on it?” they say, “Well, it really isn’t there.” That is a bit disturbing for me
in trying to figure out where things are likely to go.
Things have moved in a benign way. I don’t think there’s a strong expectation that they
would move in a nonbenign way. But I don’t have a lot of confidence that I understand why they
have moved as they have. So my concern is that various shocks or other factors could come in to
move them in a way that is not nearly so benign. Broadly, however, I share the views that most

January 30-31, 2007

84 of 255

people have expressed around the table that we have good growth prospects going forward and
so far reasonable moderation of inflation. But precisely because we have those good growth
prospects and because we may have had some temporary factors that have kept down inflation,
we have to be ever mindful of the upside risk to inflation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I’m last in this line, and I’ll try to be
brief so that we can get to dinner soon. I do see signs of stabilization in the housing market, and
the way to think of it in terms of spillovers is that we do expect some spillovers through the
natural effect of weaker housing on aggregate demand and on wealth. But we’re not seeing
anything out of the ordinary or a persistent pattern, and that gives me more confidence that
nothing really bad is going to happen here. My view is that the risks to the downside have
decreased substantially. Also, the tone of the recent data actually indicates that what is
happening concerning aggregate demand is stronger than we would have expected. As a result,
I’m a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook in terms of what is going to happen next year with
aggregate demand. Actually, I see, if anything, a little more risk to the upside, so I slant a bit in
that direction.
The inflation numbers have been very good recently, and one view is that they are just
temporary blips in the data. I tend to be a little more sanguine here because I think that there are
good reasons for inflation to gravitate toward what are solidly anchored inflation expectations.
That has been very important in terms of the cycle and is one reason that I’m a little more
optimistic than the Greenbook on inflation. I do think that inflation expectations are strongly
grounded around 2 percent on the PCE deflator. As a result, I expect us to go to 2 percent
inflation over the next year and then stay there but not go below there. I don’t actually like to

January 30-31, 2007

85 of 255

think of this in terms of “persistence.” It is one reason that I’m unwilling to think that things will
get better than that. But I do think that we will likely have a more benign path of inflation than
we might have thought earlier.
Even if you think that there’s a more benign path to inflation, which I’m willing to
consider though we’re not sure about it, it is still true that aggregate demand has blipped up
recently. That is an indication that the neutral real interest rate has moved up, which is very
much reflected in the Greenbook assessment. That’s important because, even if you’re happy
about what’s happening with inflation, you have to be more worried about the fact that the
economy is going to be stronger. That does have some implications for the way we think about
policy going forward. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. This was an exceptionally interesting, useful
discussion. I thought I would try to summarize what I heard around the table. If you have
comments on that, please give them to me, and then I’ll add a few comments of my own.
Members noted considerable economic strength during the intermeeting period. Labor
markets remain taut, with continuing wage pressures in some occupations. Consumption grew
strongly in the fourth quarter, with some momentum into the first quarter, reflecting a strong job
market, lower energy prices, and higher profits. Overall, investment seems likely to grow at a
moderate pace given good fundamentals. Business people seem generally optimistic, and
financial markets are robust.
We still have what people have been characterizing as a two-track economy. Housing,
although a drag for now, does show some tentative evidence of stabilization. However, some
warned about drawing too strong a conclusion about housing during the winter months. Some
also noted issues of credit quality. The general view was that housing would cease to subtract

January 30-31, 2007

86 of 255

from growth later this year. Some softness in parts of manufacturing, especially in industries
related to housing and automobiles, still exists. But in part this weakness may be an inventory
correction that may be reasonably far advanced at this point. Despite the weakness in housing
and some parts of manufacturing, there are yet no signs of spillover into employment or
consumption, although some raised the possibility that we may see those later on. Some, but not
all, members agree with the contour of the Greenbook that has economic growth somewhat
slower in the near term, strengthening later this year, with a modest increase in unemployment.
The Committee is generally more optimistic about potential growth than the Greenbook, mostly
because the members assume that labor force growth will be greater than the Greenbook
assumes. Overall, downside risks to output appear to have moderated, while an upside risk has
emerged that growth will not moderate as expected.
On the inflation side, people noted that recent readings have been favorable, although
there was disagreement about the cause, whether it was energy prices, well-anchored inflation
expectations, less structural inertia, or perhaps just statistical noise. Most still expect gradually
slowing inflation but are cautious and consider upside risk significant, perhaps even greater than
late last year. The primary upside risk to inflation is economic growth above potential in tight
labor markets, which may lead to inflation in the future if not in the near term. Others noted that
inflation expectations may be too high to allow continued progress against inflation. So overall,
the general tone was for a somewhat stronger economy, perhaps a slightly improved outlook on
inflation, but, in any case, a clear view that the upside risks to inflation are predominant. Are
there any comments?
Let me add just a few points. Everything has really been said, but not everyone has said
it, as they say. [Laughter] Our goal has been, in some sense, to achieve a soft landing, and the

January 30-31, 2007

87 of 255

question is whether we have missed the airport. [Laughter] We have seen a good bit of strength
in the intermeeting period, and I think the real crux of the issue is what’s going to happen to the
labor market. If the labor market continues where it is or strengthens further, we will see both
stronger growth, because of the income effects and job effects, and continued pressure on
inflation. Again, the central issue will be whether we will see enough cooling in the economy to
have a bit of easing in the labor situation. This is, obviously, difficult to say. I do believe that
the most likely outcome for the first half of this year is for some moderation in growth, perhaps
to modestly below potential. If you look at the various components of spending and production,
you note, for example, that personal consumption expenditures are likely to slow from the very
high levels we have just seen recently. In particular, a lot of the spending recently was for
durable goods, which tend to be more negatively auto-correlated—that is, they tend to drop more
quickly when they are high in the short run. We have seen some moderation in investment, in
both equipment and structures. Net exports were a major contributor to growth at the end of the
year; that should probably reverse, as the Greenbook notes. A special factor there is that the
good weather reduced oil imports, which led people to spend on domestic production rather than
on foreign production. If that situation reverses and we go back to normal net exports, that will
subtract from GDP. Also, the staff noted some likely reversals in government spending. So my
sense is that we’re likely to see something a little less hectic in the first half of this current year.
I think it also remains reasonable that growth will return close to potential later this year.
There is certainly uncertainty about that. Clearly, we have seen some signs of stabilization in the
housing market. I was going to note the effects of the winter months and the weather. I think
that we should acknowledge that stabilization but not ignore the possibility that we may see
further deterioration there.

January 30-31, 2007

88 of 255

Against the view that growth may moderate this quarter, or next quarter perhaps, there is
opposing evidence that consumption and employment are awfully strong. Economists tend to
think of consumption, in particular, as being a very forward-looking variable, and it’s consistent
with views that we see, for example, in consumer sentiment that people do feel reasonably
optimistic about the labor market and about the state of the economy. So I agree that there is
certainly some risk that the economy will be stronger going forward than we have been
projecting. I don’t have an answer other than to say that we obviously have to monitor the
situation very carefully and continue to be willing to reassess our views as the data arrive.
Let me say a bit about inflation. Recent readings have been favorable. A couple of
aspects of inflation I do find encouraging. First is that the moderation we’ve seen in inflation the
past few months has happened despite the lack of any substantial moderation in shelter costs.
Owners’ equivalent rents are actually a constructed, imputed variable. They are not seen by
anybody. Nevertheless, they are essentially the entire reason that inflation is remaining above
our target zone at this point. I know it’s a bit of a joke that I always refer to the short-term
inflation numbers, but I’ll do it again anyway. [Laughter] Just to illustrate, over the past three
months, core CPI inflation excluding just owners’ equivalent rent was 0.2 percent at an annual
rate. Over the past six months, it was 1.20 percent at an annual rate. Over the past twelve
months, it was 1.82. We also get numbers for PCE core inflation excluding owners’ equivalent
rents that are all below 2 percent. Obviously that is just carving the data, and there are lots of
problems with doing that. But to the extent we think that rents will continue to moderate, and I
think there is scope for them to do that, that’s one factor that should make us a little more
comfortable. Another factor is that there is a fairly broad-based slowing. I won’t take a lot of
time to go through the evidence, but particularly in the CPI there are some encouraging

January 30-31, 2007

89 of 255

developments on the services side in terms of inflation to go along with the slowing in goods
prices.
Now, I am the first to acknowledge that lots of interpretations of the recent developments
are possible. We hope that favorable structural factors are at work. One possibility certainly is
that the wage increases are a catch-up for previous productivity gains and that we’re seeing a
normal restoration of capital-income/labor-income relationships. In that case, this may be in
some sense a transitory adjustment that will restore those relationships and not necessarily
contribute to inflation going forward. Another possibility is that energy price effects are
somewhat larger than we thought. There seems to be some evidence that they are. A third
possibility is that what we saw earlier last year was, as Governor Kohn mentioned, a transitory
upside, some of which has simply passed, and we are going back to the more fundamental rate of
inflation. So there are some structural reasons that inflation might be moderating.
My having said that, we should certainly acknowledge the statistical noise that is inherent
in these measures. The monthly standard deviation of core inflation in 2006 was about 8 basis
points. If the true underlying inflation is 0.2 percent, then you have a very good chance of
getting either 0.3 or 0.1. Therefore, we and the financial markets ought to be braced for the
possibility that we will get 0.3—I hope not worse—in the next few months. I agree with the
view that has been expressed that the trend has not yet been established, and we’ll have to follow
its development. Another very important point that has been raised—President Moskow, I think,
was the first to raise it—is that, given the lags from economic activity to inflation that we see in
standard impulse-response functions and so on, these improvements may be real but nevertheless
temporary and the underlying labor market pressures and so on may lead to inflation problems a
year or eighteen months from now. I agree that it is a concern, and it goes back to my point

January 30-31, 2007

90 of 255

earlier that we need to be very alert to changes in the pattern of aggregate demand going forward.
As President Poole mentioned, one element that will help us is the endogeneity of financial
conditions. We haven’t done anything since the last meeting, but long-term real interest rates
rose about 30 basis points. The yield curve is still inverted by about 30 basis points. So I think
even the markets themselves have the ability to raise real rates quite significantly, enough
certainly to make a difference in the mortgage market if the data continue to be strong and if
inflation does not continue to subside. Then we would have a bit more latitude as we try to
determine whether the fourth quarter was a blip or a trend. I think that’s still an open question.
So let me just say that I broadly agree with what I heard. The economy does look
stronger. That is an upside risk to which we need to be paying close attention. Inflation looks a
bit better, at least in the short term, but there are some long-term considerations that we need to
keep in mind. Finally, the basic contours of the outlook are not sharply changed, but I agree with
the sentiment around the table that upside risk to inflation remains the predominant concern that
the Committee should have. Are there comments? Yes, President Poole.
MR. POOLE. We have two important pieces of information coming in at 8:30 tomorrow
morning. I hope the staff can give us a quick first read to start our meeting. I know that instant
analysis is risky, but I ask for it anyway. [Laughter]
MR. STOCKTON. And I will provide it. [Laughter]. Whether it’s worth anything or
not, I don’t know. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll start the meeting with the data. Anything else?
There’s a reception and dinner in Dining Room E. It’s for those who wish to attend. If you have
other plans, please feel free to pursue them, and we’ll see you tomorrow morning at 9:00.
[Meeting recessed]

January 30-31, 2007

91 of 255

January 31, 2007—Morning Session
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everyone. Let’s start with asking Dave
Stockton to report on this morning’s data.
MR. STOCKTON. So, Mr. Chairman, this was sort of done on the fly. Unlike the BEA,
I won’t be able to go back and revise these remarks. [Laughter] Total GDP this morning came
in at 3½ percent. That was 0.9 percentage point stronger than we had forecast in the Greenbook.
There were really two sources of our miss in the fourth quarter. Of that miss, 0.5 was the net
export component, which Karen will speak about in a second, and 0.4 was nonfarm inventory
investment. So perhaps Karen will give the quick story on the net export side, and then I’ll
complete the report.
MS. JOHNSON. The net export numbers are based on trade data only for OctoberNovember, and we each make an estimate of what December is going to be. Perhaps half of our
miss, or not quite half, was due to differences of opinion about December. Looking at what
they’ve done for December, we will take some information from that. Some of what they’ve put
in December is information that we didn’t otherwise have. To some degree, it’s statistical and
not really about trade. It’s something called a territorial adjustment. Maybe a quarter is
differences about things in December for which we are not prepared to change our minds at this
point. So we would not go to as strong a positive contribution from net exports as they go
because we retain some difference of views about what the December numbers will turn out to
be. The other bit of news we received was very strong exports of services. We’ll take that, and
we’ll probably give most of the adjustment, but not quite all of it, in the number we write down
next for Q4. We will actually want to reverse that thing called territorial adjustment in Q1. So

January 30-31, 2007

92 of 255

we’re actually going to make imports stronger and the net export contribution slightly more
negative in Q1 as a result.
MR. STOCKTON. That’s basically half of our GDP miss. The other half is on the
inventory investment side. Just like with Karen, about half of our miss on inventory investment
has to do with a difference of opinion about what the December book value figures will turn out
to be. So it’s just a difference between the BEA’s estimate for December and our estimate for
December. I don’t think we’d be inclined to alter our December estimate, so we’d write off
roughly half of that miss on nonfarm inventory investment. We don’t do that great a job of
forecasting those book value inventory figures either. It is not as though we have lots of
information or a good reason for staking ourselves to our forecast versus the BEA’s, but I don’t
think they have any more information than we do. As for private domestic final purchases,
which we have been emphasizing, even given some of the recent noise in net exports and
government, there we were, in fact, almost exactly right; we were off by 4 basis points in terms
of its contribution to overall GDP. In terms of the composition, consumption was a bit weaker,
and equipment spending a bit stronger, probably because of BEA’s estimate of the share of autos
being sold to businesses versus households. So we don’t really see very much information there.
On net, government was a bit weaker: The federal side was weaker by more than the state and
local side was stronger.
MS. MINEHAN. What was the number for domestic final purchases, Dave?
MR. STOCKTON. I actually don’t know what the domestic final purchases were, but if
you include the government, which they do, they were a little weaker than the number we had
written down.
MS. MINEHAN. No, the overall number.

January 30-31, 2007

93 of 255

MR. STOCKTON. Yes, I don’t know what the overall number is; I know only what the
contributions are. We’ll be able to get the overall number by break time. Taking on board our
differences of opinion about the December figures, we’d probably be writing down, with the
release in hand today, a GDP estimate for the fourth quarter of about 3 percent rather than the
3½ percent that is being currently published—and in contrast to the 2½ percent we wrote down
in the Greenbook.
So then the question is, What does this imply about the overall momentum of activity
going into the first quarter? My answer has to be “not much,” and I don’t think this is just blind
stubbornness, although I’m glad my wife is not here to dispute that particular characterization.
[Laughter] But about the two surprises—as Karen already indicated, they would be inclined to
actually mark down their contribution of net exports to GDP growth in the first quarter on the
basis of the net export side. We would probably be inclined to do the same thing with respect to
the higher inventory investment, and so we’re coming into the first quarter with somewhat higher
inventory-sales ratios and maybe some indications that we’re not as far along in working down
inventories as we had thought. I’m glad that I don’t actually have to write down that first-quarter
number today because we will have an employment report on Friday and some first real readings
on the pace of activity in the first quarter by the end of the week and in the next week or two. So
basically I’d argue that there isn’t a lot of signal in that 3½ percent figure that we’re moving into
the first quarter with much thrust. Another reason for not necessarily marking up activity as we
move into the first half of this year, even though GDP came in 1 percentage point above our
estimates, is that real disposable income actually came in 1 percentage point weaker than our
Greenbook estimate. So it isn’t as though, with the higher growth rate of activity, we have more
underlying growth in labor income that is likely to be spent going forward. We have an even

January 30-31, 2007

94 of 255

lower saving rate now in the fourth quarter than we have written down. Thus I think there are
several reasons for not necessarily reading this as a sign of greater strength moving into the first
part of the year.
On the inflation side, things were actually spot on. Total PCE inflation was minus
0.8 percent. That’s what we had written down in the Greenbook. Core PCE was 2.1—also
exactly what we had written down in the Greenbook. Market-based core was 1.7; that was
actually 0.1 percentage point better than what we had written down in the Greenbook. The other
major release this morning was the employment cost index, which showed a year-over-year
increase of 3.2 percent. That number also is exactly what we had written down in the
Greenbook, so I don’t think we really see any difference. Obviously, the number has continued
to be very subdued. So in the totality, on the inflation side, things are looking very close to our
expectations and I think still pretty good. Mr. Chairman, that’s all I have to say.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there any questions? If not, Vincent.
MR. REINHART. 3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the handout
“Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.” As noted in the top
left panel of your first exhibit, the path of policy expectations rotated up over the
intermeeting period, and investors now apparently anticipate the federal funds rate to
move down only about ½ percentage point over the next couple of years. As related
in the panel at the top right, primary dealers are unanimous in expecting no change in
the policy rate at this meeting. Indeed, nearly all the dealers believe that you will
hold the funds rate steady through the May meeting. As to the wording of the
statement, some dealers are calling for a more upbeat assessment of the economic
outlook, but almost all expect no change in the Committee’s assessment of risks. In
the Treasury market, as shown in the bottom left panel, this shift in policy
expectations was associated with a rise of about ⅜ percentage point in nominal
yields—the movement from the dotted to the solid black lines—and a smaller
increase in their real counterparts—the dotted to the solid red lines. Thus, inflation
compensation, the vertical difference between the lines, edged higher across
maturities. According to the Desk survey, as in the table at the bottom right, dealers
marked up their outlook for real GDP growth and lowered their assessment of
inflation for this year, although the changes were small. If you examine the highfrequency movements of the ten-year nominal yield, about 20 basis points of the
3

Material used by Mr. Reinhart is appended to this transcript (appendix 3).

January 30-31, 2007

95 of 255

increase was registered in windows around economic data releases—that’s the red bar
in the middle right panel—suggesting that the revisions to the growth outlook
apparently predominated in shaping investors’ thinking about your near-term
behavior. Federal Reserve communications—the statement, the minutes, and
speeches—had no net effect on yields. But as the gray bar shows, a sizable portion of
the rise in yields cannot be linked to data or other identifiable news releases. A
similar measure of our ignorance in explaining yields comes from the arbitrage-free
models of the term structure that we regularly follow. Those models (not shown)
suggest that about ¼ percentage point of the rise in the ten-year yield was due to an
increase in the term premium.
The same combination of a modestly higher track for activity and a lower one for
inflation was a highlight of the simulations of the FRB/US model reported in the
Bluebook and repeated in exhibit 2. The trajectory of the nominal federal funds rate
that best achieves your aims—subject to the many assumptions necessary to make
this exercise work—has shifted up over much of the projection period, whether you
have an inflation goal of 1½ percent or 2 percent. One consideration for the policy
choice at this meeting is which charts in those two columns entice you. With a
2 percent inflation goal, you can keep the funds rate unchanged for some time
because you can very nearly declare victory at the prevailing level of inflation. In
contrast, to make progress toward a 1½ percent inflation goal, you’ve got a bit of
work to do, as the sluggishness of inflation expectations and the flatness of the
Phillips curve in the FRB/US model make it costly to disinflate. Indeed, this
simulation puts the nominal federal funds rate around 6 percent by year-end.
This observation on the inflation goal is mapped into two monetary policy
alternatives at the top of exhibit 3. The quarter-point firming of alternative C would
be particularly attractive if, besides having an inflation goal below the prevailing rate
of inflation, you harbored significant concerns about the underlying strength of
aggregate demand and potential cost pressures. For instance, you might view the
recent string of favorable data on spending as suggesting upside prospects for
aggregate demand, perhaps along the lines of the “buoyant consumer spending”
alternative simulation shown in the Greenbook. The results of that exercise are
plotted as the green lines in the middle panels for the federal funds rate, the
unemployment rate, and core PCE inflation, respectively, along with the baseline
outcomes as black lines. With more pressure on resources and inflation running
higher, an estimated policy rule predicts a federal funds rate heading to 7 percent.
Another source of concern may be inflation expectations. Inflation compensation
derived from the Treasury market, plotted as the solid line in the bottom left panel for
the next five years and the red line for the five-year, five-year-forward rate, moved in
a fairly wide range and rose a touch on net over the intermeeting period, perhaps
undercutting some of the claim that inflation expectations are well anchored.
The case for holding the funds rate at 5¼ percent, as under alternative B, would
be strengthened if you have an inflation goal of 2 percent. In addition, the central
tendencies of your forecasts for the unemployment rate and core PCE inflation

January 30-31, 2007

96 of 255

reported in yesterday’s chart show suggest that some of you believe that there is a
more favorable tradeoff between the two than does the staff, perhaps along the lines
of the “lower NAIRU” alternative simulation in the Greenbook (the red lines in the
middle panels). Even if you viewed inflation running at or above 2 percent as
uncomfortable, downside risks to employment and growth, especially given the
uncertainties surrounding the ongoing housing market correction and possible
spillovers to other components of spending, may tip the balance toward keeping the
funds rate unchanged for now. If those risks do not materialize, the same process in
financial markets that operated over the recent intermeeting period will likely operate
in the future, as President Poole and Chairman Bernanke noted yesterday. That is,
with market expectations of the funds rate still tilted down, as plotted by the dashed
line in the bottom right panel, yields will back up further as investors come to realize
that policy easing will not be forthcoming, adding to financial restraint. Also note
that market-based confidence bands surrounding investors’ expectations, derived
from interest-rate caps and shown by the blue fan chart, are narrow in the near term
but then widen markedly. Thus, market participants see ample scope for policy
action—in either direction—in coming quarters.
The last exhibit gives the latest version of table 1, which circulated Monday. It
trims the wording of alternative B to be a little more upbeat about firmer economic
growth in section 2, which feels right this morning. I also hope that you might reflect
on the risk assessment offered in section 4 of alternative C. The language about
policy firming that you’ve repeated for the past few meetings seems a little stale and
potentially misleading if you are not confident that your next policy action will be to
tighten. Talking about the relative odds of action might be a more durable structure.
But this might be a discussion for a later day out of concern about an inappropriate
reaction in financial markets today.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Vincent? Vice
Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. This is more an observation than it is a question. I
guess I’m a little uncomfortable the way you framed, just in the paper, exhibit 3, in the sense that
I don’t think it would be great if we came to view alternative B in the statement as, in a sense,
validating a higher implicit inflation objective than members of the Committee heretofore talked
about. It is true that, with the stance of policy implied in markets today, under reasonable
assumptions you may not get below 2 percent any time soon. But if you have different
assumptions about the structure of the economy, about the way inflation works in this economy,

January 30-31, 2007

97 of 255

or different views about the period that’s optimal for bringing inflation down, it’s plausible that
you could have a forecast that gets inflation below 2 percent with the stance of policy not
dramatically different from what’s in the Greenbook. I know that you didn’t mean to imply that,
but I don’t think it would be good for us to create a sense of validating the monetary policy
expectations that are in the markets or in the Greenbook. We would be accepting that we have
allowed our implicit objective to drift up.
MR. REINHART. You probably won’t have that trouble in public because among the
things that will be released is your central tendency forecast and it does have a steeper decline in
core PCE inflation than the staff’s forecast does. So keeping policy unchanged at this meeting
does not validate a 2 percent inflation goal; it just means you might have a different view.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re ready to begin our policy go-round. President
Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll start off by saying that today I favor
maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent. As we discussed yesterday and we learned this
morning, the picture that seems to be emerging from the latest economic information is one of
reasonably strong underlying growth, which has been temporarily weakened by housing and
autos. Given that temporary weakness, I think it would be premature to raise rates today; but I
am not confident that core inflation will continue to decelerate in the coming quarters, and that
could risk our credibility. The level of inflation continues to be higher than I’d like to see, and in
my forecast we may not see a return to price stability unless monetary conditions are tightened
further. Although I don’t think today is the day to do it, I do want us to consider tightening if we
see growth accelerating back to trend more quickly than in the Greenbook. I say this not because
I think that growth will put upward pressure on inflation but because the associated equilibrium

January 30-31, 2007

98 of 255

real rates that are implied by that higher growth, which we are beginning to see in the
marketplace, will eventually force our hand. As I mentioned in my remarks on the economy at
the past two meetings, I have been of the mind that a somewhat slower economy, combined with
a constant funds rate, might be sufficient to ensure a decline in core inflation. As the economy
strengthens, that scenario becomes a little less likely. If the economy continues to strengthen, a
failure to act not only puts our price stability goal at risk but also risks our credibility with the
public.
Thus it would be ill-advised to suggest in our statement that we are finished acting for a
while, and therefore I would not favor the language that Bill Poole circulated last week. My
preference is for the language describing the rationale given in alternative C in table 1 of the
Bluebook. The rationale in alternative C, including both sections 2 and 3, is really not more
hawkish than the language of alternative B, yet it’s more concise and comes closer to my views
on the current state of the economy. Indeed, since under alternative B, section 3, or alternative
C, section 3, we would be making sizable changes in the language from our last statement, I also
think that it’s appropriate at this time to purge the language about the high level of resource
utilization having the potential to sustain inflation pressures or lower oil prices to mitigate core
inflation. All the recent work on the forecasting of medium-term and longer-term inflation that I
have seen says that these Phillips-type models don’t help us forecast core inflation very well.
The FRB/US model of the Greenbook looks as though it has very flat tradeoffs, certainly in the
near term anyway; so I think it would be useful to change our language at this point. I have not
been a fan of that language, but in the past I was persuaded that we should leave it so as to avoid
unnecessary changes that might confuse the public. But since we are considering changes at this
time, I would favor going with alternative C, which gets rid of this language. I’m happy to

January 30-31, 2007

99 of 255

continue with the risk assessment that we had last time, eliminating the word “nonetheless,”
although frankly I would not greatly resist actually going with the assessment of risk in
alternative C. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser, just so I’m clear, which sections from C?
MR. PLOSSER. I advocate leaving the federal funds rate section as is but using sections
2 and 3 from alternative C as our rationale.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I, too, am in favor of
maintaining policy at its current level. I find myself somewhere between policy alternatives C
and B as described in exhibit 3, leaving out, as Vice Chairman Geithner suggested, any
commitment to either of those goals. I am concerned about housing and the possible spillovers.
However, the underlying pace of growth and activity within the economy does risk taking
inflation up from where we think it’s going to go, changing the path of it slightly. The Chairman
and a couple of other people mentioned yesterday the uptick in medium-term to long-term bonds.
A good point to be made here is that most of the action in the markets has resulted from the
release of economic data. Given at least the surface gloss of the GDP report, I imagine that the
markets will be firmer rather than softer, will expect less movement on our part, and could move
up at the long end and create some lessening of financial accommodation, in effect making
financial terms a bit more restrictive. So I think we will get some help from the market reaction
to the current economic data. Those things together—my continuing concern about the housing
situation, though I think it is stabilizing, and a bit tighter markets than perhaps we expected—
tend to weigh in my mind against my concern that the inflation path in our forecast will not be
realized. So I am content for the time being with alternative B. As I said in my comments

January 30-31, 2007

100 of 255

yesterday, if we continue to see the same pattern of things, sooner rather than later we may have
to contemplate, to manage the risks in the economy, an upward movement in monetary policy;
but I would not suggest that for today.
Turning to the language, I suggested a couple of days ago that we use section 2 from
alternative C. There have been some modifications to section 2 in alternative B. I am okay with
those, but I continue to believe, as does President Plosser, that section 2 in alternative C is a bit
cleaner, a bit shorter, and a bit more reflective overall as to the way I see things. But I could go
with either B or C at this point. Vince mentioned that we might want to think about section 4,
the assessment of risks. I had made a recommendation there as well—one somewhat similar to
what he was implying we might want to think about in terms of the Committee’s judging that
inflation remains a predominant concern. I think that’s a little stronger than “the Committee
judges that some inflation risks remain.” I would take the remaining phrase of that sentence
out—about near-term policy firming being more likely than policy easing—as I think that might
be a big shock. But changing the language to “inflation remains the predominant concern” and
then picking up with “future policy adjustments” would make a small change to the inflation risk
section, would focus people a bit more firmly on that, and would be a step in the right direction
of cautioning the markets about the possibility, though perhaps not very high yet, that our next
move might be up rather than flat for a long period or down.
So just to sum up, I am okay with alternative B, section 2. I’d prefer section 2 from
alternative C, but I’m okay with B. I would make a change in the assessment of risks. I can live
with it the way it is, but I think the alternative C change that I have recommended is a little
cleaner and moves in the direction that Vince was talking about.

January 30-31, 2007

101 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan, for the risk assessment, in alternative C,
are you proposing also the second sentence?
MS. MINEHAN. Yes, just taking out the phrase from “and” to “easing”: “The
Committee judges that inflation remains a predominant concern. Future policy adjustments will
depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.”
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me say at the outset that I was truly
impressed with your summary of everyone’s comments yesterday. If I had known that you were
listening so intently, I might have scrutinized my own comments a little more. [Laughter] Many
participants, as you summarized, reported an improved outlook in housing and, perhaps to a
lesser extent, an improved outlook for inflation. To play off our immediate past Chairman’s
phrase, I think it might be appropriate to guard against what I might call “premature exuberance”
on both fronts with regard to the bottoming out of housing and the improvement in inflation. I
don’t think we gain much at this point in the business cycle by declaring victory on the housing
front, and I didn’t hear anyone say that. But I think we have to be cautious in our comments as it
could well prove to be a drag going forward.
For the overall economy, my own take is that we have more upside potential than perhaps
we have seen so far, putting aside this morning’s report. Corporate balance sheets remain
extremely strong. Although I do not anticipate that profits in 2007 will match the levels that we
saw in 2006, I see no reason that they would drop below trend, and perhaps they will even come
in above trend. With that as a backdrop, the job outlook might even be brighter than we’ve
discussed. If the job market remains firm, I would have every reason to believe that the level of

January 30-31, 2007

102 of 255

participation outlined in the Greenbook might be understated, and so we could well have more
positive income effect from the consumer going forward than we’ve witnessed or that we are
thinking of for the future. A final point relates to exports. Yesterday evening I looked back over
the information we had with regard to the consistency of a high level of performance of all the
economies of the world. I couldn’t find a time in which we had all the economies of the world
performing at the level they are today. If you take that into consideration and put aside, as Dave
so eloquently noted, the special factors that we had in the fourth quarter in exports, we could
well see a more positive effect going forward in net exports.
On balance, though, I still have a concern that the effect of housing going forward will be
a drag. However, I fully anticipate that, at the national level at least, we will be able to bounce
back in the second half. If we do bounce back in the second half in housing, then GDP growth
could well exceed what we are forecasting now. All of that said, I’m very comfortable with the
current stance of policy. I’m not going to try to wordsmith on the fly. My own bias is to be
somewhat supportive of alternative B as presented this morning. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I’m very comfortable with alternative B as far as the rate
goes. Given what we don’t know today, I think that’s exactly where we ought to be. We will
know more over the next six months about how that should be adjusted as we move forward. On
the language, I feel that we would be better served with sections 2 and 3 of alternative C. That
language describes my own views and much of what I heard yesterday, especially as it says
“seems to be rebounding” and “some tentative signs of stabilization.” “Going forward the
economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace” is good language. Then, more important, I
would like to see in section 3 that “readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent

January 30-31, 2007

103 of 255

months but remain elevated.” Going forward, that is the essential issue I think we have to watch
besides the economy. That’s why I believe that language is preferable. The risk assessment as
described in alternative B is fine. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. May I ask a clarifying question? It’s not actually clear
to me, really, that alternative C, section 3—the inflation section—is more hawkish than
alternative B.
MR. HOENIG. It’s not.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. So you were speaking in its favor not because it is
more hawkish but for what reason?
MR. HOENIG. Because it describes what is, and that is that inflation is elevated.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. My concern is that, as the Chairman has said, if you
look at the three-month annualized rate for a whole bunch of measures of core, “elevated” might
be overstating it a bit.
MR. HOENIG. It isn’t to me, because 2.6 year over year is elevated.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The original intention was to capture the last relatively few
monthly readings, so there is a bit of ambiguity there.
MR. HOENIG. My point is that what you’re describing is the systematic move down,
and the margin is bringing the average down, and that’s what you say: “Readings on core
inflation have improved modestly in recent months but remain elevated.” So long as we can
convey that, I think the markets will read us more properly because, even though the three-month

January 30-31, 2007

104 of 255

may be coming down, it’s still 2.6 percent year over year rather than where I thought last June it
would be, which was 2.4. So it has improved, but we’re not to where we need to be, and that’s
my point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I was a bit loquacious yesterday and apparently, for some,
too anecdotally explicit, if not excessive. [Laughter] So I’ll be less frisky this morning, shorter,
and more to the point. I support alternative B. I don’t want to wordsmith it. The only word I
would want to add, which I won’t get, is “worldwide,” which I would insert after “resource
utilization.” That’s a reality, and that’s my recommendation, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I’m
sorry if I took too much time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No problem, President Fisher. Thank you. President
Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support Bluebook alternative B. I think we
should maintain the current stance of policy because it is likely to foster an economy that
gradually moves toward a soft landing. At the same time, the upward bias in the risk assessment
is consistent with my view that upside risks do predominate for both growth and inflation. My
best guess still is that this year’s growth will be slightly below trend with the current stance of
policy. But as I indicated yesterday, for me the risks have shifted more to the upside given
recent news. Housing remains a concern, but I think the prospects for a really serious housing
collapse that spreads to consumer spending have diminished substantially. I am focused, as I
said yesterday, on upside risks to activity, possibly coming from consumer spending. On the
inflation front, the news has been good, and I continue to think for a variety of reasons, including
my views on persistence, that core inflation will edge down over the year; but clearly it is too

January 30-31, 2007

105 of 255

soon to conclude that a new trend has set in. To me, the upside risk to inflation seems palpable,
especially because labor markets have tightened. Although I agree with President Plosser that
the Phillips curve has certainly appeared to flatten in recent years, most estimates that I have
seen of Phillips curves suggest that the relationship between changes in unemployment and
changes in inflation, even though it may have become smaller, is still significant. The lags may
be long so that its effect might not show up very much over the next couple of years, but it is a
significant source of long-term risk.
I’m pleased with the language suggested for alternative B. I think it effectively updates
developments since our last meeting, and I favor keeping the same wording on the risk
assessment that we used last time. That wording still conveys a sense of upside bias. I don’t see
a compelling reason to change, and I think it still works.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support no change in the federal funds
rate today. From our comments yesterday, it appears that not much has changed in terms of our
outlook for growth and inflation. So I’d prefer to make only the changes to our statement that
are necessary to keep us current with the intermeeting data reports. I’m comfortable with the
language in alternative B. It updates what we’ve heard in terms of the current reports. However,
I also agree with Vincent’s comment that our language in our assessment of risk has become
stale. I felt that way in December. But we’re not operating with a clean slate, and any
significant changes to the language today are probably going to be interpreted as an attempt to
signal some significant change in our outlook or risks to that outlook. So I agree that today is not
the day to do that, but I hope that we’ll have some further discussion about how to use some
language in our statements that is more durable. For now, alternative B looks right to me. I have

January 30-31, 2007

106 of 255

one final comment. For the record, I agree with Vice Chairman Geithner’s comment about not
interpreting our actions today or our thought about the path for the fed funds rate as a suggestion
that we have a different objective on inflation. I think that Vice Chairman Geithner made a good
point, and I want to support it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Just an interjection—I would also like to be on record as not assuming
that the Committee has an explicit objective. Individuals around the table have indicated
comfort zones of one range or another, but as far as I know the Committee has no explicit
objective. We all want to have the best policy we can for inflation and growth in a given period.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I tried to qualify my comment with as many qualifiers
as I could: I didn’t mean to imply that the Committee had an implicit objective.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. I agree. I was commenting on my own outlook. Because of some of
the differing assumptions that we talked about yesterday, I just didn’t want to be in the camp of a
2 percent objective.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with the sense of the Committee
that we should not be raising rates today. However, I do think that, as we’ve all said, the
inflation risks still dominate and that we’re approaching some very important decision points in
the next couple of meetings. If we look back, of course, the primary risk to our growth forecast
has been housing. We have seen an incredibly sharp decline, and many of us have the sense that
housing is stabilizing now. There’s still some uncertainty about that, but it seems to be

January 30-31, 2007

107 of 255

stabilizing. Once it stabilizes, our attention will shift to the other part of our dual mandate—to
price stability. As I think we have all said, we’re uncomfortable with the current rate of
inflation. There has been some improvement; we’ll take that to the bank. We’re happy with
that. But there is still a lot of uncertainty about the future course of inflation, and the projections
in the Greenbook and the Bluebook are not encouraging to me. My comfort zone is 1 to 2
percent, so I’m in the 1½ percent category. In view of that range, as Vince said, we have work to
do. I agree with Tim and Sandy that we shouldn’t interpret alternative B as saying that each
individual has a target of 2 percent. Our projection for inflation is 2¼ percent in both years, and
that is clearly above that target. We have said we’re concerned about inflation—we said that last
time, and I think it was well put. But we should make even stronger statements in the minutes
about the costs of inflation running above forecast and about the damage it can do to the
economy on a long-term basis. As I said, I don’t think we have the luxury of waiting until
inflation rises before we act. We have to be forward-looking. The next couple of meetings are
going to be important because we’ll know a lot more about whether housing really has stabilized
further and what the inflation numbers will look like. In terms of the language, I’m comfortable
with alternative B as it’s stated. I like the reference to the high level of resource utilization in
section 3, so I would not change the language at this time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I commented yesterday, it seems to me that
developments, in terms of both real growth and core inflation, have been positive recently, and I
would say the same thing about the outlook. Against that background, I think that maintaining
the federal funds rate as in alternative B is the appropriate policy decision. I’m willing to be
patient to see how much disinflation we get from here. But I guess my patience isn’t infinite,

January 30-31, 2007

108 of 255

and so at some point, if we don’t get any more than is anticipated in the Greenbook, we’re going
to have to consider further action. But at the moment, that’s not a principal concern of mine. So
that’s my judgment about the stance of policy for now.
As far as the language is concerned, I have a preference for sections 2 and 3 from
alternative C. I find those more appropriate than the expressions under alternative B. As far as
section 4 is concerned, there could be a case for some abbreviated version along the lines that
President Minehan suggested. Alternative B, section 4, has really served us well overall, and so
my judgment is that at this point it’s not worth trying to change that language. So I would
recommend marrying sections 2 and 3 from alternative C with section 4 from B as being about as
good as we can do at the moment.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. By way of preface—I didn’t mention this
yesterday, but my semiannual forecast projects core PCE inflation falling to 1.6 for ’08, and
growth rising from 2.6 to 2.9 in ’08. This represents both a more-rapid return to price stability
and a higher rate of trend growth than provided in the Greenbook. My forecast takes seriously
the instruction to assume appropriate monetary policy, perhaps more seriously than I have taken
it in the past. I think it is likely to require that the policy be more aggressive than assumed in the
Greenbook and that communications be forceful about our intentions to bring inflation down. I
think the forecast that I have submitted is both feasible and desirable because I think we don’t
need to use the output gap as our sole means of hammering inflation expectations and we don’t
need to wait nearly a decade, as in the Bluebook simulations.
Although I believe that the appropriate policy is likely to require a higher funds rate path
at some point this year, I’m not too uncomfortable leaving it unchanged today. I welcome the

January 30-31, 2007

109 of 255

recent good news on core inflation, and like President Stern, I’m willing to wait and see whether
the good news continues. However, I have been disturbed over the past year and a half, as I have
told you, about the extent to which short-run core inflation and longer-run inflation expectations
appear to be sensitive to energy price movements. We appear to have conditioned people to
expect core inflation to rise whenever energy prices surge. This will pose a problem for us if
energy prices rise substantially or if the current lull in core inflation proves to be only the
transitory effect from the recent fall in energy prices. Both hypotheses seem reasonably
plausible to me for the coming year or two. So I believe, as President Moskow and others have
said, that we’re likely to face another inflation challenge later this year. I think it would help our
cause if our policy moves were coupled with better communications, but that is a discussion for
later today. For now, I’m prepared to support standing pat.
I agree with President Plosser and others around the table who prefer the language in
alternative C for sections 2 and 3. I also agree with President Minehan about the language in
alternative C for section 4. I think that I read “predominant concern” as a little stronger and
better calibrated to our views—or at least my views—than the language in B. I also agree
strongly with Vice Chairman Geithner that standing pat today doesn’t imply a 2 percent target.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER I’m not sure I understand, Jeff. With regard to
section 4, what is your preference?
MR. LACKER. President Minehan’s suggestion.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. This is the problem with editing on the fly. I had recommended that
you go directly from “the Committee judges that inflation remains the predominant concern” to

January 30-31, 2007

110 of 255

the next sentence—“Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for
both inflation and economic growth”—and so on. However, leaving out the phrase that is in
alternative B now in section 4—“the extent and timing of additional firming that may be needed
to address those risks”—actually does make that sentence of section 4 of alternative C somewhat
weaker than alternative B. I’m getting ready to take my suggestion off the table [laughter]
because I think that you may be on to something with alternative B, and it may be better to leave
it that way because it does suggest additional firming as opposed to leaving it open.
MR. LACKER. It’s a fair point. I’d agree with that.
MS. MINEHAN. I take my suggestion off the table.
MR. LACKER. I withdraw my support for your previous suggestion. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You can’t withdraw it; she’s not making it. [Laughter]
President Lacker, please just say a word about how we are linking energy prices and core. In our
public remarks—for example, my speeches on energy—I have talked about the importance of
unlinking those two.
MR. LACKER. Yes, indeed. But if you just plot the two for the past year and a half, you
see a kind of two-month or three-month echo into the core. You calculate the cross correlations.
They were pretty high before 1984; they were low from 1984 to 2001. They’ve been high again
since. My reading of the financial press coverage of macroeconomic conditions following the
hurricanes in late ’05 is that we saw a sudden burst of references to the macroeconomic
conditions of the 1970s. I suspect—it is hard to disprove this one way or another—that rhetoric
harkening back to slowing growth and energy prices causing higher inflation induced, in the
public’s mind, a sense that, when energy prices surge, growth is going to be lower. You saw the
policy path come down in September of ’05, and you’re going to see higher core inflation, and

January 30-31, 2007

111 of 255

that’s what we saw that fall. To some extent, we tried to speak strongly of our desire to hold
inflation down, but in hindsight we left that association in the public’s mind. So I just think this
is a conditionality that appears now to have been built into expectations.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kroszner has a two-hander.
MR. KROSZNER. A two-hander on the now-disgraced proposal on section 4.
[Laughter] I think the way to raise it back is just take the phrase “the Committee judges that
inflation remains the predominant concern” and then move on to the sentence in alternative B
that starts with “the extent and timing of any additional firming.”
MS. MINEHAN. We could definitely do that.
MR. KROSZNER. If you want to keep it, I think that’s the way to bring it back to grace.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow has an intervention.
MR. MOSKOW. I was going to make exactly the same suggestion—to put it on the table
for consideration by President Minehan. [Laughter]
MR. KROSZNER. It also has the virtue of minimizing the number of word changes and
just substituting a phrase from the minutes from last time, for those of you who think that’s the
best way to go.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But I just raise a question, for those who are making the
suggestion, because I’d like to hear your response. In saying that inflation is the predominant
concern, we are acknowledging more explicitly than we have before that we have other concerns.
That is, we’re in some sense bringing into the assessment the presumption that there are concerns
other than inflation, but we are perhaps more concerned about housing than we were before.
This is simply a semantic issue. In alternative B, we don’t acknowledge other concerns. Neither

January 30-31, 2007

112 of 255

of these things is quite accurate, I agree. I just wanted to point that out and ask for your
response. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I think several of us have used the “predominant concern” language, so I
don’t see it as likely to induce a dramatic change in assessment about our views.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. The language that we have had for some time has shown concern about
cooling as a result of the housing market. Whether we have explicitly referred to it as a concern
or not, clearly it has been a concern. I think that “predominant concern” is a bit stronger than
“some inflationary risks remain” and that such language correctly reflects the sense of the people
around the table. Now, it may be too much. I don’t want to speak for Tim, but at one point he
thought it was too much.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Well, no, I’d just make the observation that we
debated this before and we debated several times the question about whether the best
introductory phrase to that balance of risk assessment was exactly that language. The problem in
doing it now—this is just one man’s view—is that I think it will be read as a significant
alteration of our signal, and on the strength of what we’ve discussed about changes to the
outlook in December, we can’t justify a significant change in the signal. The second reason not
to do it is the one that the Chairman raised. It introduces a slightly infelicitous framing when
there is some risk that people will read everything we say through the prism of whether we’re in
the midst of altering implicitly the hierarchy of objectives that we have as a Committee in some
broad sense. That’s not the way you framed it, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I couldn’t have framed it that way. [Laughter]

January 30-31, 2007

113 of 255

VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. But I think we haven’t changed our view of the
outlook enough to justify that significant a change in the signal.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Intervention, President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I think we have to do this against the background of what we
said the last time. If you go back to section 2 from December, we were cautious about growth. In
section 2 under alternative B now, we’re basically saying that we are seeing firmer economic
growth. I don’t want to overdo this, and I think Vice Chairman Geithner’s point is absolutely
correct here. Let’s think of where we’re coming from and indicate the reality of what we’ve talked
about. We are concerned about inflation. Using the word “predominant” excessively emphasizes
our concern. At some point we may need to tighten, but let’s think of this as the migration from
where we were in December. I think the migration is adequately captured in the language that we
have in alternative B.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. Let me also support Tim on this. I have a slightly different slant here,
which is that the inflation numbers have actually come in better. The concern here is that the
economy is coming in stronger and that it may necessitate tightening. But we don’t want to give the
impression that we think the inflation numbers are worse and that’s the big problem. It’s really a
perspective about going forward, and that’s an additional reason for not changing the language in
this case.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vincent.
MR. REINHART. May I just make one observation, Mr. Chairman? When you move from
B(4) to C(4), you make another change as well. B(4) talks about inflation risks, whereas C(4) talks
about inflation. So you are changing. You’re actually indicating distaste for the current level of

January 30-31, 2007

114 of 255

inflation, whereas the previous one could be read as “oh, there could be outcomes that are on the
high side.”
MR. LACKER. Alternative C, section 3 does the same thing.
MS. MINEHAN. That’s a good point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other interventions?
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Just to clarify, I’m assuming then we’re floating back toward alternative B,
leaving the fourth section as is.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Oh, you can speak for yourself. [Laughter]
MR. HOENIG. Oh, I like that, but I’m not sure that’s where we landed. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I think we’re going to have to assert order here. Any
other interventions? President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I would just say that I’m comfortable with going back to alternative B,
section 4, but one way to help move this forward would be just to strengthen our concern in the
minutes about inflation and stick with B(4).
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I do favor an unchanged fed funds
rate target. I prefer sections 2 and 3 from alternative C. As I read the conversation around the table,
I don’t hear anyone saying that we need to prime the markets for a probable increase in the fed
funds rate in March. Possibly in June is my sense; probably later if we get bad news on inflation
and a stronger economy than anticipated.

January 30-31, 2007

115 of 255

I went back in the statements to when we started working on this language. This language
really dates from March or pretty close to it. In March we said, “Some further policy firming may
be needed.” Then in May we said, “Some further policy firming may yet be needed.” In June we
said, “The extent and timing of any additional firming . . . that may be needed.” I think that, when
we started this language, we had the sense that we were on the edge of needing additional
tightening. Certainly the pause in August was not, as I recall it, viewed as necessarily permanent.
We called it a pause; we didn’t call it a stop. I had the sense in August and September that, if we
had had continuing escalation of inflation, we were ready to move higher. We were saying that our
best guess was that we were going to hang where we were but that we might be on the edge of
tightening. That was my sense at the time, and I think that’s the way the market read it. Over the
succeeding months, conditions changed a lot. The economy came in for a while softer than
anticipated. Housing was in a deeper decline than we thought. Inflation numbers came in on the
favorable side—not dramatically better, but certainly it was a favorable development. So the policy
meaning of the language has changed as a consequence of the evolution from the time we first
adopted it.
We need to view the language in terms of how, let’s say, a graduate student five years from
now, looking at the transcript, will read the discussion around the table. He or she will say that in
December, probably October but certainly in December and at this meeting, the Committee was not
on the edge of signaling an increase to the market. That’s the problem with section 4 in alternative
C. It’s a fairly clear indication that we seriously want to signal the market that we’re on the edge of
raising the rates in March, and I just don’t think that’s where we are. So I think that we need to
view the language in terms not only of the current situation but also of its evolution, and several
people have commented that, of course, we are where we are. This is an ideal time to move away

January 30-31, 2007

116 of 255

from that language because the market commentary is very much in the direction of expecting that
the Committee is going to hold the rate constant for some time. That’s in the market commentary.
That’s in the futures markets. There won’t be an easier time to move away from this language than
right now, and that was the purpose of the memo that I distributed. I would really like to see us get
back toward the English language meaning of the words rather than the inherited policy meaning
that this has come to have as a consequence of its repetition.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Bies.
MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I favor keeping rates unchanged today, and I favor
the language in alternative B in all the sections. Trying to be cautious, looking at the numbers that
just came out, and reflecting back to yesterday’s discussion about the NAIRU, last night I looked
some more at the exhibit 5 that the staff presented yesterday. I looked at the bottom right panel,
which shows the labor force participation rate of those over 62. There are a lot of us baby boomers,
and we’re generally healthy folks, and it really is unclear what we’re going to do. The baby
boomers have changed participation in the labor force throughout our generation. We were the
generation that brought women into the labor force. We now are going to live twenty years after
age 65, and we’re not going to sit idle because we’re going to be healthier and we have a lot of
skills. The additional skill set that we have could actually mitigate the shortage of some skilled
workers. Folks probably want more flexibility. They don’t want to be on a payroll, but they may
want to take a job now and then or work on a contract. Whatever historical NAIRU patterns we
have, they are going to be tested by the changing labor force participation due to the baby boomers.
That’s a big unknown, but it clearly affects potential growth, the output gap, and inflation pressures.
So I really don’t want to signal anything. This will play out over a long period, but it is the reason,
when I look at the “Lower NAIRU” alternative scenario in the Greenbook, that I read it as “higher

January 30-31, 2007

117 of 255

participation rate,” and I want to be cautious. That’s why I can’t go to alternative C. I don’t want to
signal as much worry about inflation. I also want to be careful that we don’t go as strong as calling
something “rebounding” because I don’t want people to think we’re going to go back to mid-3
percent growth rates with housing still as soft as it is on a sustained basis. We do still need to watch
housing. The strong job market will put legs under the growth side of this, and I like the changes
that were made in section 2. I think firmer growth is exactly what we want to talk about, so I like
the tone that we’ve set in the changes in B.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like the others, I favor maintaining the federal
funds rate at its current level today. As President Plosser pointed out, the strength of the data on
employment and spending does imply a higher natural real rate. At the same time, the inflation data
have come in really more favorable than we expected and have pointed to the moderation that we’ve
all been hoping for. Today’s information confirmed that the PCE was as low as the staff had
thought it was going to be in the fourth quarter and that, at least by the most comprehensive
compensation measure we have, the pickup in compensation remains very, very damped and might
even be consistent with a lower NAIRU than is built into the staff forecast. So balancing these two,
I think we’re right where we are. Vice Chairman Geithner said something yesterday about being
patient, and I think we can be patient at least for a little while longer. At the same time I agree with
everyone else, as I said yesterday, that the strength in demand, the low unemployment rate, and the
sluggish rise in productivity suggest that there are upside risks to the further moderate decline in
inflation that we’re all seeking.
On the language, I’d prefer alternative B up and down, and let me give some reactions to the
others. I have the same issue with section 2 that Governor Bies just mentioned. It seems to me that

January 30-31, 2007

118 of 255

the word “rebounding,” particularly after we just published a 3½ percent Q4, might imply that this
is a process that is continuing. The staff’s projection is that, if anything, they would write Q1 down
a bit. I don’t know how people would read the word “rebounding”; it might have more of a sense of
continuing strength than we see. That’s why I like the changes that were made to alternative B. It is
now a little more backward-looking: “Recent indicators have suggested somewhat firmer economic
growth.” That’s kind of what we know. We are also projecting in a general way moderate growth
going forward. The word “rebounding” in section 2 has a little more momentum than I am
comfortable with.
On section 3, if we went to alternative C, we would need to be clear that we are talking
about twelve-month inflation that remains elevated, and that’s 2.3 percent on the core PCE. If we
used that first sentence, we would need to get a little more technical than we usually get in the
announcement and say “improved modestly in recent months but remained elevated on a twelvemonth basis” so as not to confuse people about the recent months. That consideration makes me
favor sticking with alternative B. I do think the high level of resource utilization is at the foundation
of my concerns about the inflation risk. It means that labor and product markets are fairly tight, and
if there are increases in cost, businesses will more easily pass them through. So I like keeping that
reference to resource utilization in section 3. It gives a little flavor—a rationale—for why we’re
worried about the inflation process, and I would prefer to keep that rationale in there.
On the risk assessment, I’d stick with where we are. I don’t think anyone misunderstands
what we’re doing. It is less stale in some sense than it was in December—[laughter] in December I
had my doubts because we really were more worried about the downside risk to output. It’s more
indicative of where we are today than it was in December. With regard to President Poole’s point, it
does say “the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed,” so it leaves open the

January 30-31, 2007

119 of 255

possibility that it isn’t the next meeting, that it might be another meeting. I disagree with Vincent’s
point that somehow it gives us a sense that we’re more certain that we’re going to need to tighten
than we really are. It just says “any additional firming that may be needed,” so I don’t think it says
we’re definitely going to firm. The market understands what we mean. The market’s reaction to
incoming data over the intermeeting period has been very constructive. We’re not saying anything
that’s getting in the way of the stabilizing properties of the markets, and on section 4 I’d leave well
enough alone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me spend a minute talking about a market
issue before turning to the language. We’ve talked a bit and Vincent talked a bit about optionimplied measures of uncertainty about the policy path, which are near historical lows. That’s
certainly the case now, and it was the case when we last met. Even though the expected path of
policy and market prices have moved much closer to our own in the past two months, it’s as though
the markets are saying—to be a touch glib—“always certain, rarely right.” I would have thought
that we would have seen market uncertainty about the policy path change along with their view that
we were going to take less-dramatic action over the past six weeks. That tells me that market
measures of uncertainty may not be altogether accurate here, and that’s a troubling sign as we try to
figure out whether they are really telling us about uncertainty or whether they are a separate bet
unrelated to our future policy actions.
Today I, too, favor maintaining the federal funds rate target, and I generally share the views
expressed in alternative B. As Governor Kohn suggests, the jump from “mixed” to “rebounding” as
the operative word suggests a reaction to the data that strikes me as somewhat more positive, at the
same time that my own sense hasn’t changed dramatically over the past six weeks. While the

January 30-31, 2007

120 of 255

markets seem to have moved dramatically, we have really been a rock in this process. The markets
have come closer to us, and so I’d rather not appear overly reactive to some very recent data.
With respect to section 4, I was concerned at one point that the words “the Committee
judges that some inflation risks remain” seemed a little too dovish. Through the minutes and the
speeches of our colleagues, that wording has come to mean exactly that inflation is more of a
concern than anything else. So in some ways it has become ossified but true, and so I don’t see the
benefit of going to alternative C. With that, I generally support alternative B and suspect that we
shouldn’t be making many more dramatic changes than that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you. I, too, support alternative B and maintaining the federal
funds rate at 5.25 percent. I agree with many of the arguments that were made before, and so I
won’t repeat them. I’ll go to the language. On section 2, I think it would be an overreaction or
appear to be an overreaction to the current data if we suddenly went from where we were to
“rebounding.” Governor Kohn suggested that “rebounding” has problematic implications for going
forward. That is particularly true if we think that at least 0.5 percentage point of the 3.5 percent will
be taken away in revisions. Alternative B very nicely encompasses that, even if we didn’t know that
the number would be a bit firmer than we expected. I also think that in section 3 it’s problematic to
use the words “in recent months but remain elevated” because in recent months core inflation hasn’t
been elevated; it looks as though the numbers have been fairly consistently below 2 and so fairly
consistently below where they had been six or twelve months ago on average. That wording gives a
misleading impression. In section 4, even though I had suggested that alternative, I did so really to
clarify the discussion because I thought some of the discussion was not focusing on the issue but on
some of the wording, though we had a very good discussion. I have been and remain in favor of not

January 30-31, 2007

121 of 255

changing the language, mainly because the markets seem to have learned to interpret it the way we
think would be appropriate. Exactly as Governor Kohn said, the market is reacting to the data in a
very sensible way, given our perspective on the likely evolution of the data. Since they seem to be
kind of getting the data and the perspective on what we’re likely to do right, it would seem to be an
inopportune time to change the language. Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. I have a slightly different take on where the economy is in that I think the
inflation numbers we have seen recently are likely to be reflecting something that’s actually
happening. So I’m a little more sanguine on the inflation front than I was before and than the
Greenbook is. I don’t see inflation risks on the upside, which is the way many people describe the
situation, partially because I think we’re going to do our job properly; but I am a little concerned
about giving that impression outside. However, I worry about the upside risk for output. In that
context, the implication is that we should think about some upward bias to the future path of the
federal funds rate. Clearly, a change in the federal funds rate is not needed today. That’s no
surprise, and I think we’re all agreed on that. However, we have a situation in which the real
interest rate that will be appropriate in terms of keeping inflation from rising has certainly gone up.
In that sense, we are more likely to raise rates in the future as a result of what’s happened recently.
In terms of the language, I am a bit mixed about section 2. I lean toward a little stronger
language and, therefore, was leaning a little toward using alternative C for section 2. But I worry a
bit about the word “rebounding,” so I’m not sure. Section 2 in alternative B is fine with me as
well—a little mix there. I feel strongly that we not move to section 3 in alternative C because it
gives the impression that the inflation risks have gone up, whereas the real side is more of a concern
to me. That concern relates as well to my view of section 4, for which I again strongly support

January 30-31, 2007

122 of 255

alternative B. The issue here is not so much that inflation risks right now are the problem but that
output may be stronger than we expect, which means that to keep inflation under control we will
have to raise rates in the future. Again, for that reason I strongly support alternative B for section 4.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Mr. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The most important thing for
us to do today, and it’s really the only thing we need to do, is to convey a sense that, on the basis of
recent data, we see somewhat less downside risk to growth and maybe somewhat less upside risk to
inflation. But the principal issue we face is whether we’re going to see inflation come down far
enough with the current constellation of financial conditions, which we’ve helped induce. That’s
the issue that we will be debating for some time. It’s possible, maybe probable, that we will have to
tighten further, but we don’t know that yet. I don’t think we need to change our basic signal about
the probability that we’re going to have to tighten more, and I’m very comfortable with the
language in alternative B. Of course, all the alternatives are flawed. Alternative B seems the least
flawed among the alternatives. An interesting question is whether referring to current core inflation
as elevated today is helpful. You could amend B(3) to say, “Although core inflation remains
elevated, recent readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months.” But you
can’t really do that without doing what Don suggested—that is, distinguishing more clearly between
a twelve-month and a three-month rate—and it’s hard to argue that doing so is really worthwhile.
So I’m comfortable with alternative B as it is drafted now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Thank you all for your insights. My
recommendation also is to take no action and to maintain a bias toward further tightening. I have
heard very clearly the Committee’s concerns about inflation risk, and I recognize that we may have

January 30-31, 2007

123 of 255

to take further action in that direction later this year. I would counsel patience for the moment for
several reasons. First, the level of the federal funds rate is probably not too far from where we need
to be. I didn’t hear anyone suggesting that we were 75 or 100 basis points away from where we
need to be. Second, we have clearly conveyed the bias of our policy, and I don’t think there would
be a problem with our taking action. No one is going to accuse us of not having provided sufficient
warning. Third, there’s the confluence of data that we’ve seen since the last meeting, including
some improvement in the inflation data, which gives us, if nothing else, a bit of breathing space to
observe what I believe remain some relatively significant uncertainties about the evolution of the
real economy. The housing market has looked a bit more solid, and the worst outcomes have been
made less likely. But given that we have the breathing space to observe how that evolves, I think
that waiting a bit more would be wise.
The other point that I’d like to make—I’ve made it before as have others, but I think it is
quite important—is the endogeneity of financial conditions. The five-year and ten-year bond rates
are 35 to 40 basis points below the fed funds rate. That has several implications. The first is that we
don’t want to completely ignore the information that may be in that. More important from a policy
point of view, we could, depending on the inflow of data, see an increase of 30, 40, or 50 basis
points in long-term rates—mortgage rates, in particular—without any overt action on our part but
simply by maintaining our stance and our language. We are very well positioned in that respect in
terms of the way markets are likely to respond to data that confirm our sense but not the market’s
current sense.
With respect to the language, I listened with interest to the discussion. My proposal is to
take alternative B. But I’d like to discuss a bit some of the suggestions that have been made. On
section 2, I share the concern that some have mentioned about using the word “rebounding.” I think

January 30-31, 2007

124 of 255

that it implies that we are seeing the 3.5 percent continuing into the near term. I don’t think that is
the central tendency of our forecast. Alternative B, section 2 does, I believe, clearly signal that we
have seen a change from December, when we noted that there was “substantial cooling of the
housing market” and that “recent indicators have been mixed.” There is clearly a movement toward
a stronger assessment of the real economy.
Skipping to the risk assessment for a moment, I share people’s concerns about the accuracy
of the language. Like many of you, I am reluctant to change that assessment, given that there’s not
a sharp change in our policy view, simply because this has become recognized by the market. I
think it’s reasonably well interpreted. As I suggested with respect to the “inflation remains the
predominant concern” language, it’s not entirely clear how that would be interpreted. In any case,
there’s a risk that there would be a perception of a significant policy shift, which is not intended.
We do need to think hard about this language. I note that we’ll be discussing in March a number of
issues. Perhaps we could ask for a bit of discussion about how going forward we assess the risks
and what kind of language we use in describing the policy direction. I think that would be useful,
and if we are going to do it, my recommendation would be to wait another meeting or two until we
either see a significant change in the outlook or agree among us to a more systematic way of stating
risk assessment.
On section 3 regarding inflation, I’ve been going back and forth listening to the discussion.
We have dropped the word “elevated.” We could, I think, take the first sentence of alternative C,
section 3: “Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months but remain
elevated.” The sense in which that is true is that the fourth-quarter core PCE was 2.1, which is
above some people’s target. So it’s not grossly inconsistent. At the same time, the word
“modestly” conveys the sense that we are not completely on board with the idea that inflation has

January 30-31, 2007

125 of 255

made a substantial move downward or that the magnitude is enormous. I remain open, if you have
additional comments about my recommendation, to finding a way to incorporate the word
“elevated.” But at the moment, I think it is somewhat more accurate to use the word “modestly” to
convey the sense that the improvement in inflation is still not that large. So having discussed these
issues and having noted that our bias remains clearly to the upside and that we must certainly leave
open the possibility of future tightening later this year, my recommendation is to take no action and
to use alternative B as written. Anyone like to comment? President Poole.
MR. POOLE. I have one question here. Do we intend in the minutes to make clear our
general—well, “expectation” is too strong—but tilt or bias in the direction of tightening later in the
year, which I think matches what you just said.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Poole, I responded to something that you said in the
go-round. I think the language of alternative B, section 4 is not saying that we’re about to move at
the next meeting. It says essentially that the next move is more likely to be up, but it’s very clear
that “extent and timing” could mean that it will be some meetings before we respond. I thought the
tenor of the meeting in the discussion of the economic situation was quite clear that our concerns
about inflation remain paramount, and I’m sure that will be reflected in the minutes.
MR. POOLE. My question had to do with the coordination between the statement and the
minutes—whether we’re going to indicate clearly in the minutes the sense around the table about
that tightening. My sense was that we viewed tightening later in the year as more probable than we
did certainly in December. That’s all I’m asking about.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I’m not sure we’ve done this consciously, but the way
the discussion in the minutes has evolved in the past several cycles is that we’ve made an effort not

January 30-31, 2007

126 of 255

to provide more nuance in the policy signal that is in that last paragraph. In fact, we’ve adopted the
simplifying convention of pretty much repeating the part of the policy statement that is supposed to
signal a judgment about what policy is likely to be going forward. The minutes provide—and this is
valuable—a much more textured sense than the statement can about the central tendency of the
Committee’s view of the future. I don’t think it makes sense for us to try to agree now to provide in
the minutes more texture about what’s, in effect, an elaboration of the risk assessment in section 4.
It is hard to do while negotiating the minutes and there’s not much virtue in trying to do it. All the
emphasis should go toward making sure that we characterize the sense of the Committee about the
rationale for our decision, which essentially concerns how our view of the outlook has changed and
what the variance of views is around that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. First of all, I’m fine with your proposal. I would have gone with the other
proposal, but neither set of language binds us, and that is the main thing that I agree with. That
brings me to President Poole’s point. I don’t have a sense that we have a great increase coming later
in the year, and I don’t want to convey that such was the sense of the Committee. Now, if he does
as an individual and would like that in the minutes, that’s one thing. But I would not want to have
the minutes read as something more than what I heard here today. Trying to define a Committee
sense of this that wasn’t in the language here would make the minutes more confusing. So I’m okay
with this language, and I associate myself with Vice Chairman Geithner on the use of the minutes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. There are differences of views about this around the table. A couple of
people have said that they think it’s likely that sometime this year we will think hard about raising
rates. I would trust that such views would be reflected in the minutes. Is it your understanding,

January 30-31, 2007

127 of 255

Vice Chairman Geithner, that our convention regarding the minutes is that we expunge from them
any comments within the Committee conveying a sense of how we think policy is likely to evolve at
longer horizons?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I don’t think it’s a problem regarding that penultimate
paragraph of the minutes, in which the staff tries to capture the texture of what people say about
their thoughts on what policy is likely to do. But in the basic framing paragraph at the end, which is
designed to capture whatever we as a Committee are willing to say about what’s likely, we’ve tried
not to elaborate on or add nuance to the basic statement. So I guess I’m agreeing with you, Jeff. I
would have thought that the penultimate paragraph might describe whatever the range of views is
about that but not try to capture the consensus of the Committee.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. The issue that President Poole raised was whether the minutes would
likely be out of sync with the statement. What Vice Chairman Geithner mentioned and I know to be
the case is that the last paragraph of the minutes is always the statement. So while the minutes
might have a nuanced discussion and possibly tilt a bit to people’s concern about resource
utilization or inflation, however it gets stated, and suggest some possibility of upward movement
rather than downward movement, the paragraph that relates back to what we actually said in the
statement would tend to bring the discussion back and make the two harmonious, as they should be.
When people read the minutes, they are likely to say there’s a little more upside risk or a little less
downside risk. That’s what I heard around the table. I don’t think that’s inconsistent with what you
suggested in terms of a statement.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.

January 30-31, 2007

128 of 255

MR. KOHN. Thank you. President Minehan said much of what I was going to say. The
minutes will indicate the tenor of the discussion, which was that, despite some good inflation news,
we still see plenty of upside risk. That will convey the basic view here. I’d be very concerned
about being explicit about an interest rate increase down the line. We will be discussing this topic in
a few minutes, I hope, [laughter] about how explicit the Committee should be in its forecasts about
the future path of interest rates. We haven’t made that decision yet, so I’m a little nervous about
making it really explicit or even implicit in the minutes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I thought, Mr. Chairman, that you described a convention a number of
meetings ago, and I thought you expressed it very well: The statement that comes out of the
meeting is a consensus statement of the Committee; the minutes describe the range of views that are
expressed. That’s consistent with the way we’ve been operating, and I think it has served us well.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agree.
MR. MOSKOW. May I ask one other question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I just was wondering, since we’re focusing on alternative B, how the staff
thinks the markets will react to the current version.
MR. REINHART. As we related in the Bluebook and as a number of you said, market
participants understand the risk assessment, and they don’t expect policy action or a change in the
risk assessment. So it’s hard to see that there would be any reaction at all. I wonder what our new
Account Manager would say as well.

January 30-31, 2007

129 of 255

MR. DUDLEY. I would agree with that. You have somewhat firmer growth but better
inflation news, and so the Committee is about in the same place on net that it was before. I would
be very surprised to see much of a market reaction at all.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Ready to vote? Ms. Danker.
MS. DANKER. I’ll read the directive from page 25 of the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 5¼ percent.”
The risk assessment: “The Committee judges that some inflation risks remain. The extent
and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming
information.”
Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Bies
President Hoenig
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
President Minehan
Governor Mishkin
President Moskow
President Poole
Governor Warsh

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. This would be a good time to have a fifteenminute coffee break.
[Coffee break]

January 30-31, 2007

130 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The second portion of our meeting is devoted to
communications. President Plosser submitted a memo about external communication that
suggested there might be some unease in the Committee. In the hope of somewhat reducing that
unease, I thought I would try to state one more time what I was trying to get at when we discussed
this issue before. Perhaps without taking too much time away from the important discussion we
want to have today, if anyone would like to respond to that, I’d be certainly happy to hear.
I and a few other people had two concerns about talking in public about our communication
issues. The first was that we would try to avoid interfering with the ongoing discussion and the
development of consensus within the Committee. The second was to try to avoid creating any
unnecessary political problems that might complicate the adoption of whatever we decide we’d like
to do. So my recommendation would be to ask yourselves two questions. The first would be,
“Would the remarks that I will give elicit opposition or significant disagreement from other
members of the Committee?” If the answer is “yes,” then by giving those remarks, you risk the
possibility that other people might be in some sense compelled to respond, and then we are having
the debate in public. My sense of that is that therefore it would probably not be a great idea to give
a speech specifically on the pros and cons of inflation targeting, for example, even if you tried to
take a somewhat neutral position because it’s inevitably difficult to take a neutral position.
However, I want to be clear. I think that it’s perfectly okay for people to talk about broader
themes—the importance of low and stable inflation, the importance of credibility, the importance of
commitment, and the importance of clear communication. I see no problem there because those are
broad, general issues that I think everyone around the table would agree with and that don’t
necessarily speak to the issues that we’re still discussing within the Committee. The other question
I’d suggest you ask is, “Would something that I say today be likely to end up being repeated to the

January 30-31, 2007

131 of 255

Chairman in congressional testimony.” [Laughter] That is a particular concern of mine. The lesson
I would take from it is that, if you do talk about the importance of low and stable inflation, which is
certainly a good thing to do, you also make the point that we are, of course, committed to our dual
mandate and that one of the principal reasons that we seek price stability is to strengthen the real
economy.
So those are my thoughts. I want to reiterate that this is guidance, not regulation. I ask
people just to use their judgment and not to feel constrained about talking about broad issues,
particularly issues that would command wide agreement in the Committee, and you certainly don’t
have to disavow any previous positions. If you are pressed too far on an issue, you can certainly
always say that the Committee is currently discussing these issues and that we’ll be saying more
about this in the future. Again, I certainly had no intention and have no intention of trying to censor
people’s words. I hope that you will continue to talk about the broad issues of price stability and
communication, which are so critical to our function as a central bank. I don’t want to take a great
deal of time from our broader discussion, but if anyone would like to react, certainly this would be
the time. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I think this is really clear, common sense, and very constructive.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. If there are no other comments, I’ll turn the
meeting over to Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought I would begin by saying a few words on
process. I’ve had a number of questions from people about where we are in the process of
considering communication issues and how we see the next couple of meetings. I hope that today
we can come up with some sense of the central tendency or an expression of the Committee on
where we want to go with the projection and the forecast process. I don’t expect complete

January 30-31, 2007

132 of 255

agreement on where we want to go. I don’t expect every question to be answered. But I think we
can probably narrow down the range of things we’re looking at and get a sense of where the modal
Committee member would like to go with this. I also recognize that the decisions we make on other
aspects of communication and monetary policy—for example, the numerical specification of price
stability—would then come back and interact with how you might want to use the forecast.
In March, we will revisit the issue of the numerical specification of price stability, which we
discussed in October. I’ve asked the staff to work on some material. Basically I’ve asked them to
take the pieces of the memo from January ’05 that talked about things such as range versus point;
which index or modification of an index; the transformation of an index; price level versus inflation
targeting; the horizon, if any, over which we ought to specify this—some of these more-specific
issues that we need to think about if we’re going to have a numerical specification for price stability.
The sense coming out of the October meeting was that the vast majority of people on the Committee
wanted to move in this direction, although exactly what they wanted wasn’t clear. So I’ve told the
staff to assume that the Committee is moving in this direction, and now the task is not to debate that
whole thing again but rather to get a little more specific. By getting more specific we can test our
own notions of how this would work out and just how much in favor we are. The March meeting
will go two days, and we’ll be discussing those things. The Chairman has put on the table another
item for the March meeting, which is the issue concerning the announcement and the balance of
risks. If we have time in March, it would be great to get to it. If not, shortly thereafter we need to
think about the directions in which we seem to be moving on both the projection side and the
numerical specification side and their interactions with the announcements, the minutes, and some
of these other modalities we have for communicating with the public.

January 30-31, 2007

133 of 255

I would hope that after the March Committee meeting, the subcommittee—President Stern,
President Yellen, and I—could take stock of where we have gotten to; how the issues have been
narrowed; where the Committee seems to be heading; what the open issues are; and if we don’t get
to the announcement or the minutes in March, how these things might interact. Then we could
come back to the Committee in June, the next two-day meeting, and ask for some more guidance
and just keep pushing this process to a conclusion. We need both some dry runs on whatever we
decide to do and a strategy for rolling that out to the public and the public’s elected representatives.
Once we get closer to a decision, then we can talk about how to proceed on those two issues. So
that’s the general process that I’m envisioning for the next couple of meetings, Mr. Chairman. I will
turn the meeting back to you. Actually I’m supposed to call on Dave Reifschneider to start the staff
briefings.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 4 Thank you, Governor Kohn. Brian Doyle, Vincent
Reinhart, and I will be speaking this morning on the material labeled “Staff Presentation
on Producing and Publishing Economic Forecasts.” As the top panel of your first
exhibit notes, the Federal Reserve regularly provides the public with information on
the outlook in the Monetary Policy Report, congressional testimony, the FOMC
minutes, and the statement. You presumably undertake this effort with an eye toward
advancing the goals of economic performance, public discourse, your own internal
discourse, and efficient operations. A key issue in your deliberations today is
whether changing your practices in this area would advance these goals further or
achieve a better tradeoff. As shown in the bottom panel, this morning Brian, Vincent,
and I will address three questions related to this issue. I will start with the production
and publication options that are open to the Committee. Brian will then discuss what
we can learn from the international experience. Finally, Vincent will consider the
governance issues that would arise under alternative arrangements.
Many ways of changing your current practices are possible. Exhibit 2 focuses on
one fundamental choice that you confront in this regard—namely, how to produce the
forecast. As noted in the top panel, you have three main options. First, you could
continue to produce independent forecasts, with each of you solely responsible for
your own forecast. Second, you could choose to produce a single centralized
forecast, working together as the whole Committee or delegating responsibility to a
subcommittee. Finally, you could adopt an intermediate position and produce
4

Material used by Mr. Reifschneider, Mr. Doyle, and Mr. Reinhart is appended to this transcript (appendix 4).

January 30-31, 2007

134 of 255

coordinated forecasts, with your individual projections conditioned on common
assumptions for factors such as oil prices and fiscal policy.
As highlighted in the bottom panel, your choice among these three options has
important implications for, among other things, your communications with the public
and the operational cost of forecast-related activities. To see this, consider one
important communication task, the telling of the central story of the outlook. As
noted in the first row under the independent option, distilling an informative message
from multiple forecasts is difficult, even if those forecasts provide a considerable
amount of detail about the outlook. In fact, it is an open question as to whether it
would always be possible to craft a central narrative that would command the consent
of a majority of the Committee, given the diversity of your views. Moving to the
right, the distillation task under the coordinated approach might be simplified a bit
because your individual forecasts would share some common elements.
Nevertheless, telling the central story would remain difficult if, after settling on, say,
a common path for oil prices, you still disagreed markedly about its economic
implications. In contrast, as the rightmost entry notes, the telling of the central story
would be relatively easy under the centralized option because—abstracting from the
difficulties of producing such a forecast—the single projection would provide a clear
and coherent message.
Your production choice has important implications for another communication
task—conveying the diversity of views on the Committee about the outlook. As
noted in the second row of the table, the independent option naturally reveals this
diversity through your individual forecasts. To a large degree, the same is true under
the coordinated option, although conditioning on common assumptions would
obscure some of the possible sources of diversity. Finally, the centralized option
would not reveal the diversity of your thinking unless the published outlook summary
included additional comments about alternative views.
Your production choice also has important implications for the operational costs
of both producing and publishing the forecast. Forecast production is a relatively
low-cost task under the independent option because you incur no expense in
coordinating your forecasting efforts. Still, you could find yourselves devoting more
resources to forecasting if you chose to publish your individual projections. Moving
to the coordinated option, here preparing the forecast would be more costly because
you would need to spend time choosing a common set of assumptions, but you could
limit these costs if you settled on a standard process for this task. Finally, producing
a centralized forecast would be very costly, especially at first, because of the wide
range of economic issues on which you would need to reach consensus. Given the
practical difficulties of achieving such agreement with a group as large as the FOMC,
making this option feasible might require delegating the preparation of the unified
projection to a subcommittee.
Finally, there are the operational costs of forecast publication. This task may be
burdensome under the independent option, especially if all of you wish to participate

January 30-31, 2007

135 of 255

actively in the preparation of the text as you now do with the minutes. In fact, given
the inherent difficulty of crafting an accurate and informative central message from
multiple forecasts, negotiating the language of an outlook summary as a group would
likely be even more time-consuming than preparing the minutes if the summary is to
be anything more than a bare-bones listing of numbers. Publishing the forecast under
the coordinated option also may be burdensome, for the same reasons. However,
choosing the centralized option could make forecast publication less costly, partly
because you would already have reached agreement on the economic factors
influencing the outlook. You could reduce costs further if you delegated
responsibility for both producing and summarizing the forecast to a subcommittee.
The top panel of your next exhibit considers some of your many publication
choices. If you choose to continue producing individual forecasts, you could release
more information about those projections—for example, by publishing the forecasts
themselves. Such a step would reveal more about the diversity of your thinking,
although it might risk diverting attention from any consensus about the outlook.
Another option available under all three production choices would be to provide more
forecast details, either numerically or in qualitative form. Such a step would facilitate
telling a more informative story about the outlook, although it would also create
additional dimensions for disagreement. A third possibility would be to lengthen the
forecast period. This step could reveal more fully how you expect any economic
shocks and imbalances to play out and thus might enhance public understanding of
the basis for your policy actions; it could also provide more information about your
policy objectives and expectations for the long run. A fourth possibility would be to
publish information about the outlook more frequently than you now do. Such a
change might help to clarify how you see the forecast and monetary policy
responding to incoming data, but it would also increase operational costs
proportionately. Finally, you have the option of publishing fan charts and confidence
intervals for your projections. This information could help to emphasize the inherent
uncertainty of the outlook and the conditionality of monetary policy. Before you
could take this step, however, you would have to settle some issues involving the
empirical basis of this material.
The bottom panel of the exhibit addresses two options that you have for setting
the projected federal funds rate. The first option is to condition the outlook on what
you see as “appropriate” monetary policy. If you produce independent forecasts, each
of you would continue to make this determination on your own, but under the
centralized approach and perhaps the coordinated one, you would need to do this as a
group. As noted in the first bullet point, publishing details on what you see as the
appropriate path of the fed funds rate could facilitate telling a more informative story
about the role played by monetary policy in the outlook. Describing your policy
assumptions qualitatively might achieve this objective; alternatively, you could
release, say, the central tendency of your specific fed funds rate projections. One
possible drawback to publishing an “appropriate” policy path is that the public might
misinterpret it as a promise, especially at first; for this reason, you might wish to pair
any published fed funds rate path with information on forecast uncertainty. Releasing

January 30-31, 2007

136 of 255

information on the fed funds rate might also generate public criticism and political
pressures.
A second option for setting monetary policy is to condition the outlook on a flat
fed funds rate or on the path consistent with market expectations. This approach
might mitigate some of the misinterpretation and political problems associated with
the release of an appropriate policy path. However, conditioning the outlook on such
a path would alter the nature of the forecast and so create communication challenges.
In particular, your forecasts would no longer represent your best guess for the likely
evolution of the economy, to the extent that a flat fed funds rate or a market-based
path differs from what you, individually or as a group, think will be necessary. For
this reason, the forecast summary would require some statement about the desirability
of the projected outcome to avoid misunderstanding. You might even find it
necessary to provide guidance about how the policy path would have to change to
bring about a more “appropriate” outcome—a step that would likely generate its own
controversies. I will now turn the floor over to Brian.
MR. DOYLE. As Dave has explained, policy committees at central banks may
choose to produce and publish one of several different types of forecasts—
centralized, coordinated, or independent—or they may choose to release a staff
forecast. In the table at the top of exhibit 4, columns A, B, and C show some of the
forecast publication choices of the central banks discussed in the International
Finance Division background paper. Seven central banks publish a centralized
forecast; one, a coordinated forecast; and one, a staff forecast. In my portion of the
presentation, I will first address some factors (shown in the last four columns) that
appear to be associated with these choices.
By our reckoning, the first central bank shown, the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, possesses the characteristics that would most likely lead to a centralized
forecast without dissent: [laughter] It has a small policy committee, composed of only
the governor (which does tend to limit dissent); hence its committee is located in the
same place, and its head bears sole responsibility for monetary policy. The other
central banks that produce a centralized forecast without dissents (shown in rows 2 to
5 of the table) share many of these characteristics. In Canada (row 3), as in New
Zealand, the central bank head has primary responsibility for monetary policy. In
other cases, such as Australia and Norway (rows 4 and 5), external members, who
have no executive functions, mainly participate at the monetary policy meeting,
leaving the remaining members a larger role in producing the forecast.
The Swedish Riksbank and the Bank of England have members who all play a
more equal role in shaping monetary policy. These banks also publish a centralized
forecast, but they recognize members’ dissents from the central forecast in their
published minutes. The Bank of England has a larger committee than the first six
banks shown. The entire committee is involved in the production of each forecast,
and with the larger committee size, the process takes about four weeks, including
many meetings to decide on the details of the projection.

January 30-31, 2007

137 of 255

All seven central banks that publish a centralized forecast also release a single
narrative of the forecast to the public. However, their choices vary about the features
of the forecast, such as the presentation of uncertainty and the treatment of policy
rates. Three of these central banks—the Norges Bank, the Riksbank, and the Bank of
England—publish “fan” charts that convey the policymakers’ collective view on the
distribution of possible outcomes. Others describe uncertainty around their central
forecast through their discussion of risks or through alternative scenarios. As shown
in column C, some central banks choose to publish their own forecast for the
appropriate path of interest rates rather than conditioning their forecast on a specified
path, such as a flat path for the policy rate or one based on market expectations.
In contrast to the Bank of England, the two other central banks with relatively
large committees—the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank—do not
publish centralized forecasts. To reflect the diversity of its nine policy board
members’ views, the Bank of Japan publishes the range and the central tendency of
their forecasts, along with the median. These forecasts are coordinated because the
board members base their forecasts on a path of interest rates consistent with market
quotes. These forecast statistics are published with a description of the outlook,
which is drafted by the staff with board input and then voted on by the board. Board
members may register (with attribution) their dissent from the description of the
forecast in the minutes of the policy meeting. The ECB’s policy committee—which
includes twelve members from the national central banks, who are located throughout
the euro area—does not publish any forecast of its own but releases its staff forecast
instead. The staff forecast is not voted on by the governing council, and its standing
with respect to policy decisions is not clear.
As outlined in the bullets in the bottom panel, despite the different choices of
these central banks, their publication of economic forecasts is generally regarded as
useful. The central banks say that publication has eased communication. Many
central banks have started publishing forecasts, none of these has stopped, and most
have increased the extent of detail reported. Most observers agree that published
forecasts have improved communication and facilitated accountability. Many have
commented favorably on the quality of forecast publications. Overall, commentary
on the publication of forecasts by both producers and consumers is quite positive.
However, we have found very little econometric work that specifically evaluates
whether publishing forecasts has improved monetary policy communication or
economic outcomes. The publication of forecasts has nearly always been part of a
package. Attempts to detect major positive or negative effects of adopting such
packages have met with little success. Limited evidence suggests that their adoption
may have helped anchor inflation expectations, but whether the publication of
forecasts has made an independent contribution is unknown. A few event studies
have found that the release of forecasts has some effect on interest rates and other
financial variables. On balance, existing econometric evidence does not provide a

January 30-31, 2007

138 of 255

firm basis for assessing the cost and benefits of publishing forecasts. Vincent will
now complete our presentation.
MR. REINHART. Exhibit 5 presents a decision tree outlining the possible paths
you might take in incorporating an economic forecast in the policymaking process. I
am including this schematic because, among other reasons, it is just what you would
expect from me. [Laughter] Before we trace out some of those limbs, I want to
remind you why the economic forecast is on today’s agenda. Discussion of monetary
policy, both here and abroad, has increasingly focused on the forward-looking nature
of setting policy. For the Federal Reserve, the structure of the current process of
releasing an economic projection was set almost thirty years ago by improvisation in
response to congressional prodding. Is it possible that the Committee could arrive at
a more coherent way of producing and releasing a forecast that would enable
policymakers to describe better what they do?
The possibilities for producing and releasing a forecast are laid out at the top of
the exhibit. Note that a couple of the nodes correspond to questions from the
subcommittee to you in a memo I distributed on Friday. In particular, as flagged by
the “1” in the decision tree and repeated in the list below, “Does the Committee want
to produce a joint forecast or conduct a survey of individual forecasts?” The answer
to this question is both hard—because it has considerable implications for your time
and resources in the System more generally—and easy to predict—at least based on
conversations I’ve had with many of you and your staff. To make it even easier to
answer, let me paraphrase those conversations: “Do you want to change the basic
nature of the Committee process by adding multiple rounds of meetings so as to
enforce a more uniform view of the outlook than has ever existed before, or do you
want to modify the status quo?” [Laughter] If you prefer to continue the practice of
providing individual forecasts, you might want to reexamine the extent of
coordination in that process. That is item 2 at the top and bottom, “If the forecasts are
done individually, should they be based on common assumptions about some key
conditioning factors?” Chief among those factors is the path of monetary policy. Do
you want to continue with each taking your own view of monetary policy, settle on
some joint assumption, or use market-based quotes?
The individual entries in a numerical forecast have only limited usefulness in
describing the economic outlook and the backdrop for setting policy. Rather, the
narrative thread explaining the forecast is the most useful because it allows the reader
to assess the credibility of the projection, to position his or her own view when there
is a difference of opinion, and to gauge potential risks to the outlook. As posed in
question 3, do you want to accompany a forecast with a minutes-style narrative
description? As with the minutes—and noted in question 4—this document could be
circulated for comments from meeting participants and ultimately be approved by the
Committee through a notation vote. Such a procedure, however, will extend the
interval between the making of the forecast and its release, raising the number of
times that inconvenient data releases will render the projection moot. If you want a

January 30-31, 2007

139 of 255

more timely release, drafting and releasing such a minutes-style document could be
delegated to either the Chairman or the staff.
The last four questions cover technical attributes of a forecast. In particular, as
noted in question 5, how frequently should forecasts be made? The current
semiannual reporting cycle was set by the Congress, but it means that the published
forecasts become stale. Another inconvenience with the current setup is that an
annual forecast made in June incorporates an implicit forecast of the second half.
Would you rather be explicit and forecast half years? More generally, as in item 6,
how many years should the forecast cover? Seventh, how many variables should be
forecast, and which should they be? Nominal income, for example, remains on the
survey by historical accident—from the days when the velocity of money was thought
to be predictable and knowing your expectation about income growth would help in
setting a monetary range. Are there other variables that would be more helpful?
Finally, should there be some attempt to convey numerically the uncertainty
surrounding the forecasts? Relaying such information would more accurately convey
the balancing of risks that is an integral part in your deliberations and would remind
your readers that it is a projection, not a promise.
By now, we probably have your heads spinning with all the possible permutations
of the many decisions that could be made. With this many moving parts, the problem
is complicated. But not all the issues to be resolved are hard. First, you have the
force of precedent, which is a powerful attractor within the Federal Reserve System.
That is why I wouldn’t worry for a minute about whether the forecast and its
description should reflect the views of the Committee or all meeting participants. The
precedents of the outlook portion of the minutes and the semiannual survey of
forecasts establish that any release should reflect everyone’s views. Second, for the
sake of consistency, some of the decisions about the format of the forecast will be
driven by other decisions you may make later. For instance, if in your deliberations
about quantifying the price objective in March you indicate a preference for
measuring inflation in terms of CPI or PCE, whether headline or core, the variable
sampled in your survey should be a good indicator of that goal.
If you can answer the hard questions today—eight of which the subcommittee
sent to you—then it would be possible to frame out a rough structure of a specific
proposal. Detail could be filled in by surveying you later on technical matters, and
sometime thereafter you could get a formal proposal for consideration as part of the
general package of work on communication. That concludes our prepared remarks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for the staff? President
Fisher.
MR. FISHER. May I ask one question of Brian?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.

January 30-31, 2007

140 of 255

MR. FISHER. Brian, on your exhibit 4, you point out that there’s no econometric evidence
that publishing forecasts—these improved methodologies—has actually had an effect from an
econometric standpoint. But you make the statement that observers agree that forecasts have
improved communications and accountability, which is a more subjective statement. Who are the
observers?
MR. DOYLE. They would be a combination of market participants, academics, and anyone
with an interest in what central banks do or say.
MR. FISHER. How do we measure “improved communications and accountability”? It
seems to be very subjective.
MR. DOYLE. Unfortunately it is.
MR. FISHER. Finally, I am just not as familiar as the rest of the FOMC is, but do any of
these banks have a dual mandate stated like our dual mandate?
MR. DOYLE. Certainly. Other central banks have multiple objectives. Some that are
specifically stated are the ones that the Federal Reserve has stated: maximum employment and
stable prices. I’m not sure, but some are quite close in terms of keeping inflation low and watching
output as well.
MR. MISHKIN. May I help answer this?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. The Norges Bank is actually the clearest on something close to a dual
objective. In their inflation report, they have several statements of their objectives, and they
explicitly say that they have a flexible inflation target regime. That’s the first statement. What that
means is that they actually are going to try to minimize both inflation fluctuations and outputemployment fluctuations. Most central banks don’t have anything as explicit as that when they do

January 30-31, 2007

141 of 255

talk in terms of hierarchical mandates in some cases, a country does talk about output fluctuations in
an inflation-targeting regime and is more explicit. I think the Riksbank is going to be moving in
that direction; it was part of our recommendations to them.
MR. FISHER. But currently it’s the Norges Bank.
MR. MISHKIN. Currently the Norges Bank is the clearest.
MR. FISHER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, I think almost all central banks, even the socalled “formal inflation targeters,” have in their mandate that they are to support economic activity
insofar as it is consistent with price stability. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. This isn’t a question.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry. Is this for a go-round, or do you have a question?
MR. LACKER. I don’t have any questions. [Laughter]
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Just answers. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Then please start.
MR. LACKER. I thought the documentation distributed by the staff did a good job of
identifying the purposes that publishing forecasts ought to serve. They’re consistent with what I
described in past meetings as guiding principles—namely, that communication is useful to the
extent that it helps the public form better expectations about future policy and inflation and that it
will help in that regard to the extent that it provides benchmarks against which people can assess
their future actions. For me the purposes of communicating a forecast are, first, to reduce
uncertainty in the public’s mind about future macroeconomic outcomes; second, to enhance our
credibility and accountability; third, to improve the coherence and internal consistency of our
discussions. It’s useful to stack up different questions and approaches against these purposes and to

January 30-31, 2007

142 of 255

see how they do. In any case—and this is a theme to which I will return—in achieving these
objectives, I think it’s really important that published forecasts be clear and understandable to the
public. Now, the cardinal rule of communication is to understand your audience. It’s one thing to
explain our forecast and procedure to Larry Meyer or Goldman Sachs economists; it’s another to
explain it to President Plosser’s $2 million business head, the Helena Rotary Club, or wherever we
find ourselves from time to time.
Before addressing Vince’s questions, I just want to note that I think the value of publishing a
forecast would be greatest if it were paired with an internal agreement about our long-run objective
for inflation. I think having a prior consensus on that would simplify the process of obtaining a
consensus on the outlook and about policy. My own preference is that we state that publicly. To
the extent that an inflation objective represents a commitment regarding future policy, you can view
it as representing an implied forecast of the long-run average value of inflation, and so publicizing
that would help reduce the public’s uncertainty along a very important dimension.
Regarding Vince’s first question, I believe a single Committee forecast is most desirable.
This relates to the accountability objective. We are jointly responsible for the outcomes of
monetary policy, so I think we should strive for an outlook that we can fairly agree represents a
collective sense of the Committee. The value of accountability is that it enhances credibility, and
it’s the credibility of the Committee rather than of individual members that’s really important. I
recognize that crafting a consensus on a forecast among nineteen or even twelve members, even as
collegial a group as this is, could be a daunting task. One approach would be to allow the
expression of dissenting views. This runs the risk, however, of making a Committee forecast
nothing more than a compilation of members’ forecasts, and I think it needs to be more than that.
The message that the release of a Committee forecast should convey is that we came to a process

January 30-31, 2007

143 of 255

with diverse views, we talked things over, our views perhaps moved closer together, and we
ultimately came to agreement on a single forecast that most of us saw as not too different from our
own. That meaning would be watered down if there were a lot of dissenting views—if they were
too frequent or too numerous. So I think there should be sort of a high threshold of disagreement
before any of us insists on differences being separately articulated. I would envision a process—I
think one of Vince’s options sketched this—in which the staff produces an initial forecast along the
lines of the Greenbook (they have a great forecasting record) and members would send in their own
forecasts, commentaries, or disagreements. Then there would be some iterative communication
process on the basis of which a new forecast would be developed for a Committee vote.
Regarding the question of conditioning assumptions, I strongly believe that what we publish
should reflect our best sense of what is actually going to happen. My preference, accordingly,
would be to condition forecasts on how we think we are actually going to set policy as events
unfold. Conditioning on any other assumption—a market’s policy path or an unchanged policy—
means having to explain that our forecast may be counterfactual. It means that, in order to figure
out our real forecast, people have to figure out how our policy choices are going to differ from our
assumed policy and then guess how we think the differences in policy are going to affect the
forecast. It means that the extent to which our published forecast reduces the public’s uncertainty
about future macroeconomic outcomes is going to be limited. It means that our accountability will
be limited because we will be saying up front that this forecast might not be our actual one. It also
means that we will be chewing up valuable staff and Committee time constructing a forecast we
don’t necessarily believe in. Here I think it’s instructive to imagine explaining a counterfactual
forecast to President Plosser’s $2 million business head or to the Helena Rotary Club.

January 30-31, 2007

144 of 255

I realize that some members of the Committee may be uncomfortable articulating an
expected path for the federal funds rate, but what we publish about the nature of future policy
settings is a separate question from whether we condition on a cohesive view about them. Our
discussion of the forecast is going to be much more coherent if we reach a consensus on future
policy. Telling the public that our forecast assumes appropriate policy obviously makes more sense,
I think, if we have stated what inflation rate that policy is designed to achieve. If, instead, we adopt
some counterfactual policy assumption, then not stating an inflation objective makes a published
forecast even less informative since people would have to know how the forecast differs from our
desired outcomes before figuring out what to make of it.
As for Vince’s other questions, on questions 3 and 4, I think the accompanying narrative
should be handled pretty much the same way the minutes are—drafted by the staff and approved by
the Committee. On questions 5 and 6, I see greater value in publishing forecasts at longer horizons.
In the event that we adopt an explicit objective, we would want the period to be long enough to
show the forecast path for inflation returning near to the objective. Again, if we condition it on
market assumptions, the period needs to be long enough to determine whether the forecast appears
to be moving toward our objective at an acceptable pace. Question 7 asks how many variables we
should forecast. I think the optimal number is four. [Laughter] In case you want to know which
ones I’d choose, I’d say real GDP, inflation, the unemployment rate, and the fed funds rate. On
question 8, yes, we absolutely should convey the uncertainties surrounding the forecast. I think it’s
important for accountability that we articulate our sense of the range of likely future outcomes. This
points to the importance of not simply assuming a path for the fed funds rate but allowing policy to
vary across different draws of the shocks that are going to affect our future economic conditions.
Otherwise our published fan charts for economic variables are not going to correspond to the

January 30-31, 2007

145 of 255

probability distribution that we believe will actually govern future outcomes, and again, we’ll have
to explain the difference to the public. Also, I think that agreeing on a fan chart around outcomes is
likely to be conducive to achieving a consensus within the Committee on the outlook.
In closing, let me reiterate the importance that I place on clarity. Our communication goals
of reducing the public’s uncertainty about macroeconomic outcomes, particularly inflation, and
enhancing our accountability strongly imply that we should adopt only a procedure that we can
easily explain to the public, that the public will find useful, and that avoids the confusion of
complex and subtle counterfactual assumptions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. You said one thing that surprised me, Jeff. You began
by saying that the objective should be to help reduce the public’s uncertainty about future
macroeconomic outcomes generally. Now, I can see that we have some capacity to reduce the
public’s uncertainty about what inflation is going to be over time, but is it realistic for us to have as
an objective to reduce broader uncertainty in the public about macroeconomic outcomes? Is that an
achievable or desirable objective for communications? We can maybe reduce our uncertainty about
what we think about what those outcomes are, but even we don’t know much about the dimensions
of the future.
MR. LACKER. I’m not suggesting that we reduce the public’s uncertainty to less than our
uncertainty about future outcomes. But the econometric evidence is that Greenbook forecasts are
superior to the private sector’s forecasts. So if the public knew them, their uncertainty would be
lower. I think there’s reason to suspect that more information, more communication, from us about
our outlook is likely to reduce the public’s uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.

January 30-31, 2007

146 of 255

MS. MINEHAN. I didn’t know I was going to go second, but that’s all right.
MR. LACKER. You can ask a question if you’d like. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. No, I’ve got plenty of questions here. Anyway, I, too, appreciated the
range of staff material that went into the preparation for this discussion. An awful lot of alternatives
are on the table, and I think it’s good that we’ve been asked to focus on eight questions to try to
clarify things. But from my view, the most important question was not posed, and Vince lightly
passed over it. Yes, thirty years ago or so we fell into the process that we now use for both creating
forecasts and communicating them, and yes, you could assume that anything you’ve done for thirty
years probably could be improved. I think that’s possible. But I’d like to have some sense of what
is wrong about what we’re doing before I seek major changes to improve it.
The staff paper suggests that in deciding whether or how to change the way we
communicate our forecasts, we ought to be looking at goals of better economic performance and
better public discourse and accountability, presumably not just in the short run but also in the long
run. There’s some marriage there with the potential for setting long-term, explicit price stability
targets. A third goal would be better internal discourse and trying to do all of that in the context of
having somewhat efficient operations. I think these are laudable goals. I continue to have concerns
about whether explicit long-term targets for price stability are really helpful—whether they’ll help
or hinder our cause. But setting that aside, I think we need to think about our forecasts not just as
forecasts but in light of the full range of communications in which the Committee now engages.
We have two Monetary Policy Reports a year. We have the central tendency of member forecasts
around GDP, inflation, and unemployment. They don’t get a lot of attention right now. Maybe
that’s good in some perspectives, given the way we do them. Maybe that’s not so good. We have
eight meeting statements. We have eight sets of minutes, and we have copious speeches and

January 30-31, 2007

147 of 255

testimony. So there is a lot of communication, whether it’s in numerical form or qualitative form,
about how we see the future. Each set of minutes has implicit in it a qualitative discussion and some
quantitative information from the Greenbook forecast and an indication of where the members of
the Committee are in terms of how they see the future unwinding. We certainly, of course, express
that a lot in our speeches and testimony.
In my almost thirteen-year tenure on the Committee the transparency of policy deliberation
has increased enormously. There’s a healthy public discourse about what we’ve done, what we’ve
said about it, and what the likely future course of monetary policy is. In the end, I think
accountability really depends on actions, not so much on words, and I believe our actions and our
words have shown us to be accountable. So I’m questioning whether some of this moves us to be
more accountable. In fact, if you look over the past twenty-five years at the range of our current
forecasts, albeit they have potential problems and they receive little attention, that range hasn’t been
at all bad in predicting what has actually happened over the period for which the projections are
made, particularly when you look at inflation and unemployment. So despite our lack of common
assumptions and with the wide variety of differences, particularly over the years, in how we view
the mechanics of the economy, we have published a central tendency that’s been fairly narrow and
reasonably accurate, at least for the things over which we have the most control—in particular,
inflation. Will more communication of forecasts result in better economic performance? I think
that’s hard to prove. The staff has said it’s hard to prove. Maybe yes; maybe no.
Turning to the objective of better internal discourse, more communication has already
improved the internal discourse of the Committee. I have some qualms about referring to our
nineteen-person editing sessions as an improvement, but setting that aside, we have moved over the
years from saying nothing to formulaic statements to more-flexible language combined with earlier

January 30-31, 2007

148 of 255

release of the minutes. So I think that has all improved our internal discourse. Vice Chairman
Geithner circulated something that implied we might further improve by sharing among ourselves
more detail about our internal forecasts and the attendant uncertainties. I like that as an
improvement on the internal discourse part of it. I think it has some merits for further discussion as
long as the intent is strictly internal consumption and there’s no intention to force us to a common
view. So I am a bit at odds with President Lacker, and you’ll see more of that.
Can we do more than we’re currently doing? That’s the question here. Of course, it’s
always possible to improve. But I think there are downside risks, and I don’t think they were well
discussed or articulated, or articulated in a way I would like, in some of the material. First of all, the
Committee is intended to be just that—a gathering of independent perspectives on policy. That’s
why we have our own staffs. Our economic frameworks have converged over time, but there are
differences in focus and in emphasis. If in the end we produce a single view rather than a range,
what does that say about the need for a Committee, particularly with nineteen members? If there is
a single, consolidated forecast that is, for efficiency’s sake, delegated to a small group, does that not
over time tend to disenfranchise those who are not part of that group? Second, Committee members
in my view should be chosen for their judgment, not their forecasting ability. Forecasts are useful
tools, but they’re not the only things involved in policy. If they were, we could rely solely on a
model to set policy, and we know we can’t do that. At some point, the effort involved in creating
and refining forecasts over and over precludes the work necessary to form judgments about the
current and the future stance of policy. Third, attempts to convey to the public the underlying
elements of a forecast, including the policy path, run the real risk, as the staff has pointed out, of
committing the Committee to a particular action. At the tails of the distribution of economic
scenarios—that is, if things are particularly lopsided from either a growth or an inflation perspective

January 30-31, 2007

149 of 255

or if there’s a bout of financial instability—some form of path commitment can be useful, and we
have used that in the recent past. Normally policy is more reactive to incoming data than proactive,
and appropriately so, in my view. The staff papers say pre-commitment is not a problem elsewhere
or can be explained away. But the process of conveying such explanations in the context of U.S.
financial markets may take more time and be bumpier than anyone expects. Again, I ask myself
what greater good would be served by risking that market reaction. Finally, if we did decide to
move to more-frequent forecasts, whether centralized or not, would the result be cacophony?
We’ve got statements and minutes eight times a year, the usual plethora of speeches and testimony.
If we added to that more monetary policy type reports with forecasts, is there a chance that we could
have too much information out there, too many things that are potentially giving rise to commentary
that’s not necessarily helping understanding but rather confusing it?
So I come back to my answer to the first question that Vince should have asked, I think. I
have serious misgivings about whether changing what we now do in the Monetary Policy Reports
and the related forecasts might be beneficial enough to offset the downside risks. I think there is,
however, some value in talking about something along the lines that Vice Chairman Geithner has
implicitly proposed.
Now, let me just quickly answer the eight questions that Vince did raise. First of all, I think
a joint forecast should be avoided. A survey of individual member forecasts is my preference. I
would aggregate them and present a central tendency either using existing procedures or some
modification that seems useful. I would not require that Committee members use common
assumptions either for the fed funds path or for other elements. In my experience, I’ve taken some
comfort that different Committee members with different assumptions and policy preferences most
often develop semiannual forecasts for the next year and a half or so that are not much different

January 30-31, 2007

150 of 255

from my own. I don’t believe that we in Boston have the best take on how the economy works or
how near-term risks will play out, but the fact that the way we see the near-term outcome with
“appropriate policy” is in the mainstream of the way most others see it gives me some confidence
that we’re on the right track. As I noted before, the range of our forecasts hasn’t been a bad
predictor of key economic outcomes.
The third question has to do with whether the forecast should be accompanied by a minutesstyle description. The release of our forecast is now accompanied by the Monetary Policy Report,
which by definition is the Chairman’s view of things. As a result, of necessity perhaps, the forecasts
we develop get little attention in the report. If we were to release forecasts more often, we would
need some verbal text like the Monetary Policy Report. But perhaps we could take a first step by
just changing the way the Monetary Policy Report is formulated right now to give a little bit more
attention to the forecasts that the Committee is making. Whether that means that the Monetary
Policy Report is a Committee report, not the Chairman’s report, is an obvious next question, and I
don’t have the answer to that. But maybe a small step to take would be to highlight more that the
report has forecasts in there.
The fourth question was whether the Committee should jointly agree on the minutes-style
description. Frankly, I’m wondering when we would do all this stuff. We’ve got a meeting in
January and February that comes out with minutes and a forecast and a Monetary Policy Report.
We’ve got a meeting in March. We’ve got one in May. We’ve got June, which is similar to
January, a meeting in August, one in September, one in November and December for which we’re
writing minutes—all of which, as I noted before, have implicit in them either qualitative or
quantitative senses of both the Greenbook forecast and the Committee members’ forecast. That
implies that April and October are the only months in which we could probably do this. I think

January 30-31, 2007

151 of 255

trying to create—and someone referred to this earlier—a minutes-like description of a set of
forecasts without a meeting around that set of forecasts would be really hard. There may be some
way of rearranging our meeting dates to get the dates to work out better. However, it seems as
though we’d be working on a lot of stuff, some of it simultaneously if we were to keep the same
range of things that we do now. So my answer to question 5 is that I’m not convinced that the two
times a year we do it right now isn’t about the right frequency.
On question 6, I understand the argument for a longer-term forecast period. I understand
that it reveals future policy preferences and tradeoffs, but I don’t think long-term forecasts provide a
whole lot else. A long-term forecast isn’t going to be realized. It’s more a goal than anything else.
It’s hard to make forecasts six months out that are right on the mark, let alone several years out, and
they could imply that we know more or control more than we actually do over a longer period of
time. So if we were going to extend the horizon, I would extend it only a little—to go, for example,
from a year and a half to two or three years perhaps. I would stay with the number of variables we
currently forecast—nominal and real GDP, unemployment, and some measure of inflation.
Finally, I think that conveying that we’re not certain about our forecast is obviously
desirable. I know other central banks have used fan charts. They’ve proven useful. I know they’ve
been accepted. I don’t know how well they’re understood. But I do find myself wondering in the
U.S. context what the average person or the average congressman would actually take out of them.
Even over rather short periods of time, the range of outcomes about which we’re certain even at the
70 percent level really is kind of wide. So my view is that a qualitative discussion of the sources of
risk is preferable to a quantitative one. Over time anything can be well understood, I suppose, but I
have a feeling that the range of uncertainty without an academic understanding of what you’re
trying to do is more confusing rather than less.

January 30-31, 2007

152 of 255

So to pull it all together, I’m intrigued by Vice Chairman Geithner’s implicit proposal of
improving internal discussion with more detail about our own forecasts and what the constraining
factors are and where we see policy going. I would not try to pull them together into a consensus
view. If we had a consensus view, we would have to tell people about it, and I’d be a little
concerned about that in terms of commitment. I also think that we could work on how our current
forecasts are actually handled in the Monetary Policy Report. I do not think a central forecast is
useful: It has problems in terms of what it says about the Committee and the Committee members.
I’m not convinced that common forecast variables or a path of forecasts is useful. I’m not
convinced that you can actually handle a more frequent release of forecasts to the public, and I think
an explicit numerical discussion of uncertainty is difficult. So that’s where I am, for what it’s
worth.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. A two-hander from President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I have just a factual question. On the existing Monetary Policy Report,
you described it as the Chairman’s view. I looked at the existing report. It has a table with the
forecast and then a few paragraphs describing that forecast.
MR. REINHART. It’s the Board’s.
MR. MOSKOW. The Board staff’s?
MR. REINHART. No. Ultimately, the Board discusses it in a meeting, and it’s transmitted
on behalf of the Board of Governors to the Congress to fulfill its legislative requirement. So the
Board is directed in the law to provide it.
MR. LACKER. Not the Committee?
MR. REINHART. No. The Board is explaining Committee policymaking, but it’s the
Board’s responsibility.

January 30-31, 2007

153 of 255

MS. MINEHAN. So you wouldn’t characterize it as the Chairman’s?
MR. REINHART. No. The Chairman may choose to talk about the forecast in his
testimony. So in some sense you really have two opportunities to talk about the Committee’s
forecast.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. When the act was being rewritten, after the Humphrey-Hawkins report was
sunsetted, we raised the question of whether it should be a Committee report rather than a Board
report. But the congressional staffs are very focused on making it a Board report, in part because
they feel that’s where the accountability is in the appointments process.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to begin by complimenting the staff
for a very thorough and thoughtful set of background materials. In recent years we have made
notable strides toward increasing transparency, and that has served to enhance public accountability
and to improve the efficacy of policymaking. At this point, further enhancements to our
communications are both possible and desirable, and I think our economic projections may be an
area with low-hanging fruit. Surveys suggest that market participants attach a very high priority to
improved information concerning the Committee’s outlook for the economy and monetary policy.
In fact, 83 percent of the respondents to the Macroeconomic Advisers’ survey accorded higher
priority to this objective than to the adoption of a numerical inflation objective. So the provision of
more-detailed and more-timely information concerning the outlook would help market participants
form sensible expectations and possibly improve internal discourse. We have been publishing
forecasts for almost thirty years, so we’re a pioneer in this area. But I think we have fallen behind

January 30-31, 2007

154 of 255

state-of-the-art practice, and I think it would be useful now to make incremental improvements to
the governance structure, the content, and the procedures of this program.
So now let me address each of the questions that Vince sent out in the memo. The first is
whether we should provide one forecast or many. My answer is many. We are too large and too
geographically dispersed to make a unified option practical. The Bank of England has a committee
a little less than half of our size. They seem to be the largest to produce a unified forecast, but the
process is reportedly time-consuming and contentious, and I fear that the attempt to arrive at a
single forecast could end up undermining our collegiality, not to mention our effectiveness. More
important than the practical side is that a unified forecast is not desirable. I think we hold a diversity
of views, and I believe that diversity should be respectfully represented in all aspects of our
communication. That diversity goes beyond conditioning assumptions, like the price of oil. Some
of us have divergent conceptions about the structure of the economy and the monetary policy
transmission mechanism. Given the diversity of views, it’s fair to say that in most meetings, no
unified forecast or forecast story even exists, and I don’t see how participants who fundamentally
disagree could, if we tried to produce a unified forecast, speak in public about the economy without
revealing those differences. The differences, on balance, are a source of strength. They reduce the
odds that we will become trapped in “group think” mentality, conforming for conformity’s sake,
and reduce the risk that we will miss important insights that could help us avoid errors. The
problem is that this divergence makes it challenging to articulate the type of unified Committee
views that I think markets really crave.
The first question goes on to ask whether individual forecasts should be released in a
disaggregated format or presented in an aggregated way. I prefer the aggregated approach that we
use now with a range and central tendency. Most of the time we’ll end up with the center of gravity

January 30-31, 2007

155 of 255

for the forecasts that can be described in a useful way, even though there are divergent views. Also,
conveying how we interpret the body of forecasts will be more useful to the public than simply
releasing nineteen separate projection documents. In principle, the drawback of a central tendency
is that the results may not be entirely coherent because different forecasters get excluded for
different variables. Based on our past experience, this seems to me more a theoretical possibility
than an actual problem, but I was intrigued by the discussion in the R&S Division’s memo on how
it could be possible to identify an entire set of variables for an individual participant as an outlier
and exclude them. I think that’s worth thinking more about. Finally, besides distributing a central
tendency and range, providing a histogram showing the full frequency distribution of forecasts
could be useful.
The second question asks whether we should base our forecasts on common assumptions
concerning the stance of policy and other factors or, alternatively, appropriate policy and opinions
about other factors. I’m certainly in the “appropriate policy” camp. I think the alternative is
problematic. Several times in the past we’ve discussed the possibility of adopting a common
assumption of a constant interest rate, but that approach could lead to forecasts that would not be
seen as desirable by Committee members. For example, since a constant interest rate may not be
the appropriate policy, it could produce a forecast with inflation that’s high and rising, and I think
that would be confusing to the public and not convey our sense of what would happen. The
problem can be especially pronounced as the forecast period is lengthened. A second issue is, as I
said, that participants differ on the structure of the economy, and any common policy assumption
may make sense in one model but not another. The same comment applies to all the conditions and
variables—even things like the value of the dollar and house prices are endogenous variables that

January 30-31, 2007

156 of 255

should be determined within the model being used. So imposing common assumptions with a
variety of models could lead to incoherent results.
Now, the third and fourth questions concern whether a narrative description of the forecast
should be released and how it should be prepared. I think we should provide a minutes-style
narrative description of the forecasts. Experience suggests that there is commonly considerable
overlap among the FOMC participants regarding the factors that are critical in assessing economic
trends. For example, right now a majority of us are focusing on developments affecting housing
and motor vehicles, as well as the implications of tight labor markets for inflation over time, and
that was reflected in the Chairman’s summary yesterday. These factors are usually emphasized in
the portion of the minutes that describes participants’ assessment of economic conditions. The
minutes do a good job of describing the state of opinion and also briefly describe divergent views
concerning the economy, and the narrative should also describe the divergent views.
Vincent’s background memo emphasizes the need for speed in releasing this information
because new data can make forecasts stale. In addition, the Chairman’s monetary policy testimony
and the issuance of the Monetary Policy Report typically occur before the release of the minutes
from the January and June meetings. So it may be desirable to devise a procedure that would allow
the forecasts and the forecast narrative to be released before the minutes themselves. We could
delegate the preparation and release of the narrative to the Chairman. It seems to me that he has
over the past several meetings provided an excellent summary of our discussions as soon as they
concluded, and that’s the type of thing that I would expect in the narrative. My preference,
however, would be for the Committee to agree on and approve the narrative. A Committee vote on
the forecast narrative would avoid the possible disagreement that might arise after the release of the
narrative but before the approval of the minutes. One way to expedite the preparation of the

January 30-31, 2007

157 of 255

narrative is for all of us before the meeting to share our individual forecasts along with a brief
written story explaining them. I thought Vice Chairman Geithner’s summary really is an excellent
template of the form that such a submission could take. Most of the time we would find that there is
an emerging majority view and a few alternative views. We could allow time toward the conclusion
of an FOMC meeting to discuss longer-run forecasts, and this would provide the staff with some
additional information concerning the Committee’s views. I would hope it would be feasible for the
staff then to prepare a minutes-style summary of views rapidly after the meeting, circulate it, and
allow a very limited time and very few iterations for comments and revisions so that the narrative
could be approved and released before the full minutes were approved.
Now, I just want to turn to the technical questions that Vince posed. With regard to the
frequency of forecasts, the shelf life of projections generally is long enough to support a quarterly
production frequency. However, given that we want to provide forecasts for the Monetary Policy
Reports in January and June, it’s difficult to see how we could evenly distribute four forecasts over
the year. The problem is that we have only two meetings between January and June. It would be
possible to spread three forecasts evenly over the year in January, June, and October, and eight
might also work well, but I fear that there could be a staff insurrection. [Laughter] In any event, on
the question of the forecast horizon, I’m fine with maintaining our current practice, but I would not
object to a small increase in the forecast period. All we really know about the more distant future is
what our ultimate goals are, and I would prefer that we provide that information in a more direct
way. The next question is which variables should be included. I’d prefer to continue to include
forecasts for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and some measure of consumer inflation,
depending on the interaction with what we may later decide about the inflation objective. I don’t
think any of the other central banks forecast nominal GDP. I would drop that, and I think

January 30-31, 2007

158 of 255

consideration should be given to providing information on the fed funds rate, perhaps the fourthquarter level for each year of the forecast or, alternatively, a qualitative statement about direction.
The policy path is necessary for understanding and interpreting any forecast, and it was at the top of
Macroeconomic Advisers’ list for what the private sector wants to see. Large and widening error
bands around the central tendency would help stifle the potential for markets to interpret these
forecasts as commitments. Moreover, narrative comments on the forecasts could emphasize the
conditionality and data dependence of policy. We will obviously need to do at least one trial run in
producing forecasts before going public with the new system, and I would propose that we include a
numerical forecast and a discussion of the fed funds rate path in that trial just to see how it works.
Of course, all these variables will be forecast with considerable uncertainty, and I think it
would be helpful to convey this fact clearly. One way to do it would be to put confidence bands
around the forecast numbers, and they could be derived by looking at the track records of the
FOMC, the CBO, the Blue Chip survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and so forth. One
could imagine adjusting them a bit based on Committee discussions—for example, when
participants note that they see the risks as abnormally large or asymmetric. Information on forecast
accuracy could be presented in a table attached to the FOMC forecasts to justify our choice of
uncertainty bands. My staff has developed a mock-up of a graphical approach to representing the
forecast and forecast uncertainty bands, and I brought some copies of what that might look like for
you to take a look at. I thought I would just pass it around the table here.5
So in summary, I’m in favor of enhancing the forecast information that we release. The key
point for me is that we should provide information on the diversity of opinion in the Committee
about the numbers and the stories, and I think procedures like the one I described to produce a

5

Material distributed by President Yellen is appended to this transcript (appendix 5).

January 30-31, 2007

159 of 255

minutes-style discussion of our stories would be effective and permit this information to be released
in a sufficiently timely manner.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.
MS. MINEHAN. May I just ask one question?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you. That was really interesting, Janet. Your recommendation
would be not to condition on a common policy path but have “appropriate policy.” So in the end
when we publish the forecasts, would it be a range of federal funds rates?
MS. YELLEN. Has this sheet come around to you?
MS. MINEHAN. All right, so it’s a range then.
MS. YELLEN. If you look at this sheet—we might do this for all the variables—the bottom
right panel shows the federal funds rate. These are obviously made-up numbers. But we have the
history, and people would just add their own forecast for Q4 for the federal funds rate. We’d report
a central tendency, and we would develop error bands around it resulting in the type of display you
would see. So obviously it would be a range of opinions based on appropriate policies reported by
the individual members.
MS. MINEHAN. So the background in there is the range of federal funds rates, of
appropriate policies that people submitted with their reports.
MS. YELLEN. Yes, the dark band in the center would be the central tendency of our
reports, and the thinner, longer lines would be bands generated by numbers we use for forecast
uncertainty.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you.

January 30-31, 2007

160 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I’m embarrassed about time planning here. These
comments have been extremely interesting, but I’m worried about flights and things of that sort.
Everyone should feel free to give their full views. Be mindful, if you can, of time, and if we don’t
have enough time, we’ll have to think about how we might reconvene or otherwise extend the
discussion. Was there a comment?
MR. LACKER. Yes. I just wanted to ask about the 70 percent interval. Does that reflect
everyone’s uncertainty?
MS. YELLEN. We would have to discuss how to produce that, but it might be based on, for
example, our FRB/US forecast errors that we would apply to the central tendency range.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. May I just try this again? I
interpret you as saying that you infer a central tendency from this process you outlined.
MS. YELLEN. With respect to the story?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. You discern a central tendency of the Committee about
our view about GDP or unemployment.
MS. YELLEN. Well, we’re submitting numbers.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Then you attach some other method for framing
uncertainty based on past forecast errors—for example, of FRB/US, Greenbook, Blue Chip, or
somebody else.
MS. YELLEN. Yes, exactly.
MR. KOHN. Or our own forecasts.
MS. YELLEN. Or our own forecasts.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. But, no, it can’t be that either. That’s a little different,
isn’t it?

January 30-31, 2007

161 of 255

MS. YELLEN. We don’t forecast the federal funds rate, but we do have data on our own
errors with respect to the other variables.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. But you’re not suggesting that we try to aggregate or ask
the staff to aggregate our own uncertainties that we convey with our own individual forecasts, right?
MS. YELLEN. No, I think that would not be a very useful procedure.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There’s research at the St. Louis Bank that says that the
FOMC forecasts are actually pretty good. Was there another two-hander? President Poole?
MR. POOLE. I have a couple of fairly quick points to make. First, in terms of the audience
we’re talking to, you really have to talk to the Congress first. We operate under the Federal Reserve
Act, and we’re reporting to the Congress. That’s a very important part of the audience. I would put
the markets second and then the general public. So whatever we do has to be coherent to all three
audiences.
I started with a question, and I think it’s exactly where Cathy was coming from. Do we
need to solve a problem? Is there something that is really creating a problem with what we now do?
My answer to that is “no.” Do we have an opportunity to move forward? My answer to that is
“maybe.” I don’t think we’re really solving a problem. My view is that we are not in deep water in
what we do now. Take the fan chart as an example: If you do this six months earlier or six months
later, the fans go in different places. Let me use an analogy. If you look at the CBO budget
outlook, the CBO tracks changes in the deficit forecast and partitions the change in the deficit
forecast into three pieces. One piece comes from changes in economic assumptions; one piece is
changes in tax and spending legislation; and the third piece is changes in what they call technical
estimates—how much revenue you get for a given tax law. I think that’s a very convenient way of
explaining the evolution. There is an opportunity not so much focusing on the forecasts—the wide

January 30-31, 2007

162 of 255

range of uncertainty makes it problematic as to how much guidance you’re really giving to the
market—but to explain why the forecast has evolved the way it has. My guess is that most of our
individual forecasts, although they’re not all the same, sort of move together. If something happens,
we all move, although we’re not all moving to exactly the same degree. With the analysis of why
the forecast has moved we could provide some insight into how our thinking has evolved as a
consequence of new information. We don’t do that much right now. It could be incorporated in the
Monetary Policy Report. I think some of it is already in there, but why the Committee’s central
tendency has moved could be made much more explicit. We would probably be able to come to
pretty good agreement on that if we were to look at a draft because we’re all responding to the same
fundamental surprises in the information section.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. First of all, I want to deal with the general question that Cathy alluded to at
the outset. I am strongly supportive of more-effective reporting of a forecast for several reasons.
One is that it helps the market to understand our actions better, and I think that has a high value. It
can be part of the process of anchoring inflation expectations, which I think is a key to successful
monetary policy. Very important also is that it indicates a degree of openness and allows public
discourse about our views; that has political benefits in terms of showing that we’re accountable to
the political system. So I answered this question very much in the affirmative.
One issue is what the research has said about this. President Fisher is absolutely right:
These issues are subjective. The research staff said that there is no strong evidence, and the reason
is that it’s almost impossible to get and, in terms of econometrics, it’s very difficult. The literature
in the area of transparency is, in fact, somewhat unsatisfying because it’s very hard to quantify
anything. In terms of research strategy, it frequently draws people to do case studies, and I am one

January 30-31, 2007

163 of 255

of the criminals involved in that activity. The Chairman has also been involved in doing some work
on case studies that we did together. Part of the reason is that you can look at the details and deal
with this. If you get involved in evaluating monetary policy, which I did for Sweden recently, you
get to talk to wide elements of the society. In the Swedish case, there was tremendous support for
this degree of openness, and it was felt to be politically very valuable by some surprising groups.
The labor unions were extremely supportive, for example, of this kind of openness and, believe it or
not, of inflation targeting—which was somewhat of a surprise.
So let me turn now to the issues that we have to discuss. I want to provide an analytic
framework in which to think about this, at least for myself. I think about seven basic principles that
are key in terms of how we might go about providing more information about forecasts. So here are
the seven principles, and I’ll discuss them each in turn. First, we need to allow for the diversity of
views. Second, this process needs to be efficient. Third, it needs to be timely. Fourth, it needs to
be relatively frequent. Fifth, it needs to explain the forecast—that is, we need to tell a story, a good
narrative, about it. Sixth, it needs to emphasize uncertainty. Seventh, we need to stress that the
forecast period is longer than the policy period. Let me go into each of these one at a time, and then
you’ll see that it leads to particular answers to the questions, at least from my perspective.
The first principle is the need to allow for the diversity of views. I strongly believe,
particularly now that I’m involved in this process, that the diversity of views is the strength of our
monetary policy process. In fact, I take the view that people have very different jobs here. I’ve
been on both sides of the fence—maybe, Janet, you have been more so because you are a president.
I was just an executive vice president of a Bank. But Bank presidents bring different information to
bear than the governors, and this difference helps us make better decisions. So I believe in this kind
of diversity. Another very positive aspect of diversity is that we have a set of staffs. We have the

January 30-31, 2007

164 of 255

Board’s staff, and then we have twelve other staffs that actually act as a check and balance on each
other. Again, that has value. Finally, I believe that committees can make better decisions than
individuals. Alan Blinder has a study on this topic that I thought was really quite interesting.
The second issue is efficiency. Any forecast process has to be workable in finite time, and
that’s really critical. I sometimes get nervous when Dave starts twitching at me, but you don’t want
the forecast process to overwhelm the staffs. I’m very sympathetic. Having been in research at a
Federal Reserve Bank, I have been on the other side of the fence, and so I really understand their
pain.
As for timeliness, there are important advantages to getting out the forecast quickly. When I
said “forecast,” I didn’t mean just the forecast; I include the narrative, too, because you’ll see that I
think the narrative is important. The key reason for timeliness is to give the forecast and the
narrative more impact. The quicker you come out with them, the more impact they have. In
particular, the environment for getting this information out is much more controlled than that for
speeches or even testimony, and I think that’s the value. So quicker is much better. Timeliness also
makes the forecast and the narrative less likely to be stale. The longer the interval between the
policy meeting in which you make a decision and the release of the forecast and the narrative, the
more likely they are to be obsolete. One danger is that data could come in and make the forecast
look silly. So there’s an issue about our looking good. The faster we come out with a forecast, the
better off we are.
The fourth issue is frequency. The key here is that the forecast and the release need to be
done often enough so that markets get the information they think they need to understand what’s
going on. Fifth, a narrative is important so that markets, the Congress, and the public not only see
our forecasts but also understand them. To be understood, the forecasts need a story behind them. I

January 30-31, 2007

165 of 255

strongly believe that we need to write up a good story and that a good narrative can help us obtain
public support for our policy actions—which is, again, a critical factor.
Sixth, it’s really important to make sure the public and the markets understand the high
degree of uncertainty that we face. Forecasts are tough—not just long-term forecasts but also shortterm forecasts. David is, of course, nodding his head on this. The key reason that emphasizing
uncertainty is important is that it can lessen public criticism when we miss—which we surely are
going to do at times. We’ve actually been very good relative to others, but we’re going to make
mistakes. At least, if people understand the degree of uncertainty, that will help. When you make
clear the uncertainty, you make it easier for people to understand why there’s a diversity of views in
this Committee. It’s not because the participants don’t like each other, and it’s not because we
frequently fundamentally disagree. It is because we have different uncertainty in views of the
economy, and that’s actually exactly what is indicated by the fact that forecasts are very uncertain.
Also, information uncertainty is important information for the markets. We want to help the
markets figure out what we’re doing and what’s going on, and we don’t care just about the first
moment but also the second moment and even sometimes the third moment.
Finally, the issue of the horizon—I think we need a long horizon. When you look at the
literature on optimal policymaking, what comes out very clearly is that the horizon that you have to
think about in terms of the paths of the variables we care about is further out than the policy
horizon, which I would say would be about two years. Any sensible way of thinking about how we
think about policy will typically involve periods that are longer than the two years it takes to affect
output or inflation. We need to express the recognition of that because doing so will clarify that,
when we have paths in our forecasts, we can then talk about how they are consistent with our
ultimate objectives. To give you an example: If inflation is substantially above our comfort zone,

January 30-31, 2007

166 of 255

getting inflation down in a two-year period may be too costly. As a result, we may have to talk
about a longer period to assure the public, the Congress, and the markets that, in fact, we’re doing
something sensible. So we need to go to a longer period than we have now. We see this clearly in
the Bluebook’s optimal paths. I have some issues about their taking as long as they do to get to the
inflation objective—ten years—and about how we build expectations, but they do indicate that a
period longer than two years is absolutely necessary for thinking about policy.
Let me now use these principles to talk about the eight questions that were posed to us by
the subcommittee. First, should the forecast be a joint forecast? I answer very strongly “no.” The
process for doing that would be way too cumbersome and inefficient. No matter how charming or
colorful it would be, it would be a nightmare.
MR. FISHER. Always charming.
MR. MISHKIN. It’s hard enough for the Bank of England to do it with a committee of nine
people. We have nineteen. Furthermore, at the Bank of England they’re all living in the same
house and talking to each other all the time. We have people all over the country with very different
jobs, and so it’s just infeasible to do it. I think Dave would quit. [Laughter] It would eat up a huge
amount of staff resources, and we might have some of our research directors quitting or going to the
research staffs at the Reserve Banks. It would be very hard to get a timely agreement on it—and,
again, I think timeliness is important. It would also be hard to get the diversity of views clearly
expressed. So I end up where Janet ends up—I think that we need to keep something like the
current procedure in which all nineteen participants give their views. It is very important that there
be no attributions and that we amalgamate the views in some way. The procedure we have now
may not be perfect—maybe there’s something better—but it should be something similar.

January 30-31, 2007

167 of 255

Question 2: Should we have common conditioning factors? Here, again, I believe that the
diversity of views is a good thing, and so again I agree with Janet that each participant has his or her
own conditioning factors. The most important conditioning factor is clearly the path of the federal
funds rate, but I have mixed feelings about it. We may want to provide some information about
what individual participants think about this. The concern I have here is that the details really
matter. There is some danger if people seem to be making a commitment, because we know that
any path one specifies is surely not going to be the path that actually transpires because new data are
going to come in. I’ve been very concerned about this issue, and in fact I wrote a paper on it that is
cited in the R&S document. Sometimes transparency may go too far. In particular, I was not a fan
of the “moderate pace” language that the Federal Reserve used in the past—I was not here at the
time, but I think that language did not express the issue of conditionality enough. If the Committee
then had to change the path, which it surely might at some point, it could be accused of flipflopping, which would create severe problems for the Committee. However, maybe we can do it
appropriately through fan charts to derive the degree of uncertainty, but we really need to discuss
this possibility. The details matter. If we even think about going in this direction, the trial runs are
going to be critical, so I want to have a bit more of an open mind on that.
On question 3, obviously for reasons that I outlined earlier, I strongly support a narrative to
accompany the forecast. On question 4, I feel that the narrative and the forecast need to be very
timely. If we could do this, it would be a great advantage to do it very quickly, possibly even at the
beginning of the week after the FOMC meeting. That would require a much more expedited
process. We’d have to use some delegation—to the Chairman or the staff—for writing up this
process. That would require moving up the Greenbook a bit. For us to produce our forecasts and a
narrative, we need to see the Greenbook—I certainly needed to see the Greenbook to come up with

January 30-31, 2007

168 of 255

my forecast—but then people could provide information very much along the lines that Vice
Chairman Geithner provided. Some might do it verbally. Some might do it the way you did it,
which was very nice. That could then go to the staff a little earlier than now—let’s say, by
Wednesday. Then a narrative could be written up that would go to people before the FOMC
meeting and then could be discussed at the FOMC meeting. I don’t know how this would work. It
would require that we not go through as much of an iterative process as we sometimes do—that is
critical for the timeliness issue. One thing that we might think about is that we have the “Recent
Developments” part of the Greenbook, and releasing that might have some value. That would be
from the staff; it would not be from the Committee. It gives some flesh to the discussion that would
be in the summary, so we might think about doing something with that as well.
As to question 5, on frequency, I don’t think that twice a year is enough to give markets the
information they need. As for eight times a year, again, I worry about losing our top people from
the staffs; they might come after us with pitchforks. I tend to lean to four, but there is the interesting
issue about the timing of our meetings, so we’d have to work that out. So quarterly seems about
right to me. On question 6, because I believe the forecast period needs to be longer than the policy
period, for the reasons I discussed earlier, it clearly has to be longer than two years. However, too
long a period might put too much of a burden on us. A period of three years, which is common in
central banks, would give the flavor of the direction of the path that we’re thinking about and would
be adequate.
On question 7, to keep things from being too burdensome, I want to use the KISS
principle—the fewer variables the better. At a minimum, the three variables that I think are the
right ones are the ones that I think are obvious—an inflation measure, an output measure, and an
employment measure. I think we should kill nominal GDP; it’s a vestige of the past. There is an

January 30-31, 2007

169 of 255

issue about the federal funds rate, but, again, that should be discussed. It hasn’t been mentioned yet,
but I would be uncomfortable providing projections of potential GDP. I think we do need it for our
own purposes, but it raises really huge political economy problems because people can think of it as
a speed limit or a target for growth, which could be dangerous. So although I welcome it in the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s document that we received, I do not think it would be
particularly wise to release it.
On question 8, for the reasons I outlined earlier, I think it’s extremely important for us to
provide information about uncertainty. Fan charts are the right way to do this. I really like what I
see here, but there might be technical details that we’d have to decide on: Should we give only one
70 percent confidence interval? Should we give more shadings? There’s an issue about how this
chart would be produced. The reality is that it would have to be produced in the same way that the
narrative is, in the following sense: It would have to be delegated. The information from the
nineteen participants would help in producing it in terms of their views. The staff would have to
come up with some measures. Then there would be some iteration along the same lines as the
narrative in order to produce it. But it then would have to be timely; it would have to be released
with both the narrative and the forecasts themselves. So with that, let me stop. I don’t think I’ve
been quite as charming here. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Intervention, President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I have just a quick question about the narrative. Would you see a
narrative significantly different from the narrative that’s now in the Monetary Policy Report, other
than the fan charts or anything else that would be added? Would you see the same type of thing—a
few paragraphs describing the forecast?

January 30-31, 2007

170 of 255

MR. MISHKIN. This is why we need trial runs. The narrative needs to be a little more
detailed than that and actually a little more reflective of the different views. I think it’s a question of
writing a good story. One thing I have learned is that, even as a scholar, I learn particularly from
writing. In this case I think the Committee will learn from doing these trial runs. Then we might
say, gee, this is too short; it doesn’t give the flavor, or it is too long and too involved, or it’s too
difficult to come to a decision about it. So my answer here is let’s do it and discuss it, and then
we’ll have a much better feel for it.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, we talked briefly about the Norges Bank and Norway, which
is a country of 4.6 million people, a constitutional monarchy, and my mother’s homeland. My
mother taught me a wonderful phrase, which I want to repeat here as an antecedent to this
discussion. It’s actually a quote from Santayana: Skepticism, like chastity, should not be
relinquished too readily. [Laughter] I admit to being quite skeptical about this exercise, and I will
reveal my cards up front in terms of being sensitive to the arguments that President Minehan and
President Poole have made as to the predicate question, which is, Is there a compelling reason to do
this? Not only is the discussion charming, but I am almost overwhelmed by the encyclopedic
knowledge of some of my colleagues. I don’t possess that knowledge, and I listen to it very, very
carefully. But I have not yet heard a satisfactory answer. Yes, we have had an evolutionary process
over thirty years, but is there a compelling reason to change the way we do our business?
If you go back to David’s exhibit 1, it says that we presumably would undertake this effort
with an eye toward “advancing the goals of economic performance, public discourse, internal
discourse, and efficient operations.” I think of this in a broader context, which is maintaining and
building or, using President Lacker’s word, enhancing the public’s faith and confidence in the

January 30-31, 2007

171 of 255

Federal Reserve, and I think the faith and confidence in the Federal Reserve right now is pretty
high. Now, two words are being thrown around constantly in this discussion. One is the “public,”
and the other is the “markets.” By the way, I’m not going to get to the eight questions—I want you
to be relieved right up front. [Laughter] I can’t get there yet because I haven’t answered the
predicate question. But I would ask the Committee to consider what “the public” is and what “the
markets” are. Governor Kohn said something during our discussion of policy with regard to the
market operators—I actually spent three-quarters of my life being one of them—that I thought was
quite complimentary and summarized the current state. He said that nothing we have been saying is
getting in the way of the stabilizing properties of the market. I really like that. So my question is,
What is wrong with the way we’re doing things if we’re not getting in the way of the stabilizing
properties of the market? I agree with Cathy’s point that, with regard to the market, our actions
speak louder than our words. Day to day there may be variance, but in the long term that’s what
counts. I believe that the markets may have had a difference of view, they may have been testing
us, but they’ve come around, and our actions have spoken much louder than our words.
If the definition of “public” is the academic community, I understand their insatiable
appetites in the pursuit of knowledge. I respect that, but I think there may be other ways of assisting
that pursuit of knowledge than by increasing the frequency of our forecasts or the complexity of our
forecasts. I want to apologize to my friend from Philadelphia in advance, but are we talking about
those who operate the economy—the women and men who run the businesses that create the
microeconomy (and many micros make the macro), whether they are $2 million businesses or big
businesses? I went back and counted. Since I had the good fortune of coming on this Committee, I
have spoken on 236 occasions to managers of big and small operations—CEOs mostly, some
CFOs. Not once have I been asked by them for more-frequent forecasts or for all the variables that

January 30-31, 2007

172 of 255

we consider or anything that projects the kind of complexity that we’ve been talking about today at
this table. I’m a former Rotarian. I may be one of the few here. I speak to Rotary Clubs all the
time. The only question they want to know is where rates are going to go. [Laughter] I don’t think
they care one whit about the complexity of our forecast models.
But that’s not the group I’m worried about in terms of the public. President Poole raised an
excellent point, which is that we do have to be mindful of the elected representatives of the people
who created our charter and who in the end we all serve, and that’s the politicians. I would just ask
you to consider the argument that we’re having against that background and the risks that it poses.
This is a one-way street. We see this from the excellent work that the staff did. There’s no going
back once you go down this path. Vince mentioned our semiannual schedule set by the Congress.
Need we do more? Have they asked us to do more? Should we do more before they ask us to do
more? Shouldn’t we think of this in terms of negotiating with the political class rather than giving
them something for which they may not even be asking. If we give it to them, it may lead to still
more questions that we cannot satisfactorily answer. So I would beg the Committee to consider
what we’re talking about when we’re talking about the public and the markets and whether this is a
compelling thing that needs to be done now.
I’d like to emphasize a second thing. Obviously, being a Bank president, I do not wish to be
party to anything that emasculates the Banks. Indeed, whatever we do and however we do it, if we
do it—and I’m not convinced that we should—we need to respect the Banks not only for their
research capacity and the diversity of views and, what Governor Mishkin and President Yellen
correctly mentioned, their geographic diversity but also as vital links to the public, whether the
public is the elected leaders, the Rotarians, the economic operators, the financial markets, or even
the academics.

January 30-31, 2007

173 of 255

A third point, and then I’ll stop, is that I ask that we be practical in the way that we do this.
President Minehan mentioned that we do a lot. I have no doubt that we could do more, but we have
constraints on our time. In being practical, we also have to be wary of what other questions we raise
by providing more information. Some elements may not be interested in our preserving our
independence or may be a threat to our independence—I won’t mention who those might be since I
don’t want that on the record. Mr. Chairman, those are my three concerns, and I’ll spare you my
answers to the eight questions, which I hope I’ll have a chance to give at a later date.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you. I’ll frame my remarks around two propositions. The first is the
“yes.” We should be receptive to changes in our practices and procedures to the extent that they
make monetary policy more effective and provide clear public benefit. My general sense is that
providing more information about our views on the economic outlook can be a good thing when it
comes without impairing the effectiveness of the policy process. The second is the “but.” Changes
that we make in this regard need to be done in a way that respects the diversity of viewpoints that is
central to the effectiveness and the effective functioning of this Committee. I believe that the
strength of this Committee and the source of its ability to conduct sound monetary policy and
facilitate confidence in our policy come in large part from the diverse backgrounds and views of the
individual members. Although at each meeting we must arrive at a Committee decision, the
decision and the way it is communicated to the public are shaped by the views of all participants.
In my experience, Mr. Chairman, as policy evolves, it is rarely the case that everyone
suddenly sees the wisdom of a major change to the direction of policy. Rather, one or more
members begin to articulate concerns with our current policy stance based on their experience and
their assumptions about unfolding events. As data begin to provide support for this viewpoint, the

January 30-31, 2007

174 of 255

Committee begins to move in a new direction. Even when new positions are not subsequently
supported by the data, our discussions benefit from considering alternative points of view and sets
of assumptions. Consequently, as we consider options that we might pursue to increase the
effectiveness of our communication, I am strongly opposed to changes that would limit the
expression of alternative forecasts and viewpoints, either in the discussion within the room or in our
communication with the public. I regard steps such as producing a joint forecast or requiring a
common interest rate assumption as extremely detrimental to the Committee’s deliberation and
public communication. Such steps would lead inevitably in my mind to the delegation of
decisionmaking to a small group of individuals, and I don’t think that’s helpful.
With that said, let me focus for a moment on some specific issues on the role of forecasts in
policy communication, and I would begin with some comments on the proper vehicle for
communicating forecast information to the public. If we decide to move forward with discussions
of our forecasts and providing more forecasts, I would like to suggest an alternative—and like all
the other alternatives today, it is superior [laughter]—and it is based on how we would choose to do
this. If we want to convey this information in a way that is both timely and logistically manageable,
we should use the minutes. This is an extension of what we now do. It takes us forward but, I
think, in a proper step.
Specifically, I propose that we consider releasing a summary of numerical forecasts as part
of the minutes. We all prepare forecasts beforehand. As I remarked earlier, it is important that the
information be in the form of a survey of individual forecasts, not a joint forecast, and each forecast
should be based on the individual’s view of policy and not on a common interest rate path. The
minutes would contain summary information in the form of tables or charts on a small set of key
variables, such as real GDP, core inflation, and unemployment. This information would be

January 30-31, 2007

175 of 255

presented in the form of a central tendency and the range of Committee member views. I would not
include specific information about the policy assumptions used for the individual forecast.
Members would present their views in the meeting and then be permitted to revisit their forecast in
light of the Committee discussion and decision. The forecast period would likely be four to eight
quarters, as now, with the semiannual report focusing on the longer horizon beyond that, if we go
there. An advantage of using the minutes, besides timeliness, is that a narrative is already prepared.
There would be less chance of confusion about the ownership of the forecast. The numerical
forecast information would supplement the qualitative discussion currently in the minutes, and I
think it would enhance the public’s understanding of policy. For example, the recent disconnect
between our views and those of the financial markets might not have developed had the markets
seen our forecasts of temporarily slower growth and persistent inflationary pressures.
A final issue is the use of common conditioning assumptions in the forecast. As I indicated
earlier, I would not be in favor of requiring a common fed funds rate path. I think it might be
helpful for the Board’s staff to provide information on some of the conditioning assumptions they
use in the Greenbook as a starting point for Committee members’ forecasts. However, as with the
fed funds rate path itself, I would not be in favor of requiring a common set of assumptions for
individual forecasts. I think this helps inform the public but also keeps the diversity within the
Committee and leaves the Committee more effective. Thank you, sir.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to join the others in thanking the staff
for their very helpful memos. These issues are complicated, and some of them are even hard, as
has been said, and I found all the memos helpful to me in framing my ideas on this subject.

January 30-31, 2007

176 of 255

I find myself, importantly, in agreement with President Yellen and Governor Mishkin—
not in every respect, but in some respects. So I’ll try to be a little more concise than I was going
to be. But I do think it’s important to confront the issues that Presidents Fisher, Poole, and
Minehan have raised. I agree that there is nothing fundamentally broken about what we’re doing
now. The markets do a good job, and the public does a good job, in anticipating what we do and
understanding how we’re going about our business, and they even do a pretty good job in
anticipating where we want to go eventually. There is no compelling reason to change right
now, but that doesn’t mean we’re in the best possible place. I do think we could improve what
we’re doing. To the extent that we can improve the way we explain our policy, particularly as a
Committee, it will help the markets anticipate. It will help on the accountability issues. I don’t
think we need major surgery, but there are some things we can do that might help around the
edges on these things. I also agree that markets are insatiable. Whatever we give them, they’ll
want more; and mostly what they’ll want, as President Fisher pointed out, is to know exactly
what we’re going to do with the federal funds rate three and six months from now, and we can’t
tell them that. So they will always want more.
One thing that we can accomplish here is to shift attention a bit from the speeches of
individuals to the Committee’s documents. I have told Larry Meyer and Brian Sack that my goal
is to be at the bottom of their league list on who influences interest rates. [Laughter] They don’t
like that, but I’m getting there. [Laughter] I don’t want to influence interest rates when I’m
giving speeches. I think it’s much better if the Committee speaks and if the Chairman speaks,
particularly when he is speaking on behalf of the Committee, in his speeches and his testimony.
So drawing attention away from individual speeches to the Committee’s views is a very positive
thing.

January 30-31, 2007

177 of 255

Understanding our actions involves understanding how much we don’t know as well as
what we think we know. Obviously, we can’t anticipate shocks. But as we’ve discussed around
this table, we have very limited knowledge of the dynamics of the economy. We need to be very
careful not to give a sense of false precision about what we know. We also need to be careful
that we don’t get invested in specific numerical projections and become less willing to change
our policies and our projections when new information comes in. Partly for these reasons I agree
that the story we tell, the narrative, is as important as, if not more important than, the particular
numbers that we give out. It’s really the story that people use to inform their own forecasts of
the future, to judge how events are unfolding relative to our expectations, to understand which
aspects of the economic environment we’re really paying most attention to, and therefore to help
predict. I also agree with the others that we need to recognize and respect the diversity of what is
effectively a nineteen-person Committee, we need to avoid doing anything that would discourage
alternative views, and we need to think about how to represent alternatives views in our
communications.
So against those principles, here are my answers to the eight questions. Not surprisingly,
on the first question, given the size of the Committee, the diversity, and so forth, I think that we
have to stick with making individual forecasts. I would publish them in some kind of aggregated
way, as we do now. I’m kind of attracted to the histogram—let the public see the whole
distribution of the forecast—but that’s a technicality. People worry about inconsistencies among
the central tendencies when you’re choosing different people for each central tendency. But in
my experience of writing these things up—when the Chairman allowed us to—[laughter] those
inconsistencies weren’t a major problem most of the time. You could tell a coherent story
around the central tendencies. Sometimes we had to use a little imagination, but it wasn’t really

January 30-31, 2007

178 of 255

incoherent. [Laughter] I think that Chairman Bernanke demonstrated this in his last two
testimonies—to take the central tendencies as we submit them and tell a pretty good story that’s
helpful to the public.
For many of the same reasons we ought to go with individual assumptions. When we use
individual assumptions, such as “appropriate policy,” rather than a common assumption, we’re in
effect telling people the combinations of outcomes for inflation and output that we think are
possible, if policy is run just right, and that we would prefer. We’re giving a lot of information
about where we think the economy can end up and where we’d like it to end up. In effect, we’re
giving our read on where we’d like to be on a Taylor curve that links output and inflation
variability. A common set of assumptions, as others have noted, might not coincide with
appropriate policy for many participants. We wouldn’t be telling people our sense of the best
possible outcomes. We could, particularly if we used a market rate path, tell them a little
something about where we expected interest rates to go because, if the outcomes didn’t line up
with where we thought things should be, the markets might sense that and adjust. But there are
other ways of doing the same thing. So I think that individual assumptions, rather than
coordinated assumptions, are the way to go.
Should we collect and publish the views of the members about appropriate policy in
another histogram or central tendency, as President Yellen suggested? We may end up there, but
I wouldn’t start with that. I think it multiplies the odds for inconsistencies among the central
tendencies. You’ve got interest rates and output now that could also be inconsistent and could
create confusion. It risks shifting attention from the forecast to the rate path. I was somewhat
drawn to somebody’s suggestion that, if we had strong views, we could indicate that qualitatively
in the narrative. But for now I’d stay away from the explicit interest rate forecast.

January 30-31, 2007

179 of 255

Because I think the story is important, I think the narrative is important, and a minutesstyle narrative, which discusses significant differences as well as the common tendencies, is
important. Such a process would be helped by our submitting notes with our forecasts that the
staff could aggregate and modify after listening to the meeting. I hope that submitting forecasts
and notes doesn’t make it harder for people to change their minds at the meeting. I’m a little
worried—and Governor Mishkin mentioned this—about shifting things forward to before the
meeting. It makes the information we get a little staler at the meeting. Already we’re getting
something that was put together on Wednesday for a Tuesday meeting; it’s already a week stale.
I’m also concerned that, if everybody has a forecast and circulates it, having an exchange of
views in which people change their minds might be a little more difficult because you have
written down exactly what you want. So we need to be careful about that tendency, but I still
think we could submit narratives and that would help.
I’d favor more-frequent updates. I was thinking about quarterly, but then there’s
President Yellen’s point about three times a year. The long interval is between July and
February. Maybe we ought to start by updating between that seven-month-or-so interval and
then see whether we want to do it even more frequently. But I think we could update a little
more frequently than we’re doing. I’d keep my focus on just a few variables—output,
unemployment, and inflation. Those are the key ones. I’d drop nominal income. We’re not
interested in velocity anymore. Other variables, like housing markets and energy prices, could
be covered in the narrative. I would like to formally convey some measure of uncertainty. I’d be
tempted to use past forecast errors to do that. I don’t think I’d like to try to fine-tune a fan chart
to begin with. If the Committee had a sense that uncertainties were particularly large or
particularly small or were skewed to one side or another, we could cover that in the narrative.

January 30-31, 2007

180 of 255

Then, I have two thoughts on procedure. First, we need to allow for some dry runs to see
how things work out wherever we end up. Second, as a former staff member, I can tell you that
senior staff members are already stretched very thin around FOMC meetings, especially around
the semiannual report meetings. So if we ask them to do more, we need to think about what else
we’re going to ask them not to do that they’re currently doing. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Barron.
MR. BARRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It may come as a surprise to some of my
colleagues, given my expressed concerns over publication of numerical inflation targets, that I
am very supportive of publication of forecasts by participants. The Committee has for some time
now made routine references to the outlook in the statement, without an explicit Committee
forecast. Explicit forecasts will, in my opinion, add to the already improved transparency and
accountability of the actions of the Committee and will, over time, serve as a reference point for
expressing the important differing views among the Committee members at this table and in
public speeches. As cumbersome and as painful as the process might be, at least initially, the
Committee also needs to develop a consensus forecast that would embrace a central tendency
outlook. However, this forecast should embrace, not truncate, outliers and use those as a signal
of dispersion of views around the forecast.
As for the basis of the forecast, it seems logical that some agreement on assumptions
would lead to fewer outliers in the forecasting process. While I can appreciate the benefits of the
“common assumption” approach, I would suggest that the Committee follow the “appropriate
policy” approach as it relates to the federal funds rate, at least at the outset. That said, one
alternative might be for the staff to suggest a set of common assumptions that would be used in

January 30-31, 2007

181 of 255

the development of alternative forecasts by the participants. However, it would be understood
that each participant’s baseline forecast would be free from imposed assumptions.
I believe it is imperative that any forecast be accompanied by a story to support the
outlook. This is consistent with my own recommendation as it relates to question 7 that we
should minimize the number of variables that we use in the forecast for the public. With just a
few key variables put forward, we should be able to agree on a narrative for the forecast, much as
we agree on a narrative for our current policy statement. I recognize that this will be
cumbersome and time-consuming, but numbers without the story would be analogous to asking a
doctor to treat a patient by seeing only the skeleton. The story could be developed in a minutesstyle description, but I would suggest that the forecast and description be an addendum to the
minutes. This would enable participants to share their forecast and opinions at the meeting. In
the discussion process, participants would be given the opportunity to absorb the discussion of
the meeting and the various forecasts and then go back and visit with their staff to consider if any
changes are warranted in their own forecast and outlook.
I hope that, after the resolution of the start-up problem that would no doubt be
encountered in this process, the current publication schedule of the minutes for those meetings
where we do set forecasts would be restored. That said, I hope also that the debate over the story
would be limited to substantive issues somewhat like a dissent on the current policy decision and
not a vehicle to capture every nuance in everyone’s forecast.
I suggest that the forecast frequency be limited to two per year to start out but that we
would eventually move to a quarterly forecast, much as has been said earlier. Listening to my
staff talk about the planning period and the policy action requirement so far as time is concerned,
I am struck that a three-year planning period would be ideal from a forecast standpoint. The

January 30-31, 2007

182 of 255

process would be more effective, at least at the outset, with fewer rather than more variables, and
I suggest that those variables be some inflation measure, real GDP, and unemployment. My
preference is to exclude a fed funds rate forecast because it could be interpreted, as mentioned
earlier, as a commitment. As for the uncertainty, clearly our story must address uncertainty and
potential changes that might come in the future. I would choose not to use fan charts, at least at
the outset, as I could almost bet that a fan chart on unemployment would be on some
congressional committee member’s desk at an upcoming hearing, illustrating the point that, if we
miss our target, millions of people will be unemployed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to start by saying that the
memos that we received from the staff before this meeting were helpful, and I think that Vincent
provided the right set of questions to guide our discussions. The goals that were laid out in the
memo that Dave distributed seem appropriate to me. From that memo and the comments from
David and Brian this morning, assessing whether releasing more forecast-related information
will improve economic performance appears difficult. However, I am persuaded that, by making
some modest changes to our current practice of preparing and releasing forecast-related
information, we could readily and inexpensively facilitate a richer internal discussion and at the
margin better inform the public about our thinking. So I want to say at the outset that I’m
interested primarily in using the forecast to help us better understand each other’s thinking about
longer-term objectives, policy risks, tradeoffs, and the workings of the economy, along the lines
laid out in Vice Chairman Geithner’s memo. From my assessment of our current practices and
the experience of foreign central banks laid out in Karen’s memo, I find no compelling case for
releasing additional forecast-related information to the public, with one exception related to the

January 30-31, 2007

183 of 255

forecast period that I’ll comment on later. So using Vincent’s language, I’m in the “modify the
status quo” camp, and I’d like to answer Vincent’s questions from that perspective.
I support the “independent” option regarding forecasts. I think there is great value in the
diversity of opinions that individual Committee members bring to both the internal and the
public discussion about monetary policy, and I would like to use it as constructively as possible.
Right now, I am not in favor of pursuing a single official forecast to be published by the
Committee as an element in our policy communication process. Although I am not opposed to
publishing information about individual forecast submissions, I think it would be fine just to
pursue the central tendency approach that we’re using and the forecast range summaries that
appear in the Monetary Policy Report today. Regarding the conditioning assumptions, I think it
would be counterproductive to impose a common definition of appropriate monetary policy or a
common set of conditioning variables. My hope would be that the assumptions and the
conditions that are important to each individual’s outlook would be revealed as part of the
dialogue that we have among ourselves about our forecasts. I suggest that we incorporate a
summary of our views in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report. For now, it would be enough
for me to simply reflect the general sense of the conversation in the Monetary Policy Report and
in our minutes, in the same way that we regularly summarize our views about the outlook and the
policy situations today.
I have no objection to delegating the release of a minutes-style description of the
Committee’s forecast discussion to the Chairman, subject to some consultation with meeting
participants in the drafting process. The process that we’re currently using to review the minutes
after each meeting could be used for drafting and publishing such a description. The narrative
then could be included in the release of the Monetary Policy Report, much as the central

January 30-31, 2007

184 of 255

tendency forecasts are included today. My suggestion is that our forecasts continue to be shared
in our semiannual format. I don’t see the need for a more-frequent release of forecasts, although
listening to some of the comments today I wouldn’t be opposed to going to quarterly once we get
some experience with the process.
One important change that I would make is that I would supplement our current
semiannual projections with a medium-term forecast for the relevant variables. Governor
Mishkin mentioned three years. My personal preference is to go out to a fifth year, so I would
continue to do the one and two years and then go out to the fifth year. My guess is that in most
cases providing something like a five-year period is long enough to assume that the fifth year
would obviously be made under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy, and that would
generally align with individual members’ views of our longer-term policy objectives. Even if a
five-year period is not long enough to reveal our long-run objectives perfectly, the longer period
will help us to clarify the pace that the Committee members view as appropriate in terms of
moving toward a more desirable inflation rate. It would also provide a description of any
tradeoffs that we perceive in meeting our objectives.
I am comfortable with publishing a small set of essential outcome variables, much as we
do today. At some point we might want to discuss further whether it’s still useful to include
nominal GDP, as others have mentioned, and what price index or indexes we should include.
For now, I am not proposing that the forecast discussions be extended to include any formal
measures of uncertainty.
In summary, my preference is to stay much closer to the status quo than many of the
other options that were presented by the staff. We have a lot to gain from shifting the focus of
our internal policy discussions to include a medium term, and we can share that information

January 30-31, 2007

185 of 255

qualitatively with the public at a very low cost. These modest steps would not preclude us from
making more-ambitious changes that the Committee might wish further down the line. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. It is a little after 1:00. Why don’t
we take a break for lunch? If people could be flexible, we can start somewhere around 1:30,
maybe a few minutes before, depending on how efficiently lunch is served. If anyone has
concerns about flights or anything like that, could you please let me know during the break? Mr.
Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Do you have a sense, a reasonable expectation, of
when you think we’ll try to stop? It’s very important, but we could do this for days.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It should be somewhere between 2:30 and 3:00, if we take a
half an hour for lunch now, unless I hear concerns about flights and the like. It’s lunch time.
Thank you.
[Recess]
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let’s resume. Thank you. Let me start by saying that
we’ve had an enormous amount of discussion. If anyone is inclined to submit a memo to the
Committee or to the subcommittee elaborating on your views or responding to some things that
you’ve heard, please feel free. It will be very helpful to receive any information like that. Let’s
continue with our go-round. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the interest of time, I’d like to be able to say
that I agree with Governor X or President Y and just let it go at that, but there are some nuances
that I feel compelled to cover, so I will. Let me just start out by saying that, while I certainly
favor some changes to the production and publication of the forecast, I do think we need to

January 30-31, 2007

186 of 255

proceed, at least in some areas, cautiously and conservatively. After all, we are the central bank.
[Laughter] Beyond that, once we make these changes, we probably won’t be able to retract
them; so we’d better make sure that we want to do them before we proceed.
In that spirit, let me address the questions. Questions 1 and 2 fall into that category. I
think that we ought just to continue what we’re doing now in terms of conducting a survey of
individual forecasts and aggregating them. I have reservations about trying to come to common
assumptions, for lots of reasons. Practically it would be very difficult, and I’m not sure at the
end of the day that there is a big payoff. So I favor the status quo so far as those first two
questions are concerned.
Question 3 pertains to the narrative description, and there my answer is “yes”—the
forecasts should be accompanied by a narrative description. That step is very important, and it
feeds into question 4: Should the Committee jointly agree on the minutes-style description or
delegate the release? We have a number of options there. As some people suggested, you could
tie this in with the minutes in one way or another. That runs the risk of the forecast’s becoming
stale by the time the public sees it. I’m perhaps a little less concerned about that than some
others because the public will know when the meeting occurred. They know what information
we didn’t have, and they presumably know we’re not clairvoyant. [Laughter] Let me put it this
way: I am not clairvoyant. Some of you perhaps are, but if so, it escaped my notice. [Laughter]
Another way of handling this would be to submit the forecasts with brief narratives in advance;
then, of course, we’d have a pretty good jump on preparing the material at the end of the
meeting. So if we’re concerned about timing and about forecasts becoming stale, we would have
the advantage of having materials before the discussion at the meeting. We can find ways to get
out the forecast and the commentary associated with it in a more timely way to the extent that we

January 30-31, 2007

187 of 255

think doing so is important. Now, here a dry run or two might be very helpful, and I think it will
turn out to be essential to changes that we might make.
Question 5 is how frequently the forecast should be made. Here again, I’m not sure the
current schedule is too bad. Adding a third forecast each year to fill in the hole in the fall and
maybe to address a bit the issue that Bill Poole articulated about providing more information
about how our views are evolving—that might work out. But this is another place in which I
would be relatively cautious about being very ambitious right off the bat. Similarly, with how
many years the forecast should cover: I think there are arguments for extending it beyond the
current period, but again, I would want to do some dry runs and look very carefully at what we
gain before we committed ourselves to going out three years or five years or whatever the period
might be. As for the number of variables forecast, I think we need an inflation variable, a growth
variable, and some sort of labor market variable, and I’d let it go at that. Putting out more things
would only add to the confusion. We could always decide at some future time to put out a
federal funds rate number, a year-end number or something like that, but I wouldn’t start with
adding it right up front.
Finally, should there be some attempt to convey formally the uncertainty surrounding the
forecast? There my answer is “yes.” Whether we do it with fan charts or with some other
approach is something that we can work out, but I think it is very important to do. I don’t think
right now that market participants or the public more generally think that there is little
uncertainty associated with our forecast, but it’s important to underscore the high degree of
uncertainty associated with policymaking. Those are my views.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Bies.

January 30-31, 2007

188 of 255

MS. BIES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just make an introductory remark, and
then I’m going to go through these questions fairly quickly. First, I’ve heard different reasons
here for our looking at change. One issue is to improve the credibility of the Fed. The point
about credibility that I’d like to make is that it is a trust issue. You earn trust by demonstrating
that you can achieve the objectives of your organization. I think we have credibility. Whether or
not we put out a forecast, our credibility is precious. If we don’t demonstrate our ability to
control the inflationary pace, we’re going to lose that credibility whether or not we have a
forecast. Accountability, too, is important. We are a central bank in a democracy, and whatever
we can do to enhance transparency—to let folks understand how we come about our policy
choices—is important. I use the word “enhance”—President Lacker or someone else used it
earlier, but I like the word—because it says that things are going well. We always have ways in
which we can improve, and we should be looking at change on the margin, not major changes.
I also agree with Government Mishkin and a few others that the strength of the way the
central bank is set up in this country is the diversity of viewpoints. We not only get different
regional inputs, we also have people from different backgrounds sitting around this table,
whether they are Ph.D. economists and experts in monetary policy, experts in Reserve Bank
operations, or folks from the private sector. We all come at monetary policy from a different
perspective. For that reason, if we go forward in this vein, I support individual forecasts and
retaining that diversity of viewpoints. Therefore, I don’t support any common assumptions.
Each of us should be free to choose the framework in which we produce our forecasts. I worry
that forcing common assumptions sort of forces convergence, and I would not be likely to
support that.

January 30-31, 2007

189 of 255

I feel strongly that the most important part of issuing a forecast is the narrative. If we just
put numbers out, I don’t know what value added we have. The numbers in the Greenbook don’t
vary a whole lot in most of the scenarios, but the narratives give a different flavor. As you read
through the scenarios, you can say, “Well, I feel strongly this way,” but the model doesn’t
produce a whole lot of difference. So I think it’s essential that we talk more about it in a
narrative form. That qualitative aspect really adds value to a forecast, particularly with the
diversity of views that may occur from time to time. In terms of how we do the narrative, the
proposal that Vice Chairman Geithner circulated is a good framework that we could use to start.
Again, if we do that before the meeting, it may help the timeliness of the communication. It
should come out at the same time as the numbers, whether it’s tied to the minutes or tied to the
Monetary Policy Report. It is part of the overall process.
As for technical aspects of the forecast—again, based on the comments about staff work,
I agree that we need to keep things simple. Twice a year is sufficient, at least initially, partly
because we shouldn’t overcommunicate the ability of monetary policy to fine-tune short-term
variations in inflation and monetary policy. I think about my life as a corporate CFO and the
frustration of being held quarter to quarter to the results of a company when so much is going on
and you are managing the long term successfully. For that reason, and because the lags in
monetary policy are so long, I think we’re overcommitting—whether to the Congress, the
general public, or the markets—about our ability to implement and affect markets by doing too
short a forecast period or too frequent a forecast. However, going forward I would lean toward
what we have now in the forecast and not go out longer. I understand that people want to go out
further because they think that doing so signals what our long-run real objectives are. But if we
want to set an objective, let’s just set the objective rather than having a longer-term forecast

January 30-31, 2007

190 of 255

because out in the long run we’re more prone to volatility and because timing, too, will be more
of an issue. I also would favor just the three variables that are related to our mandate from the
Congress—inflation, real GDP, and the unemployment rate—varieties of which are to be
determined, but they should be tied to the mandate. Down the road we could add more, but for
now let’s keep it to those three.
I think it’s important to communicate uncertainty surrounding the forecast, and I would
do that with regard to two dimensions. First, whatever the consensus, in the five years that I’ve
been here, there have been periods when we did not know how far policy was going to have to
go. One instance was when we started down the path of raising interest rates, we knew we were
going to go at a measured pace and we clearly signaled for a long period that this was where we
were going and that we felt confident that a 1 percent funds rate was too low. We were not sure
of the stopping point, but we knew we had a long way to go. Second, regarding the central
tendency, it is important to signal a rise in uncertainty around turning points—that our forecasts
about them depend a lot on incoming data. If in the Committee we have an outlier or really
different viewpoints, we need to spend a bit more time in a narrative explaining why we have a
difference of views.
The only other comment I would make is that, in thinking about the alternatives and the
variability around them, it will be a challenge to communicate that effectively. So we should, as
some suggested, do a few dry runs. I’ve been spending a lot of time recently on Basel II, Pillar
III, disclosures regarding uncertainty and risk. Looking at what we really can control through
monetary policy and differentiating that from other things going on, the style that we choose in
talking about uncertainty and risk regarding the forecast will be very important. So I think it
would be good if we practice that communication a little first. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

January 30-31, 2007

191 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to be brief. I was impressed with
President Yellen’s excellent presentation and the thoughtfulness and scope of what she talked
about, and I agree almost 100 percent with everything she said. But I want to mention a few
things that I think are important. There’s an old forecasting adage, if you’ve ever been in the
forecasting business: If you can’t forecast well, forecast often. [Laughter] Now, that suggests
to me that, if this exercise were only about the forecast, it might not be so important to do
frequently. But the purpose of publishing this information on a more regular basis is not so
much about the forecast as it is about communicating policy and the views of the Committee to a
broader audience. Our forecast is almost a byproduct, but it provides, in my view, both the
foundation and the context for our current thinking about current policy and future policy.
That’s really the value of it to me. Providing a forecast and a narrative would provide a richer
context. It would allow us to be perhaps a little more expansive about things in the narrative.
I’ll come back to that in a second. We spend so much time around this table parsing words in
our statements each time, and having a richer description of the context in which policy is being
made and the views that are being expressed would allow us to get away somewhat from our
focus on the language in the statement itself. It would provide us with some more flexibility, and
we wouldn’t have to worry quite as much about every word being parsed for some new meaning.
The purposes go beyond just the forecast and its part in this communication. Indeed, a broader
principle is the transparency of the policymaking process. So let me go through the questions
and provide for each of them a quick answer and perhaps a little nuance.
I certainly agree with most people around this table that we need to have individual
forecasts. I strongly believe in the “independent” approach. There is huge value to the diversity

January 30-31, 2007

192 of 255

sitting around this table. I don’t think we want to put that at risk, so I’m very supportive of that.
In terms of common assumptions, in particular on the conditioning variables, I don’t think there
ought to be common assumptions. We ought to use appropriate policy. I have a little
uncertainty in my own mind about whether that ought to be an explicit part of the forecast in
terms of what we publish. I am of two minds on that issue. On the one hand, I’m sympathetic to
the notion that you want to be very careful about imprinting in the minds of the public that the
forecast is some kind of guarantee or commitment. I think that’s not a big problem; it can be
overcome with some discussion and fan charts and other things. On the other hand, publishing it
has some value. I think about the times this fall when we were sitting around this table talking
about the weakness in the economy and housing and what we thought our outlook was. At the
time, the markets were projecting that we were going to drop the fed funds rate to something like
4¼ by this spring, but I didn’t sense at the time that this group would have put as much
probability on that occurring as perhaps the market was. If we were in the business of generating
these forecasts, that disconnect wouldn’t have happened, or it would have been much milder, I
suspect. There would not have been as much uncertainty nor as much movement in those
interest rates had we been more forthright about what our thinking was going forward. So I think
there are some benefits to reporting out the range of what people think is appropriate policy
going forward, but I acknowledge it also has some risk.
The narrative is terribly important for making this work. Indeed, that is where you are
providing the richness. I think it ought to be a minutes-style narrative. I’m a bit torn as to
whether or not individual Committee participants should have the opportunity to write a side bar
if they are really uncomfortable with something. Certainly, if we allowed that, it should be done
without attribution. But I believe that the issue here is more about timeliness and whether we

January 30-31, 2007

193 of 255

can do this in a timely way to make it work, which is speaking to Rick’s concern. We just have
to struggle with that a little and figure out what might work best.
How frequently should the forecast be made? I lean toward four times a year. I think
that’s a good frequency and puts the forecast roughly at every other meeting. At first, this will
be very difficult to do, but if we get into a production cycle, I think it is certainly feasible. As to
the issue of how many years the forecast should cover, I think that it should go a little longer
than what we currently have. I lean toward three years. As we go out, all we have to do is just
say something about what we believe the long-term trends are or, in some cases perhaps, what
our objectives may be. Perhaps we want to get far enough out so that the long-term trend is
revealed.
This gets back to what issues and what variables we report. I never have liked the phrase
“potential GDP” because I have never really understood what it meant or how to measure it. But
I do use the word “trend” a lot. I’m not sure it’s a bad idea when you’re collecting the forecasts
from the members, much as Vice Chairman Geithner did, to report what your view of trend is.
We may or may not choose to publish that for some of the reasons that Rick perhaps suggested—
although I’m less concerned about his concerns, I certainly understand them. But it would be
terribly useful to gather that information and to share it—maybe only internally so that we have
an idea of where people think the economy is in a long-run sense. The variables we ought to
publish would obviously be real GDP, unemployment, and a measure of inflation (whichever one
we decide seems most appropriate). I’d be okay with a trend estimate, although I don’t feel
strongly one way or another. Producing a fan chart or some information about the range of what
the Committee thinks is appropriate policy would be informative. In particular, I like Janet’s
pictures because, as you notice, it has no line in it. There is no point forecast. As we convey

January 30-31, 2007

194 of 255

uncertainty about the forecast, we want to do everything we can to steer people away from the
notion of a point forecast on anything because they’ll latch onto that point forecast and
disabusing them of that will be very difficult. Steering them away from a point forecast also
helps stress the importance of uncertainty in our forecast going forward, and I think we need to
convey uncertainty. I’d even be inclined to report, as these charts do, just central tendencies and
not any medians or point estimates for any of the variables. I think that’s a terrific idea.
Finally, I’d like to make a suggestion. It will be very difficult to design the details
around this with the whole Committee. I think Governor Kohn alluded to this consideration in
the beginning. So I would strongly support a motion that either the communications
subcommittee or a subcommittee that they delegate to would come back to this group rather
quickly with one or two well-thought-out, concrete proposals that we can discuss in detail and
begin thinking about how we might produce one or two dry runs to work out the kinks. I think
we’ll make much more and faster progress in getting an outcome that we are comfortable with if
we have something concrete in terms of a proposal to talk about. That’s all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In my views, I associate most closely with
President Stern. So I will avoid going through all eight questions and will provide perhaps three
further thoughts on what President Stern talked about—first, on what our dominant goal is;
second, on what the benefits of going forward are; and third, on how we might go to market with
something along these lines.
First, with respect to the dominant goal, I think, as Governor Bies and many others have
talked about, it is our credibility. Our credibility today is somewhat asymmetric, in the sense

January 30-31, 2007

195 of 255

that I think that we have a lot more credibility that we could lose in this exercise than we could
gain. Not only is the credibility of this institution very high, but I would say it is even higher
than it was six months ago. That suggests to me that we should go slowly, conservatively, and
prudently through this process. How does that relate to forecasts? When I think about the
forecasts that we considered yesterday for the fourth quarter, which has passed, I’d say that our
staff does a better job than anyone on Wall Street or than many of us could have done alone, but
we see the errors involved—which is not at all a criticism but a reality of the business we’re in. I
hesitate to think about making forecasts four times a year, including periods we were quite far
into, and about how that affects our credibility. Instead of extending into a third or fourth year, I
would think about making forecasts in a going-forward, rolling eight quarters way so that we
would always have a full two years in front of us. We wouldn’t be in some ways culpable for
making an error of information that we really should know in the market’s expectation. It does
strike me as a little odd that our forecast period changes by virtue of our current calendar. I think
about that from a credibility standpoint: I don’t want to mess up in front of these markets so
obviously.
I’d put the question of frequencies in the context of what benefits we are trying to
achieve. It seems to me that the predominant benefit is strengthening the transmission
mechanism of monetary policy between us and the capital markets and the reaction function of
the capital markets back to us. If we provided forecasts four times a year, I fear that our numbers
might replace the markets’ own forecasts. That is, they might say, “Well, I’m a little bit more
robust in my views than the Fed. So I’m going to take their numbers and add a couple of tenths,
because I’m the chief economist at Morgan Stanley” or Merrill Lynch or Goldman Sachs. I
worry that our numbers might end up polluting the quality of the information they go out with,

January 30-31, 2007

196 of 255

and then we would be reading back their numbers and saying, “Boy, our numbers look a lot like
theirs. Aren’t we very good at this?” I worry about that transmission mechanism effect. In
terms of the quantitative and qualitative information we put forward, the focus really should be
on what Don described as the story, the narrative—one that Wall Street and the rest of our
constituencies, like Capitol Hill, can think about, ask tough questions about, and try to interpret.
What we get back then in terms of their quantitative and qualitative assessment could be better.
All of that speaks to the focus on the narrative rather than on the numbers.
Finally, how would we go forward with whatever we conclude, and what would be the
best means of ensuring that this incremental work that we’re doing has the beneficial effects that
we hope for? To achieve this goal efficiently—I’ll use words that may be a bit more glib than I
intend—we should use a “benevolent leader” model. I’m not saying a “benevolent dictator”
model in which we all say, “Hey, Chairman, here are our best views; they are all yours.” Nor is
the model a pure democracy, where all nineteen of us parade, “These are my numbers. This is
my view of the world. These are my estimates.” In which case we provide more information,
but I’m not sure we’ve really helped the cause of what the Fed is trying to achieve. The
“benevolent leader” model probably falls somewhere between the two. With that model, we
would use the opportunity or the timing of the monetary policy testimony, when everyone’s
attention is on the Chairman and the Fed for those macro forecasts. The Chairman would report
the work product, and the work product would have two pieces. The first—and I don’t mean to
prioritize one over the other—would be the Chairman’s work product, which would incorporate
the views of others as he sees fit, and he might well want to reference where his views coincide
with the central tendency and where they differ. But in that we ought not to constrain the
Chairman. In that way, I don’t view the Chairman, in his testimony or in his announcement of

January 30-31, 2007

197 of 255

projections, as the press spokesman for the FOMC. Those are his views. But second, and very
much alongside his views, he would present our views. His presentation of our views is useful in
making certain that a lot of attention is focused on them. In answer to one of the questions from
the subcommittee, in some ways we might well be delegating to him the ability to draw a central
tendency and make appropriate conclusions. I trust in his ability to do this. If a future Chairman
doesn’t think independently and honestly provide accurate views of what the Committee
members have said, the Committee has plenty of checks and balances at its disposal to make sure
that we have some discipline over that second half. So that’s an appropriate way to think about
getting the most bang for the buck of this incremental work with which we’re proposing to go
forward. One of the memos said that the public is likely to place the most weight on a forecast
made by the entire Committee. I think that’s true only if the Chairman’s views happen to
coincide with the Committee’s. If the Chairman’s views differ from the Committee’s views—
which I presume is not impossible—it is not obvious to me that the statement in the memo is
correct. If the Chairman’s views differed substantially, there would be, for better or for worse,
different power centers and sources of information, and I think the markets would be looking at
each. So that’s perhaps another reason that I think this “benevolent leader” model might be the
best way to go forward. Those are just some preliminary thoughts. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I thought about the alternatives before
us for making forecasts, I had an even greater appreciation for the way we’ve done this to date. I
looked at the Monetary Policy Report, of course, and other things that we’ve done, and I think
we’ve been well served by the approach we’ve taken to date—the twice-a-year forecast and the
central tendency descriptions. Some of us were here when Chairman Greenspan told us that he

January 30-31, 2007

198 of 255

didn’t really care for these forecasts very much. He said it was psychologically debilitating for
him to discuss them in his testimony [laughter] three weeks later because they became stale.
Well, Chairman Bernanke has done an excellent job, and I don’t think he has been
psychologically debilitated so far that I’m aware of. [Laughter] But you have woven them into
your testimony, and I think it has been very effective. So if there are important improvements
that can be made, I certainly would favor them. But I don’t have a good sense at the moment, as
some others have expressed, which communication issue we’re trying to address here. The
background memos were first class, and I should compliment the staff. They did an excellent job
of describing how forecasts can play an important communication role for central banks that
have adopted inflation guidelines in one form or another. Of course, we haven’t adopted any yet.
Maybe we will. I think that’s still an open question. But depending on the specific mandates of
the central bank, the forecast procedures may depend on those details. In an ideal world, I’d
prefer to know more about how we’re going to address the other communication issues first.
Specifically, will we adopt a quantitative inflation guideline? Will we specify a timeframe for
achieving that objective as well? How we answer those questions will give us a framework for
deciding what types of forecasts we want to provide. I guess that will be the discussion in
March.
In the meantime, we should go slowly in making changes in our current forecast process.
Our approach to improving transparency has been incremental. We have taken a step, sometimes
a small step, and then we assess that step before we take another step. Over time we make a
series of steps that has significantly improved our transparency. This approach has served us
well, because, as Gary said, it would be very difficult to reverse a step that provides more

January 30-31, 2007

199 of 255

transparency. It would be viewed as a takeaway. In that context, let me quickly go through the
questions; then just for the record, I’ll make some summary comments.
So, one, I would say that we want to have individual forecasts. That’s what the sense of
the Committee seems to be. Two, they should not have common assumptions. I think it’s
important that they should be based on appropriate policy. They should be what we actually
think is going to happen. Otherwise, it would be very confusing. I think that a minutes-style
narrative would be helpful. We actually do it already. It’s a Board of Governors document, but
we do it. I’ll say a little bit more about that later. Should we jointly agree on the narrative? I
think we should. We have to work out the timeframe, but I think we should. How frequently? I
could see a case made for starting out doing one more a year in the fall. Doing it would be
difficult, for reasons that Janet gave, given our meeting schedule. But it could be done, and I
think it could be done without a lot of work. I’ll get to that later as well. How many years? I
would like to go more years, as you know, rather than fewer. I like Sandy’s approach, going out
five years, but I certainly think we should extend the timeframe. How many variables? I would
drop nominal GDP, as others have said. Then, on the uncertainty question, my initial instinct is
to communicate it in words rather than in fan charts, but that’s something we could learn more
about. I’m open to considering other ways if we find one that is simple and that people can
understand.
Let me make a few overall comments. First, I thought that the document that Tim
circulated before the meeting was useful. The major benefit to me in looking at it was to see
what assumptions you’re making, and I think that does help us in communication and in
understanding where people are coming from as they make statements at the meeting. It’s not
something I would want to see made public, but I think it does help us in terms of

January 30-31, 2007

200 of 255

communicating with each other. Second, there was some discussion at one point about actually
putting out a forecast of the fed funds rate. I’d be very cautious about that. I know this is
probably at the top of the list of what private-sector people want; but for obvious reasons—as
Don said, they’d like to know what it is going to be at our next meeting—I would just be very,
very careful about that. Third, I thought Tom Hoenig had an intriguing idea about putting this in
the minutes. From an efficiency standpoint, doing so has a lot of advantages. In the minutes we
actually describe what we think the forecast is, and we all review that description and make
changes, and the process has been fairly efficient so far. I could see doing that without
producing another document, so it would still be a Committee document. Of course, the
narrative would still be the Committee narrative, but we’d just do it as part of the process of
reviewing the minutes. I don’t think you need any side bar disagreements in there because we do
that already. In some cases, we say “many members” or “some members.” I think it is handled
quite well. So I’m intrigued by and attracted to that suggestion from an efficiency standpoint,
and if we were going to do a third forecast, say in October, it doesn’t have to be a separate
document at all. It could just be in the minutes. We could have a little table with the forecast,
the central tendency, and the range, and then a description in the minutes.
That brings me to the point that a number of people have made about a dry run, which
obviously is crucial, because we’ll learn more about the process. This gets back to the point
about who does the description. Is it the FOMC? Right now, the FOMC does the forecast, and
the Board of Governors does the explanation of the forecast. If we put it in the minutes, it would
be an FOMC description, and the narrative would be the FOMC’s narrative. In terms of timing
with the Chairman’s testimony, this time the minutes come out just after you testify. So to fulfill
the accountability issue that the Congress wants, we could have it in the minutes as an FOMC

January 30-31, 2007

201 of 255

narrative, but the Board of Governors could then adopt it if the Congress felt that was important
from an accountability standpoint. But it could be the same document. That way to do it seems
to me to be more efficient, and it would be the Committee’s view.
That gets me to Kevin’s point about whether we are constraining the Chairman when he
is testifying or speaking about this forecast or about the economy. Certainly, we don’t want to
constrain the Chairman. His credibility is the Committee’s credibility and the institution’s
credibility, and so it’s crucial that we not constrain him in that way. But if he felt strongly about
a difference between what the central tendency of the Committee forecast was and his own view,
I have great confidence that he could handle that without detracting from his credibility but still
enable us to have a Committee narrative on the forecast. As I said, I think a dry run would help
us understand this better, but I do think we want to do this in as efficient a way as possible before
producing additional documents because it does require a lot of effort, particularly from the staff
here but also from all of us who are involved and our research staffs.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much. The question that Presidents Poole, Minehan,
Fisher, and others asked—Why are we doing this?—is always the important one. You always
have to think about the objective and what you’re trying to achieve, so that question has to be
taken very seriously. As part of our general obligation to improve the monetary policy making
process, we are doing this as part of the broader evolution in improving transparency. We need
to be proactive. We don’t have to wait for someone to ask us to give them this or that. We
should be controlling that process, and we should always be thinking about ways to improve, and
this discussion is very, very useful in thinking about how to move forward. I want to repeat the

January 30-31, 2007

202 of 255

kudos to the staff for the excellent memos that they put forward, giving us both substantive
information about what others do and ways to think about any sorts of changes.
I’ll go quickly through the questions. I think it’s very valuable to have different points of
view that are reflected in the forecast. Part of the value is that it is in the spirit of the Federal
Reserve Act. A forecast that is seen as purely centralized would to some extent be contrary to
the act and could raise some hackles. It is valuable to get those differences of views out there.
Whether there should be common assumptions, I guess I differ a bit from where
everybody else is. I think it would be worthwhile to make some effort when we’re going through
the dry runs to see if there are areas of commonality because it would provide more information.
As President Lacker said, the clearer, more centralized, and more consistent the forecast, the
more potentially informative it is and the more accountable we can be. So it might be
worthwhile at least to explore whether there are some aspects of commonality that wouldn’t
cause inconsistencies of models or other problems. I’m not sure that we could get there, but I
think it is worthwhile to spend some time on that. Part of the motivation for doing so is that we
already put out a central tendency forecast a couple of times a year. Although the market
respondents to that survey had said they want more of this, when I talk to reporters or to market
participants, they don’t really seem to pay much attention to it, or it seems to decay very, very
quickly. They may pay attention for a very short time, and that’s why it might be worthwhile to
see whether something a bit more consistent could be given out about it. Right now, except for a
very small window around the two times a year that we put it out, I don’t see much emphasis on
it.
It’s valuable to have a more-rapid release of information. However, the last thing I
would want is to feel that we have to get it out faster and to have that feeling impeding our

January 30-31, 2007

203 of 255

decisionmaking process—either needing to put out the Greenbook earlier or constraining our
discussions because we had already put a line in the sand. I think it’s 4.2, and you think it’s 3.2;
my memo is out there, and my memo is better than your memo [laughter]—I think that would be
a mistake. Also, particularly since we are thinking of frequency, if we release information three
to four times a year, it is going to get stale. But trying to get it out a week sooner so that it’s out
there for three months and a week or four months and a week, rather than four months and two
weeks or three months and two weeks, isn’t that helpful. I don’t want to undermine the excellent
decisionmaking process that we have. So speed is valuable, but there is a cost to it, and I don’t
see the enormous benefit of getting it out a week or two sooner. As I said, three to four times a
year seems reasonable.
I like the evolutionary approach of providing some narrative, because I think that’s one of
the key things in providing more transparency—it gives us greater ability to convey to the world
how we’re thinking about things. It also helps us because we would not be as constrained with
the very few words that we put out as a Committee. It would be nice, in principle, to be able to
use more words to convey our ideas rather than be so constrained. If we do put the information
out as a separate document, I think that it will get much more attention. That may be valuable,
but it also will get different reactions. Right now, it goes out as part of testimony that the
Chairman gives. I could certainly see requests for more-frequent testimony if we start putting
the information out more frequently. We have to think about that kind of feedback dynamic.
When we report more information, what other demands might come? I’m not sure that would be
the case, but I think the form and frequency with which we put it out may induce that kind of
response.

January 30-31, 2007

204 of 255

With respect to the forecast horizon, I think the key will be whether we are more explicit
on some sort of target or goal, and then horizon should be related to that. I don’t want it to go
too far out. At the Council of Economic Advisers, I chaired the so-called troika process, in
which we would do the Administration forecast. Initially we had to do ten-year forecasts. What
information do we have today that will tell us anything about ten years down the line? We
would always revert to the mean, and we would do that over a five-year period. Basically, we
didn’t feel that we really had any more information after two to three years. So I would be
reluctant to push the horizon beyond two to three years unless we wanted to tell people about
what we sort of thought trend rate was. That could be valuable but only to tell people about
trend, not to say that we really have any insight into what’s going to happen four to five years
from now. Generally our tendency will be to bring things back to trend. In terms of what to talk
about, real GDP, unemployment, and some measure of core inflation make a lot of sense. I’d be
very reluctant, certainly early on, to talk about interest rates or interest rate assumptions.
Uncertainty is another thing. When we were working on the forecasts at the CEA, one of
the things that I and others had pushed for was trying to give some sense of the uncertainty when
we were making these forecasts. We actually got far enough to have some of our people talk
with people on Capitol Hill, and we had very strong negative pushback. They were saying,
“Well, if you’re not willing to stand by your number—we have asked you to make a forecast,
and you’re not standing by it if you’re giving us this range.” Also, people will pick out the high
end or the low end of the range for their particular purposes, and so you have to be very careful
about how you put that out. In principle, I really want to provide the uncertainty; I agree
completely with Governor Mishkin on that. But the form in which you provide it is very
important because we may think of it as uncertainty but others may think of it as either dodging

January 30-31, 2007

205 of 255

an obligation or making a particular commitment on the high side or the low side—this is as high
as you can go and this is as low as you can go—and see it as a bargaining type of thing. Being
an academic, I had never thought about it that way. But it is something that we should consider
in making sure that providing it is improving transparency and the effectiveness of monetary
policy. We don’t want to get into side debates about exact numbers—that would be exactly the
opposite of what we want to convey about uncertainty. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman Geithner.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to say just a few
things quickly about internal transparency, about the analytical framework that we use to make
decisions about monetary policy, and then about the external dimension of the forecast process.
First, on internal transparency, I think that it makes sense for us to be a little more
explicit with each other about assumptions underpinning the forecast that we bring to the table.
That’s why I circulated the note—just to lay it out there in a clear way. Without that
information, it is very hard for us to know, when we are debating what to do, what we are really
debating. Generally, being more explicit with each other in private—discreetly—about the
conditioning assumptions that are important to our forecasts, about what we mean by
“appropriate policy,” about why and where we differ from the Greenbook, how we see the
balance of risks, and maybe, if we can, at least a qualitative sense of uncertainty would be useful
and would enrich the conversation.
On the analytical framework for monetary policy, I just have two suggestions, one I’m
going to repeat from our last conversation. The first is that I think we need to broaden the set of
analytical tools the staff gives us now at each meeting to think about the consequences of
alternative views in the forecast of different monetary policy choices and so forth. You give us a

January 30-31, 2007

206 of 255

range of things now that are very helpful. The two things we don’t get now fall in the following
categories. One is that you don’t give us a simple way to look at what it might mean for an
inflation forecast and an optimal policy exercise if you have a very different view about
structural inertia in inflation—not that there’s any great way to do that now, given the state of the
art—but it would be nice to have a way we could distinguish a little more clearly what a
backward-looking, highly inertial view about inflation fundamentals means for the way we think
about the forecast and monetary policy and what a more forward-looking view of inflation
determination means. That’s one area in which having something broader would be helpful,
even if it’s a set of highly simplified, highly imperfect analytical prisms, reference frameworks,
or reference models. The other thing that we don’t get now is a way to think through how we
make more explicit choices about the appropriate period, for example, for bringing inflation
down to a more comfortable level. That’s, of course, an important way to tease out what
people’s different loss functions or reaction functions are. Right now we aren’t really presented
with, for example, a set of alternative horizons for bringing inflation back down to target and
what that would mean for the rest of the things that are important to us. Those are two areas in
which it would be helpful to have a broader set of reference frameworks to underpin our
conversation of monetary policy. That’s an important investment to make if we’re going to do
anything to change our current regime—whether in the direction of an explicit quantitative
objective for the definition of price stability over the long run, even with no horizon, and
certainly if we’re going to evolve in how we publicly describe our forecast.
My second suggestion echoes a suggestion that Randy Kroszner made before. I think
that we would benefit from spending a bit more time as a Committee on thinking through what
we understand about inflation, both how it is captured in the model the staff uses and what are

January 30-31, 2007

207 of 255

the important distinctions between our views on these questions. We don’t go very deeply into
those distinctions—just a little. You can see this in both President Plosser’s and President
Lacker’s descriptions of their views of the forecast because they have a lower inflation forecast
than the staff has without a very different view about unemployment and with a modestly tighter
monetary policy. The case for that view deserves some reflection, and we don’t spend a lot of
time talking through that. That’s an important investment to make if we’re going to be more
explicit in public about choices concerning, for example, how fast we want to bring inflation
down to our objective.
Two small things on that ground would be helpful when the staff comes back to prepare
for the discussion in March about inflation objectives. First, a short treatment about the issue of
what makes the United States different would be interesting. We have a lot of international
experience to look at, but we’re not Norway, and we’re not New Zealand. I don’t know how to
think through that interesting issue. I’m not sure it’s right, but I don’t think we can dismiss it out
of hand, and I’d like some help thinking it through. Another small thing, to elaborate on a
discussion that Janet, Don, and I had on the margins: If you could tell us a bit about what the
past forecast error is of the mean FOMC forecast and how that compares to the Greenbook
forecast error, that information would be interesting to have. It’s a small thing.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There is research on that by the St. Louis Bank.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Good. And about forecast error?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Finally, I have just a few quick points about the
external dimension of the discussion. I’m in favor of exploring a narrative that describes the
story of the Committee’s central tendency about the outlook. It’s worth doing, and the range of

January 30-31, 2007

208 of 255

issues on the table today in that direction I feel really quite comfortable with. I’m in favor of
doing it quarterly, but I wouldn’t want to make that decision without thinking through very
carefully whether it makes sense. I would want to explore different ways of expressing the
variance across the Committee. I like the histogram approach. I’d even be open to the fan chart
device, as Janet described it, for trying to capture different forms of uncertainty. I don’t think we
should try to agree as a Committee on a path for what appropriate policy means. Therefore, I
would not be in favor of working toward disclosing an agreed-upon path, for many of the reasons
that are familiar to all of us. I want to experiment with a minutes-like iterative process for
coming to some level of comfort with how that central tendency is described, but I’d be willing
to give the Chairman the role of final arbiter of what gets presented, to save the staff from
endless negotiation.
I think the horizon question is very interesting. I was inclined to think that three years
makes sense. A concern I have about three years—apart from the one that Janet raised, which is
that it probably tells you only a little about your view of potential or your objective, and it may
not have much information beyond that—is the following. If we’re thinking about the merits of
a regime in which we will not have a defined period that we commit to for bringing inflation
back to target, we need to be comfortable with showing a forecast that maybe has inflation above
target for possibly a significant period of time. If the period is two years, it will be easier not to
get ourselves in a position in which we feel compelled to show a more acute decline in that path.
If we’re at three years, it will be harder to avoid that. We will be uncomfortable, I think, if we’re
in a three-year regime going for sustained periods with inflation staying outside that range.
Therefore, I am a bit tentative about three years.

January 30-31, 2007

209 of 255

Whatever we do, we should experiment first. We should be careful not do any damage to
a staff forecasting process that has worked very, very well and serves the Committee very, very
well. Also, we should recognize the ignorance we all live with and should be careful not to start
down a road that would give the markets false comfort, a false sense of precision, false
confidence in our view of the world, and all those other things many people have spoken about.
Let me say something about skepticism. Skepticism is a very important virtue, but its
virtue is not in the service of inertia. Its virtue is in the service of trying to figure out how we
can improve what we do and how to save ourselves from mistakes along the way. So I don’t
want to be “outskepticked” by anybody. [Laughter] I think it’s important to think about it that
way.
As all this implies, I don’t think it makes sense to have uniform conditioning assumptions
imposed on our individual forecasts, certainly not uniform conditioning assumptions on the
monetary policy path, but also not on any of the important dimensions that are the focus.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. May I raise a very quick question? From time to time, the politics of
budget deficits get all tangled up with differences between CBO and OMB forecasts of the
economy. Do we know whether Fed forecasts have ever been dragged into that argument?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Not to my knowledge.
MR. POOLE. I think that the longer the forecast period and the more that it is a
Committee forecast, the more likely it is that the FOMC may get pulled into that argument—
whether we’re on this side or that side of the argument. I just raise the question because we
ought to be sure we’re clear about that before we make our own forecast period too specific and
too long.

January 30-31, 2007

210 of 255

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. First, let me thank both the staff and all members. People
clearly took this assignment very seriously, and it has been extremely useful. I won’t try to
summarize. [Laughter] Fortunately, we have a tape recorder. I would like to make a few brief
comments. I believe that we ought to increase our emphasis on the projections. I’ll talk a bit
about some of the parameters of that, but I believe that I owe an answer to President Fisher about
why. I don’t think the process is broken. I don’t think we have a serious problem. But I do
think we could do better. Specifically, to give some examples, I think, first, that our statement is
too influential in the sense that we argued today about a couple of phrases, a couple of words,
knowing that the markets would seize on them and that they would move markets. If we had
more-informative, more-complete descriptions of our views, the statement would become less of
an issue. Second, I don’t want Governor Kohn moving the markets. [Laughter] I think that
public comments are often overinterpreted. I know in my own case they have been. [Laughter]
I recall the case in which a letter to a senator included the phrase “well-contained inflation
expectations” rather than “contained inflation expectations.” That was a letter drafted by the
staff, and I perhaps didn’t read it carefully enough. It was the subject of commentary in the
markets for some weeks after that. We have a bit of space in which to improve our
communication with the markets and the public. This way to do it would be fundamentally
incremental. I’m not proposing, and I don’t think that anyone is proposing, a radical change.
We can build on something that has worked and that we understand how to do, and of course we
would approach it very cautiously. But I do think that this is, as President Yellen called it, lowhanging fruit in the sense that it’s something we could use to increase our communication and
transparency in a fairly low risk way. Last spring there was a good bit of confusion in the
markets about how quickly we wanted to bring inflation down. The forecasts essentially

January 30-31, 2007

211 of 255

addressed that issue because they implicitly incorporate our policy preferences. So I think we
could improve our communication by increasing information about our outlook and our policy
preferences.
Another issue is a bit hard to explain, but I will try. I think that our credibility is
enhanced if we can depersonalize it and make the ownership of our policy more the Committee’s
and the institution’s. It’s the credibility of the Federal Reserve that matters, not Ben Bernanke’s
credibility. I assure you that we are better off with the Federal Reserve’s credibility. Making the
credibility of policy part of a broader process, with more input and clearer Committee analysis,
does to some extent increase the sense in which the institution, rather than the Chairman or any
other individual, is responsible for the outcomes and the policies.
Having said all of that, I don’t advocate any radical changes. I think we ought to
consider three or four additional projections depending on the schedule and other factors.
Governor Bies mentioned fine-tuning. Perhaps the way I would look at it is that information that
we have about the outlook changes over time, and six months is a long time. Our views do
change within a period of three to four months, and I think it would be informative to let people
know that. I’m open, but I think we should have individual forecasts. The solution to the
problem of consistent assumptions is the one that President Lacker mentioned—to have people
make their unconditional forecast the same way a Blue Chip forecaster would do. That
essentially includes the forecast of what the Committee is going to do, which is not necessarily
the same for everyone but it is based on each person’s view about where they think the economy
and policy are going. That’s one approach. There are probably others, but I want to suggest that
as a possible solution.

January 30-31, 2007

212 of 255

Many people have supported the narrative description. I think that’s important. I think
being more timely would be useful. I don’t quite follow the idea of putting the narrative in the
minutes. If we actually have this information, say, a week after the meeting, why would we want
to wait until three weeks? It is more credible and more useful the sooner it comes out. The same
is true for the minutes. When the minutes were released after the following meeting, it was a
non-event. When they were brought out earlier, they became viewed as a very informative,
useful piece of information. So, like Governor Kroszner, I don’t think we should deform our
decisionmaking process or be overhasty, but if we can make such communication more timely
than the minutes, we should probably try to do that.
I agree with the many people who said that we should include some sense of uncertainty.
There are ways to do that, for example, including historical numbers on the forecast errors of
previous projections of the Greenbook, of the Blue Chip, or of somebody would give the public
some sense of what the historical record is and perhaps lead them not to overvalue the individual
forecasts. Again, I don’t think this is particularly risky.
As I said, I hope we’ll approach this incrementally. Indeed, the history of the Federal
Reserve since 1994, when we first began to announce the federal funds rate target, has been one
of incremental change. This is a little unfair, but, President Fisher, you should go back and read
the discussion in the FOMC before the decision to begin releasing the federal funds rate target.
There was a lot of catastrophizing about what was going to happen and why what we’re doing
now is the best possible approach, and so on. So I think this is really no more than a
continuation of twelve or thirteen years of progress in terms of information. The other reason
that this is not particularly risky, if it’s done carefully and slowly, is that we have a great deal of
international experience. Obviously, we’re not Norway, but we’ve seen what works across a

January 30-31, 2007

213 of 255

whole variety of central banks, and financial markets have become more accustomed to this kind
of information being released.
There are some important governance issues. Whether we have an approval process or a
consultative process, I think we could get a forecast, together with some description, within a
reasonable period—something on the order of a week or less after the meeting. Let me make just
a suggestion along those lines. If we were to tie projections to two-day meetings and if we were
to have, as we do now, projections submitted before the meeting, along with perhaps a paragraph
of description about the major elements of the forecast and the major risks, I think the staff and I
could present on the second day a draft of what we took both from the first day’s discussion and
from the submissions of the projections. At that point, we could get feedback, or there would be
opportunities for people to change their forecasts or their views based on the discussions at the
meeting. We’d have to allow for diversity and dissent, and I think that’s perfectly fine. We’ve
done that in many contexts, and I think we should continue to do that. I would just conclude by
saying that many people have mentioned the importance of dry runs and a slow and careful
process, and I think it would be very hard to disagree with that. We’ve done that in other cases,
and I think we should do that here.
So, to summarize, I think there is some basis for trying to increase our use of the
projections. It would be consistent with our previous incremental movements toward greater
transparency. It would provide more information and reduce the sensitivity of the markets to
other types of communication, such as the statements and public comments. But we have heard
an awful lot of interesting viewpoints today, and I don’t envy the subcommittee, which will have
to go through all of this and come up with a set of proposals. Are there any further comments?
President Minehan.

January 30-31, 2007

214 of 255

MS. MINEHAN. I know you don’t want to prolong this meeting, and I don’t either, but
I’m interested in what you think it feels like to all of us and to the market to have a two-day
meeting, to have a minutes-style summary of a range of forecasts come out, and then a week and
a half to two weeks later have the minutes come out. How does that work? What is the
incremental information that comes from those two things, since the minutes already have a
range of information in them that, narratively anyway, goes through a forecast and people’s
sense of where things are likely to go with regard to the forecast, which I presume would be what
you would put into a narrative around the range of forecasts. It is certainly possible to do, but
how does that work?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it’s more informative to combine numerical
estimates with a qualitative description.
MS. MINEHAN. Then a week and a half later have another qualitative description.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, that’s not a reason not to do this. I think that you
could reproduce the information in the minutes; there would be further amplification and
discussion in the minutes. I am just thinking out loud here. The description I have in mind
would be a page or two, nothing substantial. The minutes would be an opportunity to provide
more information and show more of the diversity of views.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. As President Hoenig’s suggestion, President
Moskow’s suggestion, and your suggestion implied, there is a range of variance around that, and
that’s one of the things we’ll have to work through as well as how this fits within a set of existing
processes and disclosures that we’re going to preserve.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. There’s also a question of how it relates to the statement.
That’s absolutely right. Are there other comments? President Fisher.

January 30-31, 2007

215 of 255

MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and my mother thanks you, for addressing the
skepticism issue. May I just add one other thing? You were very polite at the beginning of this
conversation, but I’d like to reinforce what I interpret you as having said. The article from the
New York Times a couple of days ago really bothered me. Since we’re talking about proceeding
slowly and deliberately and several people have used the term “dry run”—which is very, very
important and I fully endorse—I hope that no one forms or advances the discussion by having a
public revelation of what took place at this table. May I suggest, since you constantly see certain
people who are not on this Committee referred to, that we be very careful in what we share with
those people because they are reference points. Some of them are friends of many people at this
table, but it appears to me that this does nothing but truncate the discussion or risks doing so and
has outsiders raising questions that we really don’t want to answer right now. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. The next meeting will be a two-day meeting,
March 20 and 21. Oh, David Stockton.
MR. STOCKTON. We’d like to get updates to forecasts by Friday.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay—updates of forecasts are to be sent in by Friday.
Thank you very much. The meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING

