Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
February 1-2, 1982

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 1, 1982, at 2:30 p.m. and
continuing on Tuesday, February 2, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Guffey, Morris, 1/ and Roos, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Messrs. Burns, Ettin, 2/ Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld,
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/

Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.

2/

Attended Tuesday session only.

2/1-2/82

- 2 -

Mr.

Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
Open Market Account

System

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. McIntosh, 1/ First Vice President,

Federal Reserve

Bank of Boston
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel, 3/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division
of International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Lindsey and Slifman, 3/ Assistant Directors, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Johnson, 3/ Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors
Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Fousek, Keran, 1/ Koch,
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, New York, San
Francisco, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Broaddus, Soss, and Syron, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, New York, and Boston,
respectively
Mr.

Meek,

Monetary Adviser,

Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/

Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market transactions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.

3/

Left the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic policy directive
and returned prior to the action to establish longer-run ranges.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
February 1-2, 1982
February 1--Afternoon Session
Chairman Volcker opened the meeting by
[Secretary's note:
calling on the staff to make their "chart show" presentation.]
MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, TRUMAN and PRELL.
related charts--see Appendix.]

[Statements and

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have any comments or questions on
how these people see things?
I have a question. I understand that
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
in most or all of these new wage agreements that are coming in at much
lower levels, such as the Teamsters and others, there is for the first
time a clause indicating that labor can reopen the contracts if
And
Do you know more about this?
conditions improve in the industry.
to what extent is that likely, when recovery starts, to bring about a
very sharp reversal in the downward trend in labor costs?
MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it is apparently a fairly common part of a
limited number of such agreements so far, and one can understand why.
In a sense it's one of the things the union is trading away; that is,
the union is willing to accept a generally reduced fixed rate of
increase in wages leaning heavily, let's say, on cost of living
adjustments. But they want the opportunity to come back in to take
And I
advantage of any improved profit position of corporations.
think your point is well taken that it creates greater flexibility and
a more rapid response of wages to any change in demand. Usually there
is a lag situation with 3-year contracts; it takes a while for any
I
tightening of the labor market to be evident in a wage adjustment.
think this will occur more rapidly but, of course, it depends in a
Our forecast certainly does not
sense on how tight labor markets get.
suggest an environment that would be conducive to very effective
bargaining on the part of labor.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have the line for compensation per
hour going down pretty steeply; it's all in the future. What gives
you that great confidence?
MR. ZEISEL. Well, it's not entirely in the future, but
We did have a
you're perfectly right that in large degree it is.
As I noted in my
reduction in compensation over this past year.
presentation, I think one has to look through that compensation figure
The wage rate figures
a little to the wage figures behind it.
We had an $18
improved somewhat more than compensation last year.
billion social security tax increase that raised compensation costs by
about 3/4 of a point; and if we adjust for that, we have a better
performance of compensation. Beyond that, we expect further
We have an extremely
improvements in the rate of increase in wages.
9 percent unemployment persisting
poor labor market projected:
This will have been, by the end of
through another couple of years.
the projection period, about 4 years in which the unemployment rate
was higher than anybody's [estimate of the] natural rate that I'm
aware of in any event. And the logic leads us to feel that this is
[Looking ahead,] we have
going to result in further easing in wages.

2/1-2/82

as well less of the self-inflicted damage that occurs when social
security taxes are raised. We have a relatively small tax increase of
about $5 billion this year as opposed to last year's $18 billion and a
relatively small increase next year as well.
So, we think things are
working in our favor.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Federal Reserve had a bigger increase
in compensation [and is] looking forward to a bigger increase in
compensation on some catch-up theory. How many other people are
engaged in that?
MR. ZEISEL.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Well, it's hard to know, but one can-The Federal Reserve's recession hasn't hit yet!

MR. ZEISEL. The kinds of adjustments that President Solomon
mentioned a few minutes ago suggest that we finally are getting the
wage adjustments that we were really hoping for.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we see some signs of this, and some
wage agreements that are reported in the newspapers suggest that some
industries are under very heavy pressure. But I do hear a lot about
other industries that in the total I'm sure are much more important.
I'm just wondering what other people hear.
Banks in particular tell
me they are raising salaries by 11, 12, 13, 14 percent this year.
MR. SCHULTZ.

I'm delighted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You'll have to explain that comment.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we do studies to see what the comparable
salaries are out there. And when comparable salaries go up, why it's
consistent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They will be looking at ours and then we
will be in the hole next year!
MR. ZEISEL. You're perfectly right.
In analyzing those
industries where institutional wage adjustments remain [to be made],
they did tend to be characterized--in industries that were under very
substantial pressure--by market pressure of one sort of another.
There are other sectors, for example petroleum, where a wage
adjustment apparently occurred which was in line with the kinds of
inflationary wage increases that have been occurring in recent years.
But we expect spillover effects from this [pressure].
It creates an
atmosphere in which bargaining is done against standards that are less
inflationary than in the past. And we feel this will have an effect.
In addition, of course, we have had a cost-of-living pattern recently
that has been somewhat less inflationary; it has been rising somewhat
less rapidly. That has a feedback effect as well.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I'd like to offer a thesis. As I see
the data, the services sector part of the economy is likely to
continue to be characterized by relatively high wage settlements and
prices. The divergence in the price trend between the services sector
and the rest of the economy in the last year is remarkable.
In fact,
in the second half of 1981, prices of services went up again at a 10
percent rate whereas [other] prices continued to come down.

2/1-2/82

MR. ZEISEL. That's generally true of wages as well.
They
have held up really quite well in the services sector. We feel that
market considerations will be operating there; that is, the generally
slack product and services markets and relatively slow growth in real
income will be operating to damp prices somewhat.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They don't seem to operate very well in
that sector. Governor Wallich.
MR. WALLICH. Aren't we somewhat in a minority in regard to a
I see that outside
hopeful outlook for inflation in '83 and beyond?
models we review seem to feel that in '83 inflation will pick up again
with recovery. I look at our own alternative long-run strategies and
the easy strategy, number 2, has inflation virtually leveling off in
'84.
It still goes down in '83.
Now, is all this due simply to
differences in assumptions on monetary policy or are there more real
sector things built into these estimates?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I'm not sure.
We have not examined
We have a running tally of four
outside forecasts in detail.
commercial forecasters and, in looking at those, I would judge that
monetary policy differences have a great deal to do with that. A mean
of four commercial services has M1 growth of something like 6-1/2
percent in 1982 and 5-3/4 to 6 percent in 1983. That's two years of
really quite a bit more money growth as compared to the Board's
numbers.
In addition, they have alternative fiscal policies. The net
result is that they have a much stronger recovery in activity; they
have something like a 4 percent rate of increase in real GNP in 1983
So, all of those things do
compared to our forecast of 2-1/4 percent.
Relative
And you're quite correct:
have an impact on the price side.
to outside forecasts, we have a fairly optimistic price projection.
MR. WALLICH.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. To pick up on your comment, Mr. Chairman, I did
get the impression as we went through the chart show and discussed the
outlook [at the Board briefing] this morning that this is not a
forecast that emphasizes the negative. Everything's possible, but you
have a really remarkable decline, as the Chairman said, in
compensation per hour.
It could occur.
But, as you know, it's toward
I must say that
the extreme of what one might think could happen.
your output per hour forecast strikes me as being pretty strong, given
the fact that there won't be much recovery in the economy under your
projection. As a matter of fact, for the period from the latter half
of 1982 to 1983 you have the longest sustained increase in output per
hour that we've had since 1977.
When you look at prices relative to
unit labor costs on the next page, the price index goes down nicely,
mirroring the decline in unit labor costs.
There apparently isn't
anything that occurs in food or anything else that tends to [push]
prices up.
On the real side of the economy, it seems to me that you have
an extraordinarily optimistic projection for plant and equipment
[spending] given the capacity utilization chart shown and also the
financial factors that are on the page previous to that.
And finally,
you have consumption really doing pretty well.
Apparently, none of

2/1-2/82

the alleged effects of cuts in tax rates is working in terms of
stimulating savings.
So, therefore, consumption remains high relative
to after-tax income.
The general impression I get is that this is a
pretty upbeat forecast that you're giving us, under the circumstances.
Would you like to comment on that?
MR. KICHLINE.
employed or not!
MR. CORRIGAN.

Yes.

It depends in part on whether you're

Is that a personal reference?

MR. KICHLINE. Not yet!
In any event, you're quite correct
that, looking at the assumptions we have, we do foresee some real
growth.
It's small relative to past cycles, but it's an extraordinary
period, given our monetary assumptions.
We have what I believe to be
a realistic price forecast, given the assumptions, and I view that as
quite optimistic.
I think something very important is happening on
the price side, and 1982 is a key year.
I'm fairly optimistic on the
price outlook. There very clearly are downside risks in the forecast.
Mike pointed to some on the financial side; things can go wrong.
Jerry pointed to business fixed investment, which is a sector where
there are clear downside risks.
I would only say that we are sure to
be surprised by some bobbles in the numbers over the two-year time
horizon that we're forecasting.
But on average, this is our best
view, given the assumptions, and I think it's realistic.
MR. PARTEE. Well, as a matter of personal preference, would
you say that there are more downside risks or upside risks in your
projections?

MR. KICHLINE. Given the assumptions, I think there are more
downside risks, particularly in the shorter term.
MR. PARTEE.

That's my impression too.

MR. SCHULTZ. Can we pursue that for just a minute?
I
believe it is of some importance to think about the possibility of a
real shock, a break of some kind.
It is difficult for me at this
point in time to see a single domestic shock to the system--the kind
of thing that really sends a big tremor through the system--of the
size of Penn Central in '70 or Bank Herstatt in '74.
If International
Harvester or if Chrysler goes [belly up], I don't think those would
create that kind of shock in the system. The paper market seems to be
in so much better shape. Now, if Ford goes, that would give us
considerably more to be concerned about.
One worries in the
international area about all the East European loans and about the
condition of the German banks.
And yet whenever one asks the question
the answer always is that [the German authorities] would keep any
major German banks from going under. They may have a problem.
So, it
certainly is worthwhile to think about where the shocks could be.
We
had, what--about 43,000 corporate bankruptcies in 1981?
It seems
clear that the number is going to be larger [this] year.
The order of
magnitude is very difficult to forecast, but one would think that the
erosion of those balance sheets would cause more difficulties.
However, it doesn't seem logical that that would provide a shock to
the system of the kind that a single traumatic event would. Or would
Do you think that the number of bankruptcies
you disagree with that?

2/1-2/82

could reach such proportions that it could provide major problems to
the financial system?
I don't think
Oh, I think it clearly could.
MR. KICHLINE.
that's the most likely forecast one would want to run with at this
I very much agree with your assessment early on that the
time.
failure of Chrysler or of International Harvester probably wouldn't
provide the kind of shockwaves that a large corporate bankruptcy might
Things
I wouldn't rule that out.
if it were totally unanticipated.
that are unanticipated are precisely that; we can't predict them.
What we do know from looking at some of the individual cases as well
as the aggregate numbers is that a large number of corporations appear
to be [financially] strained. And part of the outcome, in fact,
If cash flows were to erode or
hinges on what happens to the economy.
stay depressed for a longer period of time than we have in our
forecast, then those pressures would tend to build.
In the numbers you cited on corporate bankruptcies are a lot
of smaller enterprises that have gone out of business.
Some of that
is related to the federal bankruptcy laws and it can be a misleading
guide as to the pressures on the system. But our perception is that
there are many corporations, and probably individuals, that over the
next year or two could find themselves under severe financial strain
given the nature of this forecast.
MR. BOEHNE. Just to add to what you were talking about,
Fred, I agree that it's hard to see the sequence of events or the big
But I must say that in recent
shock that would cause a real bust.
weeks I've heard the term "depression" used by businessmen and
It just keeps coming up.
ordinary people more than I can ever recall.
It's not that it's on everybody's lips, but the term or the concept
seems to be bubbling up more than I would have expected.
MR. FORD.
It has a lot to do with the FDR television show.
It has been on every channel and everybody is reading about it or
looking at it every night.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, but that was just a few days ago.

MR. BOEHNE.

That was just a few days ago.

I'm talking

about-MR. BLACK. We always hear more of these things when the
economy is near the bottom.
MR. SCHULTZ. Are you hearing as much of that as you did in
I'm not, but maybe it's because I still
late 1974 and early 1975?
only get a parochial point of view.
MR. BOEHNE. No, I wouldn't say it's more. But I just get
Are we in a depression or are we going into a
asked the question:
I have found the frequency of that question picking up in
depression?
the last few weeks.
MR. KEEHN. I think there's more comment along that line,
Fred, than there has been before. When you stop to think about it,
It was a tremendous shock, but
Penn Central was an isolated incident.
it did occur all by itself. Herstatt, while a tremendous shock,

2/1-2/82

occurred all by itself. But a whole series of companies now are
moving toward this line, along with the S&Ls.
One does worry that the
clock is running on all these companies and that if there isn't some
relief soon, it could begin to get ahead of itself and a lot could
occur all of a sudden.
MR. FORD. May I ask what the staff does know on that
subject?
I have the same feeling impressionistically--that there are
two or three of the major airlines, a substantial number of thrifts,
Chrysler,-SPEAKER(?).

International Harvester.

MR. FORD.
Yes, at least two of the major farm machinery
manufacturers.
So right there, just based on impressions, I can come
up with over a half dozen big corporations.
But has anyone looked at
the so-called raw z-scores, the predictors of bankruptcy, as to
whether the actual number of firms that in all probability are close
to bankruptcy is rising sharply or-MR. KICHLINE.
MR. FORD.

I'm not aware of that.

Mike or--

Would that be interesting do you think, Mike?

MR. PRELL. Well, I don't know how large and how reliable the
current data base is that we have access to.
I know much of the
individual firm data that are available are dated and not very
reliable.
But it might well be worth looking at.
Of course, as you
mentioned, there are large companies in the agricultural machinery
business and strings of suppliers to the automobile industry as well
as strings of suppliers in the aerospace industry who are affected,
given that commercial aviation is off.
So, there may be hard times
for many industries.
What is different about this period versus 1974
is that we have very high real rates of interest as best we can
measure them. And that does have an eroding effect on corporate cash
flows.
I think that's one of the fundamental differences in the
picture now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Well, the thing that troubles me most in your
forecast is the level of unemployment.
There is very little progress
made during the period of the next couple years. With the
supplemental unemployment benefits starting to disappear and with the
situation in the states being worse than projected--I think you get
your totals because of Alaska and Texas, which are in very strong
positions--we have a widespread absence of support for the [affected]
population group, in light of the reduction in some of the federal
programs in this area. And I think the FDR [television series] is not
helping us much in terms of a background on that.
I sense in the
labor movement and in the political movement a stirring that I don't
think is going to let this thing grind out in the kind of sequence
that we see.
Then supplement that with further bankruptcies in some
of these sectors, and it seems to me that we haven't factored into
this [forecast] a scenario that could be quite explosive. This level
of unemployment is quite different than in previous [recessions] in
terms of the hard core element. And we're removing support [by
scaling down] some of the programs that perform the cushioning effects

2/1-2/82

there.
So, I think there is more explosiveness in these numbers than
is apparent in the actual figures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. May I ask if, as I take it, this chart show is
correlated with the projections in the Bluebook?
It is.
There's
something very interesting in the chart of long-range projections that
I think is wonderful, but I don't understand how it can happen. That
is, on strategy 2 you have the fastest money growth associated with
the lowest interest rates and the highest inflation. How did that
work out?
Do you see what I mean?
On the strategy 2 you have the
highest inflation with the highest money growth, which I would expect.
But then you also somehow get the lowest interest rates out of it;
that's the part that puzzles me. How would you explain that?
MR. PRELL. Well, there are lags in these relationships, of
course. And within the time period, in essence we're getting a
movement down the demand for money curve.
There is more money and
people hold it only at lower interest rates.
So, within this time
span, that does hold interest rates down. And that also produces the
stronger performance of the economy, the tighter labor markets, and
the greater cost pressures on prices.
I think there is a clear
consistency. Now, perhaps someone who believes in rational
expectations and is of a monetarist persuasion would say:
Well, if we
know that the money stock is going to be growing 1-1/2 percentage
points faster forever, then under the base forecast here, interest
rates would adjust instantaneously. That's conceivably an outcome.
But as we model short-term interest rates primarily through a
transactions demand for money [approach], this is the outcome we get.
MR. WALLICH.
Could I pick up on that?
We often find
ourselves saying that we cannot control interest rates except maybe
very temporarily at the short end. And here we see that apparently
we're supposed to be able to bring down Treasury bill rates for three
years and make that stick. I find it hard to see the consistency of
what one finds oneself saying about the difficulty of providing
interest rate relief and these numbers here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You get out of the model what the model
says.
And what the model says is the more money, the lower the
interest rates.
about
rates
until
rates

MR. KICHLINE.
In the short run.
I would say you can argue
the lag because if we had 1985 on the chart, you'd find interest
under that strategy rising sharply. And maybe it wouldn't take
1985.
But that very strategy would provide higher interest
in the long run than any of the other strategies.
MR. PARTEE.

Is that really true?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It wouldn't equilibrate?

Unless you provide more money.

MR. PARTEE. I'm struck by the fact that your chart show has
real GNP relative to potential dropping to the lowest level since
1960.
That is a fairly long time period. If you were to raise that
level relative to potential by a point or two--from 91 to 92 or 93--I
wouldn't think it would do an awful lot for inflation or interest

2/1-2/82

rates because that would only produce a somewhat
since 1960 in the GNP relative to potential.

[higher]

lowest level

MR. KICHLINE. All I can say is that the way this model
works, as I think many others do, is that if you raise the money
stock, it just takes a matter of time--and one can quibble about the
time--but over the longer run, it's reflected in prices and not
output.
MR. PRELL. You can see that just in that table for '83 and
'84 on the high money alternative. The 5-1/2 percent does have a
bottoming out of the bill rate in the second year.
It's a perceptibly
different pattern from the others.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
I'd just like to ask Jim a question on these
fiscal policy assumptions.
In the Bluebook, of course, a discrete
range of alternatives was set forth--strategies one, two, and three,
depending on whether we follow the high end, the midpoint, or the low
end of the specified monetary growth ranges.
On the fiscal policy
side, Jim, I wouldn't know of more plausible assumptions to make than
those you have made here.
But having said that, how the federal
budget will really turn out is in my view one of the big uncertainties
now. I'm just wondering whether you experimented with any alternative
scenarios on the budget and how sensitive real growth, the
unemployment rate, and inflation are to different scenarios.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, we did, and we had so many alternatives
that it was a question of which one to present or what to talk about.
It was a real problem. We did try something that was a much tighter
fiscal policy by getting rid of the 1983 personal tax cut, for
example, and the 1985 indexing.
We stripped that out and assumed more
expenditure cuts, and in that process we found that in 1983 when the
stimulus of the budget was taken away, output dropped and the
unemployment rate rose.
That was the short-run effect; but the longrun effect gives you a much better posture with much lower interest
rates and a better inflation performance. There is this output cost
in the short run but that fiscal alternative of a tighter posture does
in fact provide a good deal of relief on the interest rate front,
according to the model, and does provide opportunities over the longer
run for improved inflation performance.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. How much relief for interest rates do
you get in your model with a tighter fiscal policy?
MR. KICHLINE.
With this fiscal alternative and the
judgmental money assumptions, the model reduced the bill rate in 1983
by some 2-1/2 percentage points; the bill rate was a little under 10
percent versus 12-1/2 percent.
So, it's 250-300 basis points.
But I
must say that was a package of about $50 billion on the tax and
expenditure sides.
It's a big fiscal change from what we have here.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. KICHLINE.

This was with no change in monetary policy?
That's

correct.

2/1-2/82

MS. TEETERS.
You didn't postulate that if we had a
fiscal policy we might have a more--

[tighter]

MR. KICHLINE.
Yes, we did.
Fiscal alternative
[unintelligible] higher money.
In 1983, we'd get a 6-1/2 percent bill
rate instead of 12-1/2 percent.
One can get all sorts of things, but
that was an outcome that at least in the first 3 years produces a much
better performance on most of the variables you might be interested
in.
Then it begins to get worse as you go out further in time.
MS. TEETERS.
Does that give you an increase in business
fixed investment and housing and so forth?
It must.
MR. KICHLINE.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
What are you assuming here on the budget?
You're assuming a higher level of expenditures than the Administration
is going to project by a considerable margin, right?
MR. KICHLINE.
I presume so.
Those numbers were still being
changed, I am told, even as of this last weekend.
I really lost track
several weeks ago.
I think we are higher because of the economy as
well as-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
That's what I was going to ask.
is the economy and how much is a difference in [the fiscal
assumptions]?

How much

MR. KICHLINE.
Well, in fiscal '83, they have an unemployment
rate of around 8 percent or so and we have a little over 9 percent;
that alone probably is worth roughly $30 billion on the deficit.
Also, I'm told that for fiscal '83 they have something like $15 to $20
billion of tax raising measures and $30 billion of expenditure
reductions, and we've taken about half on those sorts of things.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
to propose?
MR. KICHLINE.

You've taken half of what you expect them

Correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
That's probably as good a guess as
any because they certainly don't expect to get all of that out of the
Congress.
MR. WALLICH.
Jim, isn't your model in a sense vitiated by
the fact that you have data going way back into the '50s when
inflation wasn't very important but fairly sizable actions were taken
both to curb inflation and to get the economy going.
So, you have a
history of large actions, large swings in the economy, and modest
reactions on inflation.
The model then gives you these same answers
for the present period when it would seem to me that large swings in
the economy would also have large effects on inflation.
MR. KICHLINE.
Well, I think that's possible.
When talking
about long-run forecasts I'd be very cautious simply because for most
of the very important variables we're out of the range of historical
experience.
So, I wouldn't disagree with that.

2/1-2/82

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find it interesting that the
interest rate projections in the bond market that are consistent with
your GNP scenario show virtually no change.
[The bond rate] is
projected to be between 15 and 16 percent over a 2-year period.
What
does that say about inflationary expectations and investors affecting
the bond market at a time when you're showing such a sharp drop in
actual inflation?
How do you tie this whole thing together? Are you
in effect saying that bond market investors are going to continue to
have a fairly high level of inflationary expectations notwithstanding
the major progress that you're assuming in '83 and '84?
MR. SCHULTZ.
[in their forecast].

But think of the deficit that they're assuming

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I'm not disagreeing.
be sure that I understand what the man said.

I just want to

MR. KICHLINE.
I think that's right.
Our forecast would be
one of continued high or, in fact, rising real rates given that we
have inflation coming down.
So you'd have to be thinking in terms of
disbelievers in the market; that's certainly a possible way of
reconciling these differences.
MR. PARTEE. You're talking about real rates building to 10
percent or thereabouts, aren't you?
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, as Governor Wallich would say, before

taxes-MR. PARTEE.

Just a little on the economy--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That is.

if there is any tax left!

MR. BALLES.
Another question on your tighter fiscal policy
assumption:
How did that translate, if you did this, with Mike
Prell's chart on the Treasury borrowings and the percent of total
funds raised?
The chart shows that percentage shooting up to 40
percent by 1983.
Would we get any significant relief under that
tighter scenario from the crowding-out phenomenon that I'm quite
afraid of?
MR. KICHLINE. The borrowing that we have with that tighter
alternative would drop about $45 billion, which is about 10 percent of
total funds raised.
So it would make a substantial difference in
terms of the federal borrowing as a share of total funds available.
MR. CORRIGAN. Let me pick up, John, if I may, on the point
that Tony started to get at.
I think there's a natural coincidence of
conversation about the downside phenomenon here, but this real/nominal
interest rate issue strikes me as something that really may cut the
other way, even if it's only in the realm of possibility. As I look
at all of the numbers here, basically, you have nominal interest rates
unchanged between 1981 out to 1983.
And that's true whether it's
mortgage rates or bill rates.
But at the same time, you do have in
that time frame a very sharp change in the measured rate of inflation,
ending up with 5.7 percent or something like that in 1983.
My
question is:
Isn't it at least conceivable, everything else equal,
that you could end up with quite different nominal interest rates,

2/1-2/82

-11-

In Mike's
particularly when you're also talking about higher savings?
flow-of-funds tables, I must say I am struck by the fact that even
with the deficits the way you have them, total funds raised as a
percentage of GNP is down fairly sharply from where it was as recently
as 1980.
Now, I wouldn't project it, but isn't there clearly some
[possibility that], if things worked a little differently, we could be
looking at something much more favorable in terms of nominal and real
interest rates?
One is that,
MR. PRELL. I'd make a couple of observations.
of course, that outcome on flows is the outcome of supply and demand.
And one of the things holding that flow down is our basic
interpretation of the monetary target and the constraint it places on
the supply of funds.
The other thing is that, indeed, if one adheres
to this policy and sees the progress on the inflation front and a
slowing of all the underlying indicators of inflationary trends, then
one might anticipate some improvement in nominal interest rates
reflecting a decreased inflation premium. We've been cautious in
that.
Given the short-term interest rates we see as in essence
clearing the money market, we've been hesitant to put in a big drop in
long rates at the same time that short rates are pretty much stable
and at some points higher than they are now. It's just totally
against all history to have a pronounced drop in long rates when short
But it's not inconceivable in
rates are under this kind of pressure.
this kind of environment.
MR. FORD. Well, if I may, again on the same question that
the rest are asking:
If you do calculations on trends in real rates
and compare them under the three strategies--strategy 1 being the one
that I assume starts with 4 percent growth--the way it seems to work
out is that by 1984 under strategy 3, which is really tight money, the
real rate of interest is 8.6 percent versus 3.1 percent under the most
expansionary monetary policy. And if you give any credence at all to
the expectations notion, it would seem to me that after 3 years in a
row of tight money and dramatic reductions in inflation down to 3
percent, the real rate of interest would be smaller under that
strategy than the others--certainly not 3 times as high as it is under
strategy 2 by 1984.
MR. PRELL. Well, this is a short-term rate of interest. And
I don't think there's any clear evidence that as one models the demand
for money one can find clearly a separate influence of the expected
inflation rate.
In essence, the nominal interest rate captures the
opportunity cost of holding cash balances and, therefore, there's not
an obvious place for inflation expectations per se to enter into that.
But the farther out you get on the maturity spectrum, the more
plausible it becomes that this kind of inflation expectations effect
will have a significant impact.
MR. FORD.
In other words, if instead of just the T-bill
rates shown here you also had shown, say, rates on 5- or 10-year notes
or bonds, the apparent inconsistency there would be less apparent.
That is, you could have the [lowest] long-term rates under the
tightest monetary policy.
MR. PRELL. Not necessarily, using a traditional model.
That
probably would tend to show rising long-term rates because short-term
rates are rising.

2/1-2/82

-12-

MR. FORD.
or 10-year rate?

Does your model put out a long-term rate or a 5-

MR. PRELL. It [does use a long-term rate], but it has not
been especially reliable. That's one of the reasons we have not used
it very much.
In fact, it has been underpredicting long rates over
the past year.
MR. CORRIGAN.

You have mortgage rates on there.

MR. BOEHNE. Getting at this real rate effect:
Don't you
have to trade off the effects of the inflationary expectations, which
have become commonplace, versus the demand effect that comes from this
very large deficit?
It seems to me that it's the demand side that is
driving up the real rate and more than offsetting the positive effects
you're getting from inflationary expectations.
MR. KICHLINE. That's right. And I wanted to mention that I
think it's both the federal side as well as the private sector.
On
these tight money alternatives, essentially the economy very much
wants to grow more rapidly in nominal terms than monetary policy is
permitting it.
And it's that kind of squeeze in the short end that is
driving these rates up.
So, I'd say it's both the federal government
sector as well as the private sector; even though we have a fairly
sluggish private sector, in our view there are still demands that
would be satisfied at these rate levels.
And you need those sorts of
rates to restrain the economy over this time horizon.
MS. TEETERS. You still have a fairly substantial shift in
the demand for money in 1982, don't you?
MR. KICHLINE.
MS. TEETERS.

How does that compare to what happened in 1981?

MR. KICHLINE.
MR. PRELL.

Well, 1981 is bordering on 6 percent, I guess.

About 5-3/4 percent.

MR. KICHLINE.
MR. PRELL.

We have assumed about 2-1/4 percent.

Yes.

And we have greater drift in later quarters.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me, notwithstanding the
rapid decline in the actual rate of inflation that you are projecting,
that inflationary expectations will stay high for two reasons:
(1)
the short-term volatility of rates; and (2) as two years go by, if we
stay at 9 percent unemployment and very depressed housing conditions,
etc., notwithstanding the progress on inflation, there will be less
and less patience with that situation in the political arena.
If you
add to that some changes in the election in '82 or changes in the
polls of public opinion, then I think there is going to be pressure
for reversing some of the spending cuts.
On the other hand, there may
be some willingness to do something on the revenue side, so I'm not
sure what the net effect on the deficit would be.
But I don't see any
realistic scenario that assumes that the country will simply stay with
this situation for two years, notwithstanding the very attractive
drops in the rate of inflation. I don't know what follows from that

2/1-2/82

because there are so many different possibilities as to what form the
reaction would take.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we had very little in the way of
differences in the forecast for '82, although a slight difference in
quarter-to-quarter performance. The main difference we had was the
With the
one that Jerry elaborated on more than anyone else.
projected decline in inflation, I think rates have to come down more
than what we see projected here. And on the point that Mike Prell
developed a while ago:
If long-term rates did come down, I would
expect short-term rates also to follow as people use the proceeds of
that long-term borrowing to liquidate some of their short-term debt.
So, our guess would be that we are underestimating the amount of real
growth and overestimating the amount of unemployment that we would
have in '83.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

On that happy note, Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think one of the answers to why real
rates are so high is contained in one of the charts that the staff had
I don't happen to have
in its briefing [to the Board] this morning.
it with me, but it showed the components of GNP and the trends in
It had consumption going up like [a
those components over time.
rocket] to 65 percent [of GNP], the highest ratio since 1948; it had
defense expenditures going up from something like 4 percent to 6
percent, as I remember the numbers, and investment dropping out of
bed.
In effect, what is happening is that when we have a fiscal
policy that stimulates consumption and is designed to increase defense
expenditures, real interest rates have to go high enough to hold down
the rate of business fixed investment to the point where it will fit
If you look at the
within the monetary growth assumptions provided.
numbers for monetary growth and nominal GNP, you find that strategy
one provides for an increase in velocity of roughly 4 percent in 1982,
3 percent in 1983, and 3.8 percent in 1984; it's 3.3 percent on
And what has to happen, if we're going to get a better
average.
economic performance than what the staff has provided here, is that we
have to get awfully lucky and have another one of those big downward
That may happen, but I think the staff is
shifts in money demand.
quite right in saying one can't be sure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying anything different--in an
elegant way--than that the deficit is pushing interest rates higher?
It looks at it in a different way.
MR. GRAMLEY.
when we have a combination of--

It says

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you're going to get those same
velocity shifts regardless of what the deficit is, on one theory
anyway. Well, you get it at lower interest rates.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I wouldn't subscribe to that theory at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
lower interest rates.

Well, you get the same velocity but at

2/1-2/82

-14-

MR. GRAMLEY. I don't subscribe to the theory that you get
the same nominal GNP no matter what fiscal policy does.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
unemployment, too.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. GRAMLEY.

You get a lower nominal GNP; you get more

That's right.
A lower nominal GNP with a smaller deficit,

right.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And you get lower

[employment]

and less

growth.

growth.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Yes.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. GRAMLEY.

You get more unemployment and somewhat less

In the short run.
In the short run.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But you'll get an economy--

Why is it only in the short run?

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, over the long run--and by long run I mean
over the next 20 years--if you believe that prices are sufficiently
flexible, then the real GNP will be related to productivity and real
resource use.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Eventually prices will go up, too.

MR. PARTEE.
I guess what you're saying is that that big hunk
of 42 percent of the demand for funds is not interest sensitive at
all.
Therefore, you have to force the real rate up on the residual in
order to keep the total down to the point that it fits within your
monetary assumption.
MR. BLACK. To the extent that inflation comes down, that
nominal rate does not have to go up as high.
MR. CORRIGAN. But Chuck, under that argument, if you didn't
have the 42 percent, you could end up with the best of both worlds in
the sense that all credit demands were interest sensitive and the real
economy could be stronger even though you had lower deficits.
MR. PARTEE.
Well, the first effect would be lower GNP
because you have the reduced federal spending; but the second effect
would be the impact lower interest rates would have on expanding total
demands.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have any comments?
full is the strategic oil reserve these days, Mr. Truman?
MR. TRUMAN.

I don't know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. TRUMAN.
that figure.

How

My memory is that it's about--

How much are we putting in it now?

We're putting in about--.

Let's see, I do have

-15-

2/1-2/82

MR. SCHULTZ.
We were putting in 100,000
And then didn't they raise it?

[barrels]

a day.

Well, it was moved up, I think, to 1/4 million
MR. TRUMAN.
barrels a day.
If you hold on a minute, I'll tell you what they did
Last year it was 340,000 barrels per day on
last year, at least.
We have
And that was high relative to the previous periods.
average.
in the forecast something only on the order of a little over 100,000
They put a lot in over the last three quarters.
barrels per day.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You have it going down.

I think that is
The rate of fill has gone down.
MR. TRUMAN.
one of those things that is locked up in the budget financing
It's no more certain than some of these
situation with Mr. Stockman.
other factors.
MR.

SCHULTZ.

MR. TRUMAN.

Is

120 billion?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. SCHULTZ.

120 billion what they're trying for?

No.

I mean million.

As of the middle of 1980, it was 91 million
MR. TRUMAN.
barrels and they've been putting more in at the rate of about 100,000
[per day]--I'd have to multiply that out--for the past two years.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This last compensation figure--I keep
Is that the third quarter or
staring at Mr. Zeisel--you have plotted:
the fourth quarter?
MR. ZEISEL.

The last

real figure would be the fourth

quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR.

SCHULTZ.

MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. ZEISEL.

Was

The fourth quarter.
it 5.7 percent in the

This is year-over-year

fourth quarter?

as the chart reads?

Yes.

MR. SCHULTZ.
What was that figure for compensation in the
It was pretty
fourth quarter--5.7 percent or something like that?
low.

for
and

MR. KICHLINE.
For total private business it was 5.7 percent;
total private business for the full year 1981 it was 9.3 percent,
that was down a percentage point from the year earlier.

Why was
I never did get to ask the question.
MR. SCHULTZ.
it so low?
I recognize that there's a lot of volatility in those
Do
quarterly figures, but that 5.7 percent did seem to be quite low.
you think that's an aberration or was that indeed indicative of some
real progress?

2/1-2/82

MR. ZEISEL.
certain amount of--

-16-

I would think it's an aberration.

There's a

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
For the first three quarters, the
average earnings per hour figure was coming way down while the
compensation index was not.
And then finally in the fourth quarter,
there was this delayed parallel trend movement in the compensation
index. For the first 9 months of the year, as I remember, we had a
significant drop in average earnings that we did not have in
compensation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a couple of minutes [on recent
developments in the aggregates], since it bears upon what people think
about the long run--or at least what I do.
Although I don't know the
answer on what has been going on in the money supply in the last 2 or
3 months, maybe you can say something, Mr. Axilrod, in terms of the
composition and the surveying that your people have been doing and so
forth. Then let's get comments from around the table on how everyone
is looking at this.
MR. AXILROD.
Well, so far as we could tell, in the last 2 or
3 months we have had this very sharp run-up in the money supply, which
partly was expected, given interest rates, and partly unexpected.
I
can't divide it very easily between the expected and unexpected parts,
but I would point out, as many of you have heard, of course, that we
have had a fairly sharp turnaround in all of the components of money;
but in particular the turnaround in other checkable deposits seems to
be correlated with a turnaround in savings deposits.
For example, the
savings deposit component of M2 declined over the 6-month period from
April to October '81 at about a 21 percent annual rate at a time when
other checkable deposits were growing at around a 15 percent annual
rate.
I picked that period because that is after the bulk of the
shifting into other checkable deposits was finished in the first 4
months of the year.
Since October--in the last 3 months--savings
deposits on the new seasonals have increased at a 12 percent annual
rate, compared with this 21 percent decline, and other checkable
deposits have moved from a 15 percent annual rate of increase to a 53
percent annual rate of increase. At the same time, of course, demand
deposits have turned around.
They had been declining at a 6 percent
annual rate and are now expanding at a 6-1/2 percent rate through
January.
But the bulk of that expansion in January occurred in the
first week and is now ending, whereas the expansion in other checkable
deposits has remained strong through the balance of January.
So, I
think the demand deposit expansion is working its way out whereas as
yet we have not seen the NOW account and savings deposit expansion
working its way out.
We've tried to investigate the various reasons for the
increase in savings and in demand deposits. We have surveyed the
banks and we have not gotten very satisfactory replies.
In my view
some of it is related to nonconsumption, just savings resulting from a
failure to consume [and funds] flowing into the easiest alternatives
for a while--demand deposits, NOW accounts, and savings deposits.
Some of it is related to actual financial uncertainties. We see that
in time certificates; small time certificate growth slowed very
noticeably in December and January, and that money is being placed
elsewhere, at least temporarily, in more protected forms. And we have
heard bits and pieces of evidence that corporate demand deposits were

2/1-2/82

rising toward year-end and early in the year, partly for corporate
window-dressing and partly for compensation balances. However, those
were bits and pieces of evidence and they were not very clear-cut.
This rapid expansion has tended to exhaust much of the growth
for the year [allowed for] in the tentative targets, as the Committee
can see by observing chart 1, following page 11 in the Bluebook. That
range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent is plotted from the actual level for
As you can see, the January
M1 in the fourth quarter of 1981.
expansion has brought growth well above the range; growth is well
In effect, much of
above the parallel dashed lines [unintelligible].
the expansion for the year has been used up.
It is quite possible
that we could get negative numbers in February and March. As the
Bluebook points out, we had that in 1981 following the April bulge at
a time when short rates rose very sharply. And that has occurred on
But absent such a sharp drop, the
rare occasions at other times.
amount of monetary expansion [that could occur] over the balance of
the year is relatively limited [if money growth is to be] within the
tentative range adopted by the Committee. That, of course, Mr.
Chairman, brings up questions about the range and its basing and
whether it should be raised.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't quite want to get to those
[issues] now. But, obviously, what you think is going to happen in
the next few months makes quite a difference in how you look at a lot
of things. Everybody has been looking at this to some extent. We
have this phenomenon of big NOW accounts in particular, although other
We don't even know whether the seasonals
things are mixed in with it.
are any good, and they may well not be. Does anybody feel that they
have any stronger insights into what is going on here? Mr. Morris.
MR. MORRIS.

I may have a feeble one.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We want a strong one.

MR. MORRIS.
I think one of our problems is the assumption
that we made at the last meeting--that the adjustment to NOW accounts
The New England data lead me to suspect that
nationally was over.
that may not be the case--New England being the only section [of the
I looked it up to see if we have
country] with mature NOW accounts.
They have been quite
had any bulge in NOW accounts and we have not.
flat.
So, that at least is a little evidence that perhaps the problem
is that the national NOW account adjustment is going to take longer
than we had assumed.
MS. TEETERS.

Do your back data show anything on--

MR. AXILROD.

The data we got show that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pursue that for a second as a
possible explanation. My understanding was that very few of you, if
any, found much of the explanation in the opening of new accounts
instead of [an increase in] existing accounts.
Is that true?
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
existing accounts going up.

This was all

[accounted for by]

-18-

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There seems to be a little inconsistency
with that explanation, but that's an interesting phenomenon.
MR. MORRIS.
Well,
thought it might be because
should feel more secure and
accounts than people in the

maybe it's not the right explanation.
I
it's not clear to me why New Englanders
not need to put more money into NOW
rest of the country.

MS. TEETERS.
In the past have you had increases in NOW
accounts in the first part of January?
You've had NOW accounts for
what, five years now?
MR. MORRIS.

They go back to the middle of 1972.

MS. TEETERS.
jump in January?
MR. MORRIS.

But do you show in those early years a sudden
No, I don't think so.

MR. RICE.
Did your demand deposits increase along with the
rest of the country?
MR. MORRIS.
MR. RICE.

Yes, our demand deposits were up.
Have they fallen off recently?

MR. MORRIS.
I haven't seen [data for]
they apparently have fallen off nationally.

the latest week when

MR. BOEHNE.
The demand deposit [increases]
the corporate side, not the personal side.
accounts?

have been more on

MR. PARTEE.
What kind of seasonal do you have on the NOW
Are you using your own seasonal because you have this--?

MR. MORRIS.
We've just been comparing our nonseasonally
adjusted data to the national-MR. PARTEE.

Unadjusted data, I see.

MR. MORRIS.

The unadjusted data.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Well, I don't really have any answer, Mr.
Chairman.
I do have a couple of questions that I thought I might try
on Steve.
We couldn't find any good reasons for this explosion we've
had in NOW accounts in the Twelfth District. Our banks weren't very
helpful in throwing any light on why it has occurred; it just seems to
be happening. Maybe it goes back to the thought that you expressed;
it could be a belated reaction to interest rates having fallen late
last fall.
It could be increased liquidity preference in a period of
uncertainty. The more I mull over why it's going on, the more I just
have a hunch that we may be asking the wrong question in a sense.
I
recall a debate around this table some years ago in the mid-1970s--I
can't remember exactly when it was, perhaps 1976 or 1977--when we were
agonizing over an excessively rapid and unexpected rate of monetary
growth and why it was occurring.
I think it was Chairman Burns who

2/1-2/82

Well, it's very simple; we've been putting too
said at that time:
many reserves into the market. And I wonder if that isn't really the
basic answer when everything is said and done.
MR. AXILROD. Well, there's a correlation, obviously.
It
wouldn't be there if we hadn't put the reserves in. The question one
has to ask oneself is:
Why this much money at current interest rates
That is the question, mostly, that we are
or rising interest rates?
trying to answer.
Why has the demand for money at current interest
If we had somehow managed to get all those reserves
rates expanded?
out and not permitted this much money in these NOW accounts and demand
deposits and currency, then it's our thought that, of course, interest
rates would have been a lot higher. So we'd have to ask if you'd
still be wanting to know the answer to the question at that point.
If
we had succeeded in doing that and had these high interest rates, you
would want to know why interest rates were so high in the middle of a
recession and we'd be trying to explain why the demand for money was
strong. That's what we're looking for, those kinds of explanations.
MR. BALLES. Well, taking the whole period of November
through January, Steve, when we had this very rapid growth, net, do
you have an impression of how much of it was due to changes in
Does that explain very much of it?
multiplier relationships?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'd have to go back and review. We tried
to [determine] the extent to which we might have been off on the
multiplier relationships that we put in the reserves to money path.
Of course, we change these each week as we get data, and with lagged
But the
reserve accounting in some sense we are always perfect on it.
I
current relationship doesn't mean anything and the lagged one does.
don't recall to what extent we've had to change them. We've made
considerable changes, but I don't recall that as being a big source of
error with the lagged reserve accounting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that explanation is that
we've been putting in reserves since July or so and it has only been
in November, December, and January that money growth suddenly took
off.
MR. BALLES.

It suddenly grabbed and the question is why.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. As you requested, we did a survey. And if it's
bad to contribute, then we're guilty, because our growth in the last
month has been distinctly above the [national] average both in demand
We've had a particularly
deposits and other checkable deposits.
strong kick in terms of percentage growth in NOW accounts, the area
that you expressed an interest in.
There was virtually no change in
I asked my staff to take a sample of the banks
ATS-type accounts.
around the District that were contributing particularly to this growth
above the trend growth for the whole nation and, like the others who
commented, we could not find any clear, simple, new explanation. The
facts we came up with were that virtually all of it was in existing
accounts--to address the possibility that you raised, Frank. We did
not see any surge in the number of new NOW account openings; growth
was in existing accounts.

2/1-2/82

MR. MORRIS.
Is there any evidence of higher minimum balances
being imposed now that might have led to a change?
MR. FORD. We didn't pick that up.
There's a drift higher.
Right now in our District there's very heavy competition among
[financial institutions] on pricing of all types of deposits,
particularly the IRAs.
And the terms and conditions for IRAs seem to
be getting more and more competitive from the consumer standpoint.
I
didn't check any trend on NOWs, but I haven't noticed it.
I just
don't know. So, we didn't get any strong indication of any surge in
new NOW account openings.
It's just the existing accounts that are
building up.
As far as the speculation as to why, a couple of bankers said
that they think people are holding off, waiting to see what develops
in IRAs, and are just parking money in these NOW accounts until they
figure out the best IRA deal, at which point they will switch to an
IRA. The IRA deals are still being unveiled in our District.
Another
explanation is the simple old one that people are just saving more and
spending less.
It seems consistent with other information we have.
There's nothing really exciting, though, on the demand deposit side;
we don't see anything particularly interesting there.
We looked at it
and considered it normal corporate window-dressing during this yearend period; nobody believes it's an unusual amount of corporate
window-dressing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos, as I remember, money growth
wasn't very big in your District.
It probably means you have better
monetary policy out there!
MR. ROOS.
I asked our staff to see if they could churn up
some figures that perhaps would explain not the IRA thing but why M1
acted as it did.
And they did come up with some interesting figures
that I'll be brief in touching on. The bottom line of the figures
they gave me indicated that we were somewhat slow in our willingness
to change our nonborrowed reserve path under certain circumstances.
They looked at four periods. One, for example, was the 3 weeks ending
August 19 and, Steve, let me see if I can explain what I'm trying to
say.
In those 3 weeks, the projected deficiency of total reserves
relative to path averaged about $152 million, according to our
records, and in that period we did not change our nonborrowed reserve
path nor did we change the discount rate.
The average in the 4 weeks
ending September 15--and this was when the aggregates were
undershooting--was about $244 million. The deficiency in the 3 weeks
ending October 7 was about $405 million. And in each of those
periods, if my staff's figures are correct, we apparently did not
change our nonborrowed reserve path nor did we change the discount
rate. Now, back in May of [last] year, when total reserves were
projected to be about $500 million above path, we increased the
discount rate and we reduced the supply of nonborrowed reserves by
about $375 million. And as a result of those actions, Ml began
declining immediately and we did avoid a continuation of that.
We, in
effect, interrupted the bulge that occurred then.
Is there any logic
in their conclusion, based on that type of evidence, that one of the
problems has been a problem of our not moving our nonborrowed reserves
as quickly as we should?

2/1-2/82

MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, maybe to put a little
perspective on this--I don't know about those figures but I'm sure
they're accurate--from September to December of [last] year the
Committee originally wanted M1-B growth, shift adjusted, of around 7
percent.
They changed it a bit in mid-course. By the time September
to December was over, we had [M1-B] growth on the order of 8-1/4
I haven't checked the most recent seasonal figures, but
percent.
these are the figures before they were adjusted. That's not far off
from what the Committee found perfectly acceptable and is probably on
the order of what the Committee would find generally acceptable given
what happened. What then occurred was that January growth was
unusually high, going into a period when the Committee wanted growth
It was made unusually high
to phase down into the longer-run range.
by a bulge in demand deposits early in the month, which I believe is
in process of working its way out, though not entirely. And it has
been maintained at a high rate by NOW accounts not quite working their
way out so far but, in fact, growing faster in January on average than
In light of all that and with total
in the preceding two months.
reserves running strong, of course, a downward adjustment of around
$190 million was made in the nonborrowed path midway through this
There's no way
period. We put additional pressure on the funds rate.
in a period as short as a month, given lagged reserve accounting or
possibly even given contemporaneous reserve accounting, to have gotten
that growth of 20 percent down to, say, 5 or 6 percent or whatever the
Committee would have felt comfortable with, short of a funds rate
moving up I would guess into the 27, 28 percent area, with
contemporaneous accounting. I made a theoretical calculation at one
point, which would not have changed the basic question that the
Chairman raised as to why money demand was so strong in this very
One would have had to answer that question either
short-run period.
way. But I think the actions taken with regard to the reserve path
were such as to work in a constraining direction.
In other words, that's the answer:
MR. ROOS.
withdrew reserves by about $190 million.
MR. AXILROD.

That you

Yes.

The excess of the total reserves was up in the
MR. ROOS.
$300 or $400 to $500 million area. You say that if you had pulled all
of those out, it would have had a dramatic upward influence on
interest rates. And that's the reason you didn't.
If we had pulled out $400 million, we would
MR. AXILROD.
have had more borrowing, of course. But all the research I've seen
suggests that to pull out $400 million of total reserves in a month-under contemporaneous reserve accounting, let's say, not under lagged
--we would have to reduce nonborrowed reserves by something like $3
billion because the banks are going to offset that with borrowing.
And if we reduced nonborrowed reserves by about $3 billion, the banks
would borrow $2.6 billion to get the total down $400 million, and
interest rates would go up extraordinarily high. That's how the
You might conceivably get
mechanism would work in the short run.
January down, assuming contemporaneous reserve accounting, but then
interest rates would be so high that February would be plunging
negative. Then interest rates would have to drop very sharply to
That's
induce banks to expand again and get the February growth up.
how the process seems to work.

2/1-2/82

MR. ROOS.
Steve, our experience in May, though, when we had
a similar bulge and when you did take strong action to reduce
nonborrowed reserves--I think by about $370 million, if my numbers are
correct--was that it did cause the fed funds rate temporarily to go to
about 19 percent, but then it receded, didn't it?
In other words, I
wonder if we are exaggerating the possible volatility of those fed
funds rates and whether we're not in the long pull affecting interest
rates more meaningfully than if we really bit the bullet.
MR. AXILROD. Well, in my judgment, President Roos, last
April that bulge probably would have come out to some degree without
our doing anything--that is, with interest rates unchanged. And the
rise in rates that occurred--because it was just [due to] temporary
factors--of course encouraged it to come out more.
It may even have
contributed to money running low for the rest of the month. So, I'm
not sure how the variability would have worked out in that respect.
You can make the case that you could get less variability in money
growth with less variability in interest rates if you examine these
things carefully through a different procedure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, we tried to look at this
question of the money supply both analytically and by relying on
anecdotal information as well. Let me just touch on each of these
briefly.
On the analytical side, we really looked at two things.
One
was the seasonal adjustment, and there I guess what we found is a bit
of good news and bad news. There was good news in the sense that
using a different procedure than X-11 one could point to a pattern of
weekly movements in January that is quite different from the one that
the official numbers suggest. Now, I don't mean to imply that one
method is better than the other.
But it really tends to underscore
how extremely volatile these seasonal factors are and how badly they
can lead us astray in a given period of time. The second thing we did
is probably more important. We tried to take a quick and dirty look
at this question of how the measured money supply responds to changes
in interest rates, recognizing that there are at least some people on
the staff--it's not many--who argue that if you go back and look at
declines in interest rates in the late summer and fall of 1981, maybe
what we have been seeing over the last 3 months isn't all that
unusual. We tried to look at that and found at least in a very
tentative way that perhaps more of what we've seen can in fact be
explained by declines in interest rates earlier on.
Indeed, while
this work is very tentative since it has been done in only about 8
days, it does suggest that the response in money to changes in
interest rates or shocks in the federal funds rate is a lot greater
than I thought possible.
And it may well argue that the problem isn't
so much too quick a response on the part of policy but the other way
around:
That the harder we hit the short-run blip in the money supply
by jiggling reserve paths or whatever the more we may be creating a
worse problem for ourselves a little further down the road in the
sense that by hitting it hard it builds in this perpetuating cycle
that we've seen a little of over the past 2-1/2 years or so.
Of
course, the argument could be made the other way as well.
I don't
know the answer yet, but certainly this work does suggest that more of
the increase in money than I thought possible can be explained, at
least by this exercise, by what happened to interest rates earlier.
And to my way of thinking that's not inconsistent with the argument

2/1-2/82

that we ought to respond more slowly rather than faster to some of
these temporary blips in the money supply.
But even under the best of circumstances, I don't think
either of those factors can fully explain the more recent developments
in January. And there we did try to develop some anecdotal
information. Certainly in our case we were able to find on the
business side patterns of window-dressing by large corporations that
involved larger amounts of money than both they and their bankers said
And that phenomenon was very
had been typical in earlier years.
short-lived, which of course is compatible with the idea of that big
bulge in business-type checking accounts in the first week with
On the household-type checking
washouts in the next two weeks.
In our
accounts, NOWs and so on, we really don't have much to add.
area, in terms of Frank's point, we too didn't see many new accounts.
It was all existing accounts. The bankers and others we talked to
basically made the argument that we have some kind of precautionary
phenomenon here, some of it related to the economy and unemployment,
some of it related to uncertainties about the interest rate outlook,
some of it maybe related to savings flows themselves, and some of it-at least in the case of our own employees in the Bank, based on a
little informal survey we did--related just to a desire to build up
larger balances to pay off bills incurred in December faster than they
might ordinarily do.
That's about it.
MR. AXILROD.
Mr. Chairman, President Corrigan mentioned the
effect of interest rates and I probably should point out to the
Committee that our monthly money market model, which is very often
wrong and is sometimes right, would have projected very sharp growth
in the money supply. That is one of the reasons we thought [M1] would
grow in November and December, way back when. And [the model] would
project that growth continuing on, given interest rate moves that had
already occurred, into January--but not at this rate--and February and
On the other hand, if you look at
March and petering out after that.
our quarterly model, it would suggest that the money growth we've
gotten in January is more than enough to finance the quarter's income,
given interest rates. And to get what it says we would have for the
quarter, then we would have to expect [M1 in] February and March to
That's just about what
drop at around a 13 or 14 percent annual rate.
So, the models tend to
the money model says it is going to increase.
give varying results.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We get explanations and counterexplanations for every phenomenon. Mr. Keehn.
MR. PARTEE. The only trouble is that we don't know if it's
temporary or permanent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Keehn.

That's right.

That's all I want to know.

MR. KEEHN.
In the surveys that we did with the banks in our
area, we were impressed by the consistency of the compensating balance
comment. Apparently corporations allowed their compensating balances
to fall during the latter part of the year. We were surprised by how
many banks commented on that and by how many companies apparently drew
on their lines of credit to build up their [cash] balances, even their
Secondly, IRAs have
compensating balances, over the year-end period.

2/1-2/82

been receiving a lot of publicity in the Midwest, and one institution
that we talked with in January has accumulated $60 million in IRA
accounts. They conjectured that if they were any sample at all, this
is going to be a very big program. And there has been a lot of money
parked in various NOW accounts waiting for the IRA programs.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KEEHN.
MS. TEETERS.

They had $60 million already in the IRAs?

One bank had $60 million in IRA accounts.
Which ones have the--

MR. SCHULTZ.
That was First Chicago, though, and that was
because they put that 2-point bonus on, wasn't it?
MR. KEEHN. Yes, and they are a very major savings bank, so
they have a big base.
The program was very big and they conjecture
that if they are symptomatic--and perhaps [their flows] are heavier
than most--there are a lot of people who had money saved up waiting
for January and the opportunity to begin to open these IRAs.
MR. SCHULTZ.
Did you find any other bank that had that kind
of percentage increase?
MR. KEEHN.

No, this was heavier than typical.

MR. BOEHNE.
In fact, most of our bankers were rather
disappointed about the IRAs.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Anything else, Si?

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
The only thing I can add that hasn't been said
about the bulge in January is that we've found one of our large banks
engaged in what I would call a reverse sweep--a sweeping out of
interest-bearing assets as of [December] 31st and into demand deposits
and then out of demand deposits back [into interest-bearing assets] in
January. This was to take advantage of the Pennsylvania personal tax
law on personal assets, and it was done this year more than any other
year for some reason. And because of a long holiday weekend, this did
cause an unusual bulge in demand deposits during that week of January
6th.
That's just local in Pennsylvania, but perhaps other states have
personal property tax laws that may have contributed to the bulge.
MS. TEETERS.
the date is in March?
MR. PARTEE.
MR. KEEHN.
MS. TEETERS.

Doesn't Illinois have something like that but
It's April 1.
They used to but they've done away with it.
They've done away with that?

MR. BOEHNE. Just one other comment.
There may be some
flight from other checkable deposits. As I left the Bank this morning
the lines were unusually long for the Treasury auction.
The lobby was
just full of people.
MR. PARTEE.

One of their last chances to get a free one!

-25-

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our survey didn't turn
But there
up anything that hasn't already been noted to this point.
is a bit of work that was done by our staff that may be of some
It relates to a float factor that might be being
interest to you.
It's principally perhaps a reporting problem.
[double] counted.
Since we started charging for servicing checks, more and more of the
checks have been collected through the correspondent system rather
And we have some indication that
than through the Federal Reserve.
That
there's a bit of double counting in the correspondent system.
is, the collecting bank will record the checks in "due from" balances
as opposed to checks in the process of collection. As a result it's a
double counting in the demand deposit that they pass along to the
customer and thus could affect M1, for example. And that would be
magnified in terms of the checks drawn on NOW accounts simply because
they start from a very small base.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

This is known as the Auerbach theory.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, he started at our Bank.
name it something else.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I'd prefer to

Irv Auerbach?

MR. PARTEE.

This is a different Auerbach.

MR. GUFFEY.

Oh, okay.

The
MR. AXILROD. We looked into that, President Guffey.
Bach Committee a long time ago recommended an alternative measure of
the money supply which grosses up the demand deposits side by adding
"due to" [balances] and grosses up the subtraction by adding "due
Presumably, then, we would not have this bias you
from" [balances].
are talking about. We keep track of that series seasonally adjusted
and compare it with our current series seasonally adjusted. And they
have shown similar patterns; that is, they both showed this sharp
bulge in early January and they showed subsequent weeks about the
same. Actually, the alternative series showed larger growth
So,
unadjusted in November and December than did the present series.
We are well aware that
we have used that as the basis for checking.
It's there, but it could
this bias could arise and could get worse.
get worse. But it doesn't seem to be getting worse and making our
present measure more biased in terms of growth rates at the moment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Another theory dashed, presumably.

Mr.

Balles.
Well, in searching for possible answers here, I
MR. BALLES.
In each of the
have another question I'd like to raise with Steve.
two years, Steve--in 1980 and 1981--when we have had a convergence of
the federal funds rate and the discount rate, and the funds rate even
has gotten down to a bit below the discount rate, that was followed by
some very rapid monetary expansion, as we all know. With the benefit
of hindsight, looking back on that period between the November and
December FOMC meetings last year, total reserves were almost on
target. They were a little above. But the nonborrowed reserve level
was raised quite sharply, by almost $200 million. And that

2/1-2/82

undoubtedly had the effect of keeping the interest rates down because
if we hadn't raised that, borrowings would have gone up.
And I
suspect, as I look back on our feelings in December, that most of us
would have viewed that as not a very opportune time to be letting the
federal funds rate rise, which would have been the result if we had
not increased the nonborrowed reserve path. I'm just wondering if
maybe we aren't falling back into the trap of intuitively trying to
keep interest rates down at a time when it seems logical to do that
and then paying the price for it later on when we get this delayed
reaction of sudden very sharp expansions in monetary growth, as we got
in both '80 and '81.
A companion question would be:
With respect to
that major study of our operating procedures that you headed up, as I
recall there was a recommendation for more frequent changes in the
discount rate. As I look back on it, we haven't really done that
Well, those are just a couple of thoughts as to some deeper
either.
factors that might be at work here in these sudden surges of monetary
growth.
I'd like your reaction to that.
MR. AXILROD.
Well, there is nothing in any evidence we've
ever looked at or in any experience certainly in the past two or three
years and earlier that says that money demand is naturally smooth. In
this large an economy, it seems to me that money demand is naturally
volatile. And we're annualizing, and the numbers look terrible. A
1.5 percent change in a level looks like 20 percent because we're
annualizing it.
We probably shouldn't be annualizing those monthly
figures.
It gives a wrong impression.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.

Hear, hear!

Yes, that's a point.

MR. AXILROD.
So, I don't think that policy is ever going to
get away from the question of:
Do you want to try for a smooth growth
path with what every bit of evidence anyone has dug up says will be
sharp variations in interest rates--and you can only do that with
contemporaneous reserve accounting, if then--or are you going to try
for a path over a more sustained period of time and live with the
short-run variations in money demand that seem to be built into the
kind of economy we have? We have this huge economy with several
hundreds of billions of dollars of money flowing daily, some of which
happens to sit in demand deposits on top of which--and I don't mean
this to sound preachy--we now have a narrow money supply that has
savings in it.
They are not being paid a very high rate, but they are
what many people consider savings.
When these NOW accounts were
installed, people in many cases just transferred what were savings
accounts into NOW accounts.
So, for whatever reason, people decided
to increase their savings, and it flowed into these accounts. You and
I know they have very low rates of interest, but many people feel they
are safe.
And people are willing to take that [low rate] for a very
short period.
So, we have a mix that is changing over time, making it
even more complicated to evaluate money movements, which to me means
that one has to have a longer-term horizon to come to some judgment.
Sure, we could begin to constrain it faster by letting interest rates
rise faster, lowering nonborrowed reserves faster, raising the
discount rate.
But that again gets into areas of policy judgment for
the Committee as to whether it wishes to put those kinds of interest
rate variations in the economy or live with the potential for a little
more money volatility or whatever trade-offs it can think of there.

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd be more impressed by these theories
about reserves and all the rest if the increase in the money supply
were not so divergent between the different components of the money
supply. That doesn't prove that it's wrong, but it's just a little
suspicious when the NOW accounts are going up at the same time the
And that's a sharp change in trend.
savings accounts are going up.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could we get an explanation from
Steve on the seasonal adjustment?
As I understand it, starting in '82
we're doing a common seasonal adjustment for demand deposits and NOW
accounts.
Is that correct?
MR. AXILROD. We're trying. That's right. Last year we did
some very complicated [calculations] by assuming that part of the NOW
accounts were demand deposits and part of them were savings deposits.
In concept, that's right, but it strikes me as a distinction that is
going to be impossible to [judge] in terms of whether [the actual
proportion] is 2/3 or 3/4 or 1/2.
So, we felt that as time went on we
should simply begin constructing a seasonal for total demand and NOW
accounts based on the movement of the total and that whatever
difference there is in the movement, with the increasing composition
of NOW accounts, it gradually will be worked out in the seasonals.
And that's how we have begun to proceed.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

May I ask you a hypothetical

question?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ten years from now we'll have a good

seasonal!
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My hypothetical question is:
If you
would apply to the NOW accounts the same seasonal correction that you
applied to the savings, would you have had less of a bulge in January?
MR. AXILROD.
I'd have to look up the answer to that.
check that out.
I don't know, but I doubt it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We'll

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. This is purely a technical change, but a couple of
banks with the largest increases in NOWs closed out their ATS
accounts, so it was just a transfer.
And that would still-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, but that would have been in the same

total.
MR. WINN.
[The total would]
the NOW account category-MR. AXILROD.
MR. BLACK.
phased in.

still be the same, but just for

Yes, it's an OCD.
Well, the

[reserve]

requirements were not yet

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments on this or
any other insights, which seem to add up to not very much?
Did you
want to comment?

2/1-2/82

-28-

MR. BOYKIN.
I was just going to say, but I really can't add
anything, that we tested the corporate balance sheet question and the
representations were that there was nothing unusual, just the
traditional [window-dressing].
The only thing I did find, which I
don't think has any bearing at all, was a relatively small bank that
had a very large upswing.
Inquiring about it, we were told it was
simply the liquidation of a very sizable estate; temporarily several
million dollars were put in, but the funds were being distributed.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
Well, the only thing I'd like to add,
since it has been mentioned and I think it's significant, is that the
bulk of Christmas sales came much later this year than in previous
years.
And the bad weather in January also caused extremely weak
sales.
Credit card companies with whom we checked emphasized that the
sales were very weak.
That tends to give some logical common sense
support to the view of various bankers that these are temporary
increases.
Add to that the precautionary reasons that call for
somewhat larger balances.
I don't have any hard proof, but my feeling
is that a substantial part of this increase will be washed out over a
period of time.
I do not believe that we could begin to attribute
such a sharp increase to economic reasons--advance indicators of a
very strong economic recovery.
There may be many factors involved;
there probably are to get such a sharp increase.
But I think it's
hard to conclude that a substantial part is not temporary.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, before we leave this, I wonder if I
could ask Steve if he could give us any further explanation on the
projection for the week of February 3rd, which shows a further rise.
New York shows a decline from the previous week on M1 and you show a
pretty significant increase there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Neither of

That's right;

them knows anything!

that's pure projection.

MR. BLACK.
Well, if that's his answer, then that leads me to
my final point.
No matter how much we rationalize, I don't think we
can explain all this away.
And if we can't explain it away, we had
better assume that there's some reality to it and act accordingly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Well, there's a certain reality in that
some of it seems to have gone up quite rapidly, whatever seasonal
adjustment factor one uses.
But what is causing this is interesting,
not just because of the short-run significance.
If we knew the
answer, it would tell us something about whether money is too tight or
not.
We have a system where the money supply balloons every time
interest rates go [down] to 11 or 12 percent in the short run and the
economy goes into the tank; when interest rates are 11 and 12 percent,
we have problems at some point and it says the money supply is too
low.
I don't know how or when we will arrive at that conclusion, and
I'm not arriving at it now, but I think that's what we are discussing
here under the cover of what causes a blip--or more than a blip--in
the short run.
Does the economy want more money than we are allowing
in order to grow in line, let's say, with the projections that Mr.
Kichline presented?
You are saying, okay, the economy will make that
projection anyway even with the interest rates that we have.
Now,

2/1-2/82

that remains to be seen, but it all bears on where the targets should
be.
And I don't think we have much evidence to reach any sweeping
conclusions on that point at this time.
The worst kind of result would be if people had a bigger
liquidity preference in some sense, particularly in NOW accounts, than
we assume and interest rates were to go [down] to 10 percent [and
those accounts] began ballooning. What would they do if rates went to
8 percent even if the economy were shooting way down? And, of course,
we would have this problem with NOW account interest rates at 5-1/2
percent.
If you dream of that day when interest rates get down to
5-1/2 percent, the money supply is going to balloon. There is no
question about it the way we now define [the money supply] with that
[NOW account] component in there. Now, when we reach that point--and
I would have thought we were nowhere near it with market interest
rates at 10, 11, 12 percent, but surely that would happen some day if
interest rates got low enough--are we going to say there's an enormous
increase in NOW accounts because we are now under the NOW account
ceiling and that's an excuse for tightening up money with an
unemployment rate of 32 percent, just to exaggerate a bit?
We'd have
a problem, right?
I don't think we're there and I don't mean to
suggest that.
But what is behind these forces is an interesting area
about which we do not know enough.
I'm struck by the lack of the
explanation that I would have thought would be the most common one:
That a lot of money is being parked temporarily not because interest
rates are necessarily so low, but just because of uncertainty about
interest rates and the fear--or not necessarily the fear on the part
of the depositors but the hope--that rates will go up again and people
could make a better deal on a money market certificate or something a
month or two from now than they could in December or January.
I hear
a little anecdotal evidence myself on that point, but I won't-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

That's all part of the temporary

thing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that much background and
elucidation or lack thereof, [we will proceed].
We had a discussion
of long-range targets at the last meeting.
I guess it's appropriate
now to ask whether anybody has changed his or her mind or wants to
make further observations on that point.
MR. BALLES.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I have had a few second
thoughts since both our July '81 meeting and also our preliminary
discussion of this in December. And at the risk of being a
troublemaker, I do feel fairly strongly that we ought to bite the
bullet on the inconsistencies among the M1, M2, and M3 ranges,
specifically by increasing the M2 range by a full percentage point
over what it was last year and the M3 range by a point and a half.
I've set forth in a brief memo the rationale and the advantages that
would have, along with upping a bit the lower end of the M1 range.
With your permission, I would like to have it distributed so that
people could see what it's all about and see what the ranges look
like.
But that is the bottom line.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You don't want to do anything about Ml?

MR. BALLES. Yes, I'm suggesting, for reasons set forth in
this very brief memo, that we ought to increase the lower end of the

2/1-2/82

[tentative M1] range to 3 percent instead of 2-1/2 percent, keeping
the upper end at 5-1/2 percent.
Very briefly, the reason is that, as
I looked back to last July, we hadn't known about the weakness now
emerging in the economy.
We had expected--I think more than we do
now--the prospect of a further downward shift in the demand for money,
and that downward shift seems to have slowed pretty considerably.
Whether it will resume and go on in 1982 remains to be seen. But
given the fact that we now are in a fairly serious recession that we
hadn't really anticipated in July, and given the fact that the demand
for money is no longer shifting downward as much--and maybe not at
all--as compared to last summer, and given the fact that a 2-1/2
percent lower band would seem pretty Draconian right in the middle of
a recession in terms of public announcement effects, I believe we
would be better advised to use a 3 to 5-1/2 percent range.
That would
have the virtue of being uniform across the board; the upper end, the
lower end, and the midpoint [of the M1 range] would all be 1/2 point
lower than our 1981 range.
And this would continue some credibility
in our longer-run anti-inflation approach of gradually cranking down
the growth ranges every year.
If we were to hit the midpoint of the 3
to 5-1/2 percent range that I'm proposing, which is only a
presumption, the growth would be 4-1/4 percent.
And 4-1/4 percent is
a pretty healthy decline from the actual observed M1-B growth of 5
percent last year.
So, although I supported the tentative decision
last July for the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range, I've changed my mind
for reasons I've just set forth on M1.
On M2, it gets a little more complicated. The composition of
the M2 and M3 aggregates, in terms of the portion that is sensitive to
interest rates, has really changed dramatically, as we all know. My
staff calculates that as recently as the end of 1978 assets yielding
money market rates of interest comprised only 8 percent of M2 and that
that's up to 45 percent now. The interest-sensitive portion of M3 at
the end of 1978 was calculated at 21 percent and it's now up to 54
percent. We knew this last year, but we didn't really do anything
about it.
We decided for reasons the Committee felt satisfied with-and I didn't object because I thought it was a good idea--to keep
those ranges down more or less for public reaction purposes. We
didn't want to be in the posture of raising the M2 and M3 ranges.
But
as we all know, the actual [growth] last year, certainly not to my
surprise, was considerably over the ranges that we set forth for the
year.
A final word-M2 did not go considerably over
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2?
the range last year.
[It was over by] 0.3 of a percentage point as I
recall.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, it was 0.4 percent.
Only a half point over.

MR. BALLES.
It just seems to me--if we're willing to bite
the bullet in terms of what might be a reaction among the general
public or superficial observers of our policy that we are going to be
accelerating monetary growth--that a range for M2 of 7 to 10 percent
versus the 6 to 9 percent we've been talking about tentatively and a
range of 8 to 11 percent for M3 instead of the 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent
we've been talking about would simply be more realistic.
I personally

2/1-2/82

-31-

consider the likelihood of strong inflows into these interestsensitive broader aggregates to be great in a year when there's a good
prospect, as we've heard from the staff today, that interest rates are
I'd just
going to continue at pretty high levels throughout the year.
hate to get in the middle of the year and then-I'm not sure I understand the reasoning
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
You say there is a lot more interesthere.
Let me explore it.
sensitive money; that is certainly true.
Why do you expect that to be
more pronounced in terms of influence this year than last year?
MR. BALLES.
I don't necessarily think it will be more
pronounced, Paul, but I don't think it could be diminished any in
terms of rates of increase in these aggregates.
Some of us brought
If the staff forecast is
this point up at the meeting the last time.
correct, as I understand it, it implies a continuation of pretty high
interest rates throughout 1982.
And that's why I would just-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do you expect could happen?
If interest rates come down, what would happen to M2 all else equal?
Or if they went up, what would happen to M2, all other things equal?
Why is there a presumption one way or the other?
MR. BALLES.
The presumption is that M2 and M3 in the future
will continue to be more sensitive to interest rates than they were
under the old definition.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
interest rates go down.
MR. BALLES.

Yes, the growth rate would go down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.
interest sensitive.

That means that M2 will go down if

Why?

What's the mechanism?

Well, it's simply the huge proportion that is

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
put their money?

Yes, but where else are people going to

MR. BALLES.
Well, there are some things that aren't in
either M2 or M3 such as Treasury securities.
SPEAKER(?).

But those rates are--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what if those rates go down just like
the certificate rates go down?
Now, if people put funds in long-term
securities, that will make a difference.
But I-MS. TEETERS.
[unintelligible].

They could move them out just for

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But that's also in M2.

MR. BLACK. One can make a clear case if you think about
rising rates back when we had ceilings on some of those items in M2--

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I know what happened when there were
ceilings on them, but the point is made that there aren't ceilings.
don't know what will happen now.

I

MR. BLACK. Well, it clearly slowed down then and there are
no ceilings now, so--

ceilings,
fell.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question that when we had
[M2 growth] slowed when rates rose and increased when rates

MR. BLACK.

Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
opposite now.

It's not clear to me why it would do the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We did not find when we analyzed M2
into those components that pay market rates and those that are below
market rates--and we analyzed the movements in these two [components]
--that we could arrive at any better correlation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know what the answer to this
question is.
We have had 3 years since the market rate issue became
important and in all of those 3 years the velocity change in M2 has
been very close to zero.
That's not a long enough period of time to
conclude too much on that, but the evidence that we have since that
time is zero [velocity change].
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And last year [M2 growth] was 9
percent, virtually the same. Nominal GNP was also up in a range of
about 9.4 or 9.3 percent, as compared to M2.
And I noticed that
everybody's projections were in the 8 to 9 percent range for nominal
GNP.
If that's one to two percent real growth, plus about 7 percent
inflation, then one would think that we would come comfortably within
the tentative M2 targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, can the staff help here?
Is there
any evidence that they know about that says what the interest
sensitivity on M2 is now?
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's getting much less sensitive to
market rates.
So, we wouldn't think it's [going to be] as volatile as
[those] rates change.
The conclusion we came to in evaluating this
was that with more and more instruments in M2 having market rates, for
any given reserve target aimed at we'd get more rate movement in
holding money growth and prompter income movements, so to speak. That
is, you hold if there's a money demand of so much-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. TEETERS.

You're losing me.

Yes.

MR. AXILROD. There is a money demand of so much. Market
rates tend to rise.
In the old days, people would shift out of M2type instruments into market instruments. Now, instead of that
happening, the institutions mark up the offering rates so people don't
shift out.
So, if you insist on holding [M2 growth down], then
interest rates rise even more on both instruments until income falls

2/1-2/82

back to where you're producing only enough savings to be consistent
with your monetary targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you saying:
going to reflect nominal GNP, period?
MR. AXILROD.

that M2 is just

In the limit, not totally.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But just to state the converse of that,
would you or would you not make a presumption other than through the
effect of interest rates on GNP that the interest rate level itself is
going to affect M2?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think the institutions will move
So, I think it would
their rates quite as fast as the market rates.
have some effect.
MS. TEETERS.

But it will have an effect of making M1 and M2

diverge?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

Reducing it.

When the rates rise.

MS. TEETERS.
statutory ceilings.

When the

[market]

rates rise over and above the

MR. FORD. When they drop, you would expect them to converge,
wouldn't you, because of this other phenomenon?
MS. TEETERS.

Not at the level the NOWs are at.

MR. PRELL.
Mr. Chairman, I think Steve has addressed the
question, "If you're trying to control M2, what would happen?"
To
focus on the simpler question--the interest elasticity of M2--the work
we've done indicates that it still has a negative elasticity of a
minor dimension. When interest rates fall, it grows a little faster.
The redefinition, taking out the institutional money market funds,
should probably make it even less interest elastic because the lag in
the money fund yields stimulated this kind of shifting of funds by
institutions into M2 and out of M2.
So, we say there's a very small
negative elasticity on it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now you're saying there is a
very small negative elasticity; as near as we can say it's declining.
If I understand this correctly, that's the opposite of the presumption
that Mr. Balles is making.
MR. PRELL.

That's right.

MR. BALLES. Well, I'd like to ask you, Mike, you are taking
out the institution only money market funds but aren't you putting in
the retail RPs?
What about their elasticities?
MR. PRELL.
Well, as for the retail RPs, once again they
So, there are unlikely to be
carry a current market yield.
substitutions--a great shifting of funds from outside of M2 into M2-Our supposition at least has been that
when interest rates change.

2/1-2/82

most of the money in retail RPs has been diverted from small time
deposits.
Indeed, that's one of the rationales for putting retail RPs
into M2: they are a close substitute for those things that already
were in M2.
MR. BALLES. Coming back just for a minute to the facts, we
do know for a fact that M3 grew by 11.4 percent last year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M3, I think, is a different animal.
That
shows you how fast bank credit is going up and how much financing is
being pushed into banks, as one influence anyway. The more financing
that is pushed into the banks, the higher M3 will be.
If we didn't
expect much bond financing, we'd expect high M3 growth.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult to isolate
the structural changes as they're occurring now, operating with an
instrument that pretty much has market rates in it.
For example, I
would not argue that M1 was weak last year because in a sense M2 was
strong. There was a partial element of that but there was a downward
shift in the demand for M1, where people were taking money out of
currency and demand deposits and putting it into a lot of other
assets, some of which were in M2.
But that was a substitution that
didn't affect M2 itself. So actually, on the level of M1, the
downward adjustment in M1 that occurred was a structural change that
was evolving. When we get away from that structural change, it's
quite possible that M1 and M2 will move closer together as we are
projecting that they will this year.
We really have a slower growth
in the nontransactions component of M2 this year than last year,
largely because income is growing more slowly and we expect M1 to grow
a little more normally in relation to income than it did last year.
With that combination we still would have M2 slowing in this coming
year. We don't have a reason to think the nontransactions component
of M2 will grow substantially faster in 1982 than it did in 1981 with
a sharp slowing in income in prospect, regardless of the interest
rates that they're offering on those [deposits].
MR. CORRIGAN. Is that another way of saying, Steve, that you
view the midpoints of the tentative ranges for M1 and M2 for '82 as
consistent with each other in a structural sense?
MR. AXILROD. Yes. We have growth a little above the
midpoint for M2 but, rather than put our neck out on the line, I think
the safer way to put it is that it's a lot more consistent than it was
last year.
MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask one other definitional question?
I
saw the comment in the Bluebook about retail repos.
Has a decision
been made to take the IRAs out of M2?
MR. AXILROD. No.
We are just going to be getting the first
complete data at the end of February.
We may not make [the decision]
then.
MR. CORRIGAN.

in M2.

What about the ones that are already there?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we haven't done anything about the IRAs
We're waiting to see what we're dealing with.

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Just one more point on M2.

how strong a case one can make in practice because

I don't know

I don't know how

much of this is mostly individual money and how much of that would go
long term.

But if you have a shift

in preference

toward

longer-term

securities, then I would think M2 would be depressed somewhat or vice
versa.
MR. AXILROD.

[From]

the money market

funds they

can go into

bonds.
And if people really went out and bought
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know how
bonds--but not many individuals buy bonds anyway.
much else is in there that's not-MR. PRELL.
The more attractive time deposit instruments that
have been created will tend to limit that effect [on M2] in any event.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor

Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ.
Well, I argued last time for retaining the same
targets that we had adopted tentatively.
I want to come out the same
place, having gone through a [lengthy] thinking process in the
meantime because of the big jump [in monetary growth] that we got in
January.
Obviously, the question was why and one got very nervous
about whether these targets were going to allow us to have anything
like the leeway we might need.
So, I went through the process of
taking a long look at what would happen if we shifted the base:
Should we go to [the average for] December or even the end of December
or use November-December-January instead of October-November-December
and all that kind of thing?
I might tend to opt for some change in
the ranges for the aggregates if I had a little stronger feeling that
we knew precisely what all these relationships were.
But it does seem
that we have been a bit off in these from time to time in the past.
All of which seems to me to argue very strongly for a broad family of
aggregates and for some fairly wide ranges in each of the aggregates.
If I had to make a bet, I would bet that whatever we come out with
And, therefore, if I
we're going to miss something along the line.
felt it was really critical that we set these targets very precisely
and say that absolutely we're going to stay within these ranges for
the aggregates in every case, I might feel a little differently.
But
I have some considerable doubts on that score.
The other side of it
is:
What do we give up?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We may do that every now and then.

MR. SCHULTZ.
Well, there's no question about that.
That's a
different subject.
You know, there is some very good news.
This is
the last time I'm going to be with you and it's very clear that when I
came on board things got worse and now that I'm leaving things are
bound to get better!
So you're going to do better this time than you
have before.
But even under those circumstances, it strikes me that
there are some costs in making any changes.
How big are those costs?
I have talked to a lot of market participants and I can't find a
single market participant who doesn't feel that it's going to have
They will argue differently
some impact if we change these targets.
on how big that impact is going to be.
But I think that's a vital
question here.
It's not only what we do that's critical but what
people think we're doing and what we say we're doing, and that's going

-36-

2/1-2/82

to make a heck of a big difference through the year.
So, I would be
perfectly willing to see us take our time getting back to the targets.
I have a feeling that we probably are going to end up in the upper
part of the range for M1, but I really do believe that if we change
those targets, there is going to be a cost and I urge you to think
carefully about that cost.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I have several things on my mind.
One is
that I think we're in a real box and we have a way to go with the
monetary aggregates in 1982, M1 in particular. Given what has
happened so far, if we were to reach the midpoint of the range by the
fourth quarter, we would end up permitting an increase in M1 of all of
1.55 percent from January to November. And I just don't think we can
live with that.
With M2 I haven't made the calculation, but taking a
rough ruler and laying it out and comparing it with this 6 percent
growth triangle, to get to the midpoint must imply a growth of
something like 6-1/2 percent from January to November.
I don't think
we can live with that either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What did we have last time?

MR. GRAMLEY.
If we want to get to the midpoint of a 6 to 9
percent range, starting with where we are in January, a rough guess is
that it must be around 6-1/2 percent.
Have you made that calculation,
Steve?
MR. AXILROD.
about right.

No, but it doesn't

sound wrong.

It sounds

MR. GRAMLEY. Unless we're awfully lucky, I'm afraid those
growth rates are not going to permit the economy anything like the
kind of progress this year that the staff is projecting. We need to
think seriously about doing something that will give the economy some
breathing room. Also, I think this year we ought to start out giving
more weight to M2 than we have. We ought to express that publicly so
that the focus of attention is not all on M1 as it has tended to be
recently. And I think there's a way to rationalize John Balles'
suggestion that we raise the target range for M2 that's different from
the rationale he uses, and that is that the increasing interestsensitive component of M2 has probably raised the income elasticity of
demand for M2.
If you look back at history, the studies of demand for
M1 and demand for M2 have always come out that M2, the luxury good,
has an income elasticity that is bigger than 1 and M1 has an income
elasticity of considerably less than 1. The main reason was that M1
didn't have interest payments on it and M2 did.
But as more and more
assets that are interest sensitive are shifted into M2, the chances
are that its income elasticity has grown. And I [considered] the fact
that Fred Schultz has said we will have some adverse reaction in terms
of loss of credibility if we adjust our targets.
But I said at either
the last meeting or the previous one, I don't remember which, that I
think our credibility basically doesn't depend so much on these
targets and whether we stay within the ranges from one month to the
next as it does on the basic fact that we've been following a very
tough and tight monetary policy since October of 1979.
That is what
has gained us our credibility.
If we stick with that basic posture,
we will still have credibility.
I think we ought to give serious

2/1-2/82

thought to the suggestion of raising the M2 target range to 7 to 10
percent.
And I think we ought to go further than just raising the
I would prefer to do something like
bottom edge of the M1 target.
using a different base--starting out with the lower end of the range
for 1981 as the base figure rather than starting from the actual.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make just one observation on your
observation about how little room we'd have for M1 in particular to
grow between now and the end of the year if we're going to stick to
the midpoint.
Your arithmetic is undoubtedly correct.
It makes a big
difference what you assume will happen, let's say, in February or
March. If M1 comes down, we will have quite a different picture than
if it doesn't.
If it doesn't come down, it certainly will look as if
we are too tight by every evidence, but it's just hard to make that
judgment right now. That's where this explanation of the short run
gets pretty critical.
MR. GRAMLEY. Unfortunately, we have to make the judgment in
terms of what we decide for the long-run ranges.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We have to do something.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I would support John Balles and his
proposals.
I would prefer not to fiddle with the base because that's
going to be so hard to explain and so difficult to deal with.
I would
rather consider the possibility that M1 growth is going to be high in
the range because we had a shortfall of size last year that was just
being made up toward the very end of the year and into January.
I do
think, though, that the fact that we have had a shortfall and that we
obviously have a very weak economy is a pretty good reason for saying
that on reconsideration we think a number as low as 2-1/2 percent for
1982 would be too low, and therefore we're going to nudge the lower
end up to 3 percent and make the range 3 to 5-1/2 percent, which is
our typical 2-1/2 point range [for M1].
On M2, I do believe that there are things that have tended to
add to its growth relative to the economy over time. They keep
happening. We had a number of them last year.
Some, like the all
savers certificates, didn't really work out, though it could come back
this year if interest rates at some point rose to a high enough level.
Others involve considerable lead times and change gradually, such as
the IRAs and the Keoghs, some considerable part of which is going to
be showing up.
Maybe we can make some kind of adjustment for it but I
really don't think we're going to have the figures to adjust M2 by
taking out all IRA and Keogh accounts, which tend to be spread through
the deposit instruments in the banks; they are not just in one deposit
instrument.
That's the terrible problem, I believe. Then we have
things like the Treasury's proposal to start charging a fee [for
noncompetitive tenders] or to shut off altogether the lines of people
at the Federal Reserve Banks and at the main Treasury [building].
The
effect of that will tend to be--and it is intended--to push money into
deposits that are in M2 form rather than to open market instruments.
So, there is a whole series of these things.
It's not totally without
reflection in the numbers.
If you look back, you'll find that in 1980
nominal GNP rose 9.4 percent with a 9.1 percent growth in M2.
Then in
1981, GNP rose 9.3 percent with 9.4 percent M2 growth. There is 0.1
less GNP with a 0.3 larger increase in M2.
Most people are looking at
something in the area of 8-1/2 to 9 percent for nominal GNP growth

2/1-2/82

this year.
That certainly is where the whole focus of the range of
expectations for both voting presidents and nonvoting presidents and
Board members is.
And that suggests to me very strongly that we're
going to have an M2 growth of 9 percent or above, maybe 9-1/2 percent.
Therefore, I see no great reason for starting out with a range, which
is supposed to give us some flexibility, in which we expect to come in
at the very top right from the word go.
So, I think it would be best
to recognize that there has been a tendency for the kinds of
instruments included in M2 to increase in popularity and also a
tendency for the number to be high relative to our ranges and,
therefore, to say that we're raising the range.
And I think 7 to 10
percent is about right.
So, I guess for somewhat different reasons,
I'd come down with John.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I think what is happening to the variability of
money suggests that our ranges in a sense are narrower than this
variability. And the variability is also greater than the difference
between expansion and contraction in the economy, so that interest
rates really become the one meaningful check on what the aggregates
are doing. Another possible but not very reliable check would be to
say "Let's go to a single number for the target, which would be the
midpoint of what we've had so far."
Then we'd get rid of the problem
of having a wide target and still missing even that.
But the basic
problem is to make a decision as to whether this January number is
meaningful or not.
We do not have worthwhile guidance on that.
That
leads me to the conclusion that we ought to do something about the
base.
I listened to Chuck and I listened to Fred; I can see the
danger of manipulating these things.
I think it is perhaps less
dangerous to manipulate the base than to manipulate the ranges,
because we've always accepted base drift. We had upward base drift in
'80 and we're going to have downward base drift now if we're accepting
where we came out.
Therefore, I don't feel that the base is very
sacred.
I think there's something to be said for the Bluebook version
of basing it on the lower edge of the band that we had because that
was, after all, one end of our target. We're not going to have the
base drift that events gave us but we'll take advantage of that much.
That seems to me acceptable. Another acceptable rationale, it seems
to me, is to say we will go back to July of 1981 when we set these
targets and use where we thought we were then. We've shifted in a
probably fortuitous manner since then and if we go back to where we
set the tentative targets and reaffirm them on that basis, I think we
have the rationale. I looked at the possibility of going even further
back in order to eliminate past base drift, as it were.
If we go back
to late 1980 as a base, of course, we have to accept that we don't get
the benefit of the upward drift that occurred during 1980.
If we go
even further back to 1978 and follow all the midpoints of the various
ranges we've had, we are now within $100 million of the target.
It's
really quite a success.
MR. MORRIS.

There's nothing like compensating errors!

MR. WALLICH. Of all these various devices, the Bluebook
version strikes me as the most plausible. We do accept that something
has happened. We don't take it fully into account. We have a
reasonable rationale.
I think on that base we can probably live with

2/1-2/82

the [tentative] targets that we have and that's the [lesser]
sensitivity than having to face a change in these targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What Bluebook alternative are you talking

about?
MR. WALLICH. The Bluebook alternative for the short-term
Where is it?
ranges where the base takes off--.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

For a short-term target?

MR. AXILROD. There's a discussion in the Bluebook of
shifting the base, Mr. Chairman.
Which page is it?

MR. WALLICH.
MR. CORRIGAN.
MR. AXILROD.

There's a footnote on page 12.
There's a text discussion in paragraph 14.

I would be inclined to be sympathetic to that,
MR. PARTEE.
except that as I understand it we were targeting in terms of M1-B
shift adjusted.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you have to adjust M1 the same way. You
just take the difference--the amount of shift adjusted in that period.
MR. PARTEE.
I read that footnote on page 12 and that's what
led me not to want to do that.
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.
reasonable one.

It sounds too messy.
Yes.
The arithmetic is messy, but the concept is a

MR. FORD. Would you also shift to the lower end of the M2
I'm
band. Henry, to at least be consistent between M1 and M2?
serious: I'm not kidding.
MR. WALLICH.

That doesn't sound--

MR. FORD. How can you rationalize shifting M1 up from the
actuals to the bottom of the band unless you also do the same thing by
shifting [M2] on some end of the band?
MS. TEETERS.
SPEAKER(?).
MS. TEETERS.
relationship.

You ought to shoot to the top of the M2 band.
Oh,

come on!

Well, it's the same thing as widening the

MR. WALLICH. I don't think there's an absolute logic that we
have to do the same thing for the two aggregates, particularly when
they clearly have been moving in opposite directions.

2/1-2/82

MR. GRAMLEY.
If you want consistency, you follow Governor
Teeters' suggestion:
Use the upper end of the band for M2.
MS.
suggesting.

TEETERS.

MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. FORD.

That's exactly the same

thing that John is

The base drift.

When my turn comes up,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

I'll--

Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.
I want to align myself with Fred Schultz.
I
also am very impressed with the perception, based on what I'm hearing
from everyone I've talked to, that if we make any changes in the
ranges, it could be misinterpreted.
I would much prefer to see us
hold with the tentative ranges that we have set.
One thing that has a
little appeal to me--we're not sure what is happening right now and
you mentioned that things might look differently in March and April-is the thought that was expressed at the last meeting I think by Tony
Solomon, who made some reference to the midyear review.
That is an
opportunity to reassess and take a look.
It seems to me, if we're
going to make a change [in the 1982 ranges], that rather than doing it
now we ought to defer it for 4 or 5 months at least and we would have
more information on all these changes that are occurring.
Certainly,
we might have a better explanation of what is happening to the money
So, given my perception of how [a change] would be
supply.
interpreted, I would prefer to leave the tentative ranges and then
have some kind of caveat that we could make a fairly serious
[adjustment at our] midyear review.
MR. PARTEE.
We
seriously in January.

said at midyear that we would

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

look at it

Ford.

MR. FORD.
I have some sympathy with Fred's view, too, given
all that has been discussed, that we should stay basically with the
longer-run targets that we already set but [I would] pay a lot more
attention to trying to get back into the ranges on both if we can.
With regard to base drift, I'm very concerned about how this
discussion is going.
Look at the history of what we've done and think
back to last year's big debate about what to do about base drift.
It
has been suggested, if I understand Henry right, that we not only
change the way we handle base drift from last year by going to the
lower end of the M1 band instead of the actual [outcome] but that on
M2 we do yet another thing.
My feeling is that the market people will
take this to say that we're just fooling around so much that we're
purposely trying to manipulate the game so that it will come out the
way we want it.
If we go with the established procedure, as I
understand it, of not drifting the base a new way but the way it has
been drifting-MR. WALLICH.

Which is a bigger drift.

MR. FORD.
Yes, so?
If we stayed with it on M2, it probably
would solve the problem of having to adjust the M2 band upward because
we would be starting way up there and will in effect have incorporated

-41-

2/1-2/82

We'd be able to project the existing band
some of the past problems.
I think we will
The real problem comes on M1.
off the higher [base].
address that tomorrow morning when we get around to the question of
That's the place to
how fast we will try to get back into the band.
So, I would say, for the sake of the appearance
discuss that problem.
of consistency certainly and to avoid the appearance of purposely
manipulating the base drift issue, let's stick with the ranges that
were already announced and then concentrate tomorrow on trying to get
down to the question of how hard we should try to adjust to what has
happened.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I too have been around this a
lot of different ways, and basically I come out to the view that we
ought to maintain the targets that were adopted tentatively last July,
in part for the reasons that Governor Schultz articulated and for a
I wouldn't be allergic to trying to do something
few others as well.
with this base issue, but I've looked at that a number of ways and I'm
not sure how to do it in a way that doesn't add more confusion rather
I am still a little concerned that any change we make here
than less.
among the ranges that are being discussed is going to be perceived as
tinkering that won't materially influence where things come out
anyway. And I think we have to give some consideration one way or
another to changing the targets at a point in time when some people
are telling us to change them as well. To me at least all of those
things point to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Would you amplify that last comment?

MR. CORRIGAN. Basically, the way I read the newspapers and
things like that, the message that seems to be coming through both
from the Hill and the Administration is that it's time to change this
monetary policy in some [way].
The money supply has to be allowed to
grow faster and it will grow faster even with the existing targets.
But my point is that if we change the targets, the risk we run is a
little different than just the risk Governor Schultz was referring to.
I think we run the risk that credibility will be affected in a more
amplified way because of the perception that the Fed has buckled under
And that just elevates
again; they always have and they always will.
the concern that Governor Schultz spoke of.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You remind me--and I will insert this in
our consideration now, if you will permit me--that when I was
testifying before Mr. Reuss the other day he wanted me specifically to
bring to your attention his recommendation that the M1 band be made
the same as last year which was 3-1/2 to 6 percent. He wanted that
considered as a proposal from himself and maybe some of his
colleagues.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the kind of thing I had in mind
Now, I know it can cut either way in
when I mentioned this point.
terms of being responsive on the one hand or being whipsawed on the
other hand. As I look at it, particularly in the context of M1, which
is the measure most people seem to want to look at, no matter what we
do to the targets we're going to be looking at a rate of growth on a
comparable basis that is going to be above last year. Indeed, if we
ended up at the midpoint of the current range, M1 growth would be

2/1-2/82

roughly 2 percentage points above last year's growth even though it is
still within the tentative targets.
I do recognize, as I said, that
maybe something can be done with the base, although I'm not sure how
to do it.
Personally, I would have sympathy for the notion that maybe
M2 is a little incompatible with M1 or from a presentational point of
view maybe talking about an M1 range of 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
Just
changing the bottom and not changing anything else doesn't matter, and
I wouldn't fight that to death. But anything that comes across as a
systematic raising of these targets--raising them all, for example,
instead of maybe raising the bottom end of just one--will cause us to
run into some problems.
On this question of what growth is left for the [remainder of
the] year, I am very sensitive to that as well.
I would just observe
that all these lines in the Bluebook are drawn more or less on the
assumption that we will go through the year without having any
negative months.
I don't know when we're going to have them, whether
it will be February or July or whatever, but the one thing I am sure
of is that we will have some negative months. So, I don't think the
situation is quite as bleak as the pattern one gets just by drawing
those straight lines off of that January number.
In a nutshell, I'd
like to see us retain the targets either at or pretty close to where
they are.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Having established the preliminary targets that
we did last July, I'd be very reluctant to make a change at this time
unless there are good supportable reasons for so doing. And I'm
unpersuaded by what I've heard today that, with regard to M1, a change
would be in order.
It seems to me that we are in an environment where
absolutely everything we do is so carefully scrutinized that we'd have
to have very supportable reasons for making a change. A change upward
would be inappropriate, particularly given the economic forecast we
have for 1982.
Therefore, I'd be in favor of leaving the M1 target as
we had established it.
But with M2 it does seem to me that there are
some supportable reasons for a change, namely, that we did not come in
within that range last year and that from the figures that we have for
this year [an unchanged range] would be very tight at best. And I
think it would be too bad to go through the year having to explain
constantly why we are out of the range on M2.
Therefore, I would be
in favor of making a change upward with regard to that target to, say,
a 7 to 10 percent range, to give us a little room to operate.
MR. FORD.
MR. KEEHN.

What base would you go for?
Where we are now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have three points, probably none
of which will prevail.
The first is that I would raise the lower
limit of M1 to 3 percent and I would put the top at 5 percent.
I
think 2-1/2 percent is too low and I have long favored narrowing that
spread because I think doing so would give additional credibility to
what we say we're going to do.
But I sense that we'll go for 2-1/2 to
5-1/2 percent, so I would suggest that we ought to aim definitely at 4
percent regardless of which of those two routes we follow.
The second

2/1-2/82

point is that I wouldn't favor what the Bluebook called rebasing. I
had some sympathy for it back when we had overshot our targets, but
then I started trying to contemplate how difficult it would be to
explain to the market how an aggregate was going to grow at a certain
percentage rate from where it really wasn't at the moment and I
And now, since
decided that it was best just to adjust the rates.
we've come in on the low side in the case of M1, I think we'd really
Furthermore, with our
catch a lot of flak if we tried to do that.
shifting from M1-B to M1, which is going to be very difficult to
explain, if we had to explain rebasing on that, too, I just don't
think anybody would really understand what we're trying to do.
My
final point is that I'd really rather solve this problem of running
I realize we don't
over on M2 and M3 by not setting ranges for them.
know all we would like to know about M1, but I think we know more
about it than we do about M2 and M3.
So, I'd get rid of these
multiple targets and focus primarily on M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS.
I think it's important that we stick with our
present targets. If we were able to achieve precise gradations, I
would think that M1 should grow as in the strategy [2] scenario at
something like 5, 5-1/2 percent.
I'm not sure, with our present
procedures, that we can hit our targets anyway much less achieve
subtle differences between 4 and 5 percent.
I would agree with [Bob
Black] in that I'm not disturbed about [the behavior of] M2 or M3.
Except for the cosmetic aspect of it, the defensive end, I think we'd
clear the air by not setting M2 or M3 targets because they don't
affect output or prices as effectively as M1, and I think it would be
disastrous to start horsing around with the base again. People know
what we're doing; they watch us like hawks. And I think it's
important for us to say what we're going to do and then try our level
best to improve procedures to accomplish our targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS.
Well, my problem is that I'm not satisfied with
the forecast. If we stick to these targets, we end up with virtually
no growth for the fourth year in a row and unemployment of 9 percent
or above.
I think that's politically very dangerous. We're courting
a lot of trouble for the Congress, the Administration, and the
American people [if we try] to hold unemployment at 9-1/2 percent.
We
said we were going to review these targets. We set tentative targets
and that has turned out in my mind to be a major mistake because we
are setting targets for the subsequent year when we're right in the
midst of the formulation of fiscal policy for that year on the Hill.
And then we don't have the courage to change them.
I don't want to
play around with the base because I think that is too difficult to
explain.
We ought to look at this and ask:
What gives us an
acceptable level of real growth and some decline in the unemployment
rate next year?
And that leads me to say that we should go at least
to last year's M1 target of 3 to 6 percent.
The target proved
disastrous and we undershot it.
Instead of doing all this horsing
around with the base, we should [set the ranges] straightforwardly the
way John Balles has suggested and widen the difference between the M1
and M2 ranges, and then try to stay with that.
Even with 3 to 6

2/1-2/82

percent, if we come out at the upper limit, we are not going to have a
robust economy next year. But at least we might get some decline in
the unemployment rate and in interest rates and I think that's what
we're here for.
Our major responsibility is to provide a healthy
economy.
We are getting considerable forecasts, at least, of a
reduction in inflation; and if it turns out that we're wrong, maybe we
can change the ranges again in midyear and do it in an honest way
rather than just always have this problem of perception.
One of the
problems with sticking with the ranges that we have is that if we
don't come within them, then we have an enormous credibility problem
starting the end of the year.
We can push, but there's just so much
we can do with this.
Sooner or later we have to face up to whether we
made it within our ranges or we didn't.
We go into an enormous amount
of explanation to try to explain why we didn't.
We may push off that
credibility problem, but we don't avoid it.
So, I would suggest
raising the ranges on all of the aggregates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there is still a very
good chance that we will see in 1982 some of the downward shift in
demand for holding M1 that we saw in 1981, and I don't think we should
be mesmerized by a January bulge.
We also should not be the least bit
unhappy about coming in anywhere within the range and we shouldn't
even be thinking in terms of midpoints given the shifting nature of
these demands.
We may very well come in at the upper end of the M1
range if we don't get a significant or even partial repetition of what
we saw in 1981.
But I have no reason to assume that we won't get
that.
In addition to money moving into money market funds and the
substitution effect, we may also get a significant movement in the
development of automatic sweep accounts, which also will tend to
reduce the demand for M1 balances. Therefore, my instinct would be to
stay with the ranges because it's not clear to me that we have as
little room as the January bulge would indicate.
Not only is there
the possibility that part of it is temporary but there's also this
other point that I just made.
So, I'd be inclined to stick with [the
tentative ranges].
As far as M2 goes, even this last year I was a little unhappy
about the tightness of the M2 range.
I pretty much come out the way
Steve does in that I believe it's very likely that we are going to
have less of a problem coming within the 9 percent [upper limit],
although I agree with Chuck that we're probably likely to be at the
high end of that range. On the other hand, it wouldn't bother me at
all if we came out at the low end of one range and the high end of
another.
I think the midpoint stuff is absolutely nonsense in this
imprecise world we're living in.
So, on balance, if I were presenting the targets, I would
point out to the Congress and the country that we may very well come
in at the upper end of the range for M1, given the strong growth in
January, if that doesn't prove to be as temporary as it might be.
But
it's also true that if we get the kind of innovation and structural
changes that we got in 1981 in M1, we could very easily come in toward
the lower end of the range. And I think the M2 relationship to
nominal GNP is close enough; I don't think one can read too much from
that 0.3 percentage point movement.
It's still very close and,

2/1-2/82

therefore, it seems to me that we could come in on that.
why I would stay [with the tentative ranges].

So that's

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running late, but I think we are far
enough advanced here that we may as well get this preliminary goMr. Morris.
around out of the way.
MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I still feel that we're in a
period now where we can no longer measure transactions accounts. And
the problem, as Tony indicated, is going to get more difficult rather
If you look at what happened in
than less difficult in the future.
'81, we had a reasonably predictable performance in terms of M2, M3,
But the real outlier was M1;
and bank credit relative to nominal GNP.
the M1 number came in much lower than anyone would have forecast.
It's very clear from the earlier discussion at this very meeting that
So, I
we really don't understand what the devil is going on with M1.
still feel that we should abandon the M1 target and go with M2, M3,
Beyond that, we ought to take a fresh look at how
and bank credit.
we're managing monetary policy because I think this whole concept of a
transactions account, which is really the way the public focuses on
The monetary aggregates are obsolete.
what we're doing, is obsolete.
We have to get some new models on the floor or the Japanese are going
to take us over!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We seem to have contrasting views on what
Leave it alone or throw it out.
to do with M1:
MR. SCHULTZ. We ought to put Messrs. Morris and Roos in the
center of the table and let them go at it!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would agree with
those who have spoken about the uncertainty that might come about by
trying to rebase or to fool around otherwise with the numbers. As a
result, I come out on the side of taking the ranges as we set them in
July and trying to decide whether or not we want to increase or
Let me just say that it's
decrease those ranges, as the case may be.
striking to me that one month's money growth--which we have talked
about and the bulge that took place is totally unexplainable--has
prompted this Committee to talk for another hour and a half or so as
to how we should change the ranges for the period. That's a dramatic
change, it seems to me, from what we talked about just one month ago
at our December meeting. I mention that to make the point that
because of the uncertainty that I suspect rests within everybody's
mind and the unexplanability of the January numbers it doesn't seem to
me to be very logical to start talking about rebasing or doing
There's only one [month of data].
anything else with those numbers.
As a result, I would reestablish what we set in July and agreed upon
again in December without taking any formal action on it.
There's one potential [change] that has been mentioned before
that might be acceptable as far as I'm concerned, and that is the
movement of the lower end of M1 from the 2-1/2 percent that we
originally set to 3 percent. And that is only because the January
bulge probably has rendered that 2-1/2 percent lower limit ineffective
unless we get some very big negative numbers in the next couple of
months.
And if moving the lower band from 2-1/2 to 3 percent would

2/1-2/82

-46-

serve the Chairman's purpose when he testifies before the
Congressional Committees to give a view that we are going to be a bit
more expansive in 1982 than what we achieved in 1981, then I would opt
to increase the bottom end of that M1 range from 2-1/2 to 3 percent.
That produces a midpoint, if anybody worries about midpoints, of 4-1/4
percent as opposed to 4 percent, and that's some 2 percentage points
more than we achieved in 1981.
It tells a pretty good story.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, it's getting on toward cocktail time
wisdom and I wouldn't want to stand in the way of that, so I'll be
brief. Rebasing strikes me as gimmicky and I feel that we ought not
do that.
I don't think we've done it in the past; we ought to drift
up or down and go from the real base.
I think we ought to stay with
the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range for M1.
Roger is probably right that
the 2-1/2 percent end is obsolete but I don't see any reason to cut
into our flexibility.
I think we ought to be happy to be anywhere
within that range, given the imprecision. There is a case on
technical grounds to raise M2 for reasons we discussed last time.
Some of the points that Chuck made are valid, so I would be amenable
to that kind of adjustment.

anything.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice and Mr. Winn haven't said
Do either of you want to add a quick word?

MR. RICE. Well, just quickly, my instinct is to agree with
Fred Schultz, largely on the basis that to change the targets for the
aggregates at this point would probably damage our credibility.
I
recognize the point that Nancy made that we have somewhat of a
conflict here in that if we don't make the ranges again, that's a
basis for reducing our credibility. But, on balance, I think we do
more damage if we change the ranges or fiddle around with the base at
this point than we do if we just stick with the current ranges. As
you know, I've been one of the people who have been worried about the
fact that the money supply, up until this month, has not grown fast
enough. To me the ranges are basically cosmetic.
This is what we
tell the public we want to do.
If we come in at the upper end of the
range for M1 and if we exceed the range for M2 slightly, I for one
will not be too worried about that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, against the background of the
behavior [of M1] in January, I think any changes we make would be
subject to a misinterpretation regarding what our intentions are.
Second, I'm really concerned about the thing we call M1 because it's
going to become less and less of a measure of transaction balances.
I
watch [banks] in our District as they tool up for [changes in] cash
management, and there are big, big, numbers here that don't show up at
all as M1 numbers.
The sweep accounts also are being tooled up in a
big way and that's going to affect behavior, so I think we have a real
case [for not changing the ranges] in terms of the changes that are
occurring in the aggregates themselves in this period alone.
Our
concern should be to get a better feel for what these numbers really
are than on this [unintelligible] that we play out here.
I'd also
focus on the ranges and not the midpoints because the midpoint
overemphasizes our precision and our ability to achieve these things.

2/1-2/82

-47-

Third, it seems to me, with this uncertain economic background, that
we can't just stay with this willy-nilly. And we ought to factor that
into the report that is made at this time, saying that as things
change, we too will reexamine what we're trying to achieve.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am tempted to make some observations but
I think I'll let them go until the morning, considering the hour.
[Meeting recessed]

2/1-2/82

February 2, 1982--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a considerable go-around yesterday
on the long-term ranges.
There were some differences of view
expressed, I think more on M2 than on M1.
I don't believe we should
try to settle this issue right at the moment until after we look at
the short term because the two are interrelated in some respects.
We'll go to the short-term [policy discussion] and then come back to
the long-term [decision].
Let me just say in general terms, so far as the long term is
concerned, that I am aware of and sensitive to all the concerns about
confusion and market interpretations of what we say and of credibility
and all that.
More basic than that is that we ought to be doing what
we think is appropriate, and we can live through the credibility
problems. In the end, our credibility will be related more to making
the right decision than to worrying too much about what the market
says about it in the short run. Having said all that, I think we're
in a peculiarly uncertain period simply because of this big jump [in
If this growth were going to carry through, it
M1 growth] in January.
would begin to suggest that something is going on here that we haven't
If it were semifully been aware of in NOW accounts or otherwise.
permanent in some sense, given how little growth that leaves [within
the tentative range] for the rest of the year, I would question
whether we are not being too tight.
But I think a very strong case
can be made that that judgment is premature; we just don't know.
Things will look quite different if we get a decline in M1 in
February. My expectations are not the greatest in the world; I don't
think anybody else's are.
My [intuitive] expectations weren't very
good at the last meeting, I'm sure, and they may not be any better at
this meeting.
But one would think with the kind of velocity decreases
we're getting now, and particularly a velocity decrease with the kind
of interest rate movement we have had very recently, that it just
doesn't seem to hang together all that well unless there is something
So, there's a pretty good
very peculiar occurring in NOW accounts.
If there is a
chance of some relapse from that January M1 movement.
relapse, then this box that we appear to be in will disappear or
dissipate--to a very considerably extent anyway.
If we are going to change anything--and I thought about this
for a considerable amount of time--I would argue that the advantages
of rebasing rather than changing the targets are quite clear. I say
First of all, changing the targets in response
that for two reasons.
to a sudden jump of the kind we have experienced--a short-term
deviation or maybe a long-term deviation--may give the wrong
impression. It could be interpreted easily as our not being
interested in bringing down the money supply growth over a period of
time and it could have implications for 1983 and 1984, which we do not
want.
Somehow, just psychologically, [it would appear that] we were
off on a course of increasing the money supply.
More important than
that, it doesn't really go to what I conceive of as the problem. The
problem is that we have a bulge right at the moment, which puts M1
above the target. We can change the target, but [under any reasonable
target] we would still be above the target by a [considerable] amount,
as we were before. And, if we leave the base the same, all the
psychological and market freight of being above the target will be
sitting there just as it is now, whether or not we change the range
for the year as a whole.

2/1-2/82

If we move the base up, what we will be doing is recognizing
that we are starting from the higher point and we will be immediately
back much more within the range of where we want to be in terms of the
I am constantly aggravated-targets without changing those numbers.
maybe other people are less so--by the amount of importance put on the
I
three months that happen to be the final three months of the year.
I meant to bring
look at what happens over a longer period of time.
Starting where we're
the figures in, but Steve may have them.
starting, unless we get a very significant decline in February or
March, we're going to have a higher year-to-year growth in the money
supply than we had last year, certainly if you look at the shiftIf you don't look at the shift-adjusted figures it
adjusted numbers.
won't be true because we had a 7 percent growth I think year-to-year
That growth reflected the bulge
on the non shift-adjusted last year.
So, if you look at the
of NOW accounts at the beginning of the year.
nonadjusted figures, we started high and that produced a high yearly
average growth of the money supply for the year as a whole even though
the fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter growth was not very high. The
contour was a high [rate of growth] in the beginning of the year and
I think that gave a
then it leveled off for the rest of the year.
false reading because of the shifts into NOW accounts that produced
If you look at the shift-adjusted numbers, what was it on
the bulge.
a yearly average basis last year, Steve?
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.

4.7 percent.
4.7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks now that we would be no lower
than 4.7 percent in 1982 and in all probability higher simply because
Consistent with the present targets and growth
we're starting high.
anywhere in those targets except at the very low end and [in the
absence of] a sharp early decline, we are going to have more monetary
growth this year, looking at the period as a whole with the present
target, than we had last year, if "reality" is a shift-adjusted
And, of course, we would have
number, without changing the target.
So, we
more growth on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, too.
have [more growth] both ways.
MS.

TEETERS.

Are you assuming a decline at any point?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm assuming it doesn't go down very
If we had a very sharp
sharply. That comment may not be correct.
decline--and by very sharp I mean more than a $5 billion decline in
February-MS. TEETERS.

Or over a couple of months.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we would have to have a fairly
sizable decline for a month or two for the yearly average to have any
reasonable chance of not being significantly higher than it was last
year.
I can't predict every month but, just [extrapolating] on a
straight-line basis, which may be unfair, it is equivalent on all
these short-term alternatives except alternative A to ending up with 5
to 6 percent growth--I'm just going by memory, Steve--in the yearly
average for 1982.

2/1-2/82

MR. AXILROD. That's right.
If you hit the upper limit, it
would be around 6 percent; at the midpoint it would be around 5
percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That assumes that we don't have a great
big decline in the short run.
But, one of the peculiarities is this:
Suppose October weren't there and suppose this increase had happened
one month earlier.
The fourth quarter would be very close to the
fourth-quarter base and nobody would be arguing that that wasn't the
[The bulge] comes a month later and
appropriate thing to start with.
results in a $5 billion difference in the base.
Should that type of
thing affect us?
That's the kind of consideration that I've been
struggling with.
I have gone up and down on this, not knowing what is
going to happen in the next 6 weeks.
My feeling is that we will
pretty much know the story then, although we never know for sure
because there's always another week out there. But at least in 4 or 5
or 6 weeks, we will have a much better feel as to whether some of this
has washed out or not.
If it has, the current targets may not be
perfect but, given the problems of fiddling around with them, they
would look entirely appropriate to me.
If that did not happen, I'd
have a very serious question as to whether we were not being too
tight--that something more basic and continuing may be going on here.
That would imply, as a matter of judgment, given what is going on in
the economy, what is going on in interest rates, and what is going on
in the money supply, that we would have to think seriously about
providing a little more relief. My tentative judgment is that that is
a very hard decision to make right now and that maybe we should just
say we are not prepared to make that judgment but will keep the matter
under review and if we have to change it, we will change it.
And we
will change it as soon as [the situation] becomes more solidly
apparent than it is today.
MR. ROOS.
Do we assume that it is impossible to pinch off
this bulge through our open market operations?
In other words, we did
it in the middle of last year. What if we decided, instead of waiting
to see what happens in a month or two or six weeks ahead, that we were
going to instruct the Desk to sell securities out of our open market
account in the amount necessary to pull down this bulge that has
occurred.
And, if that goes too far, then we'd reverse that
performance.
Can't we be the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are raising the question
directly that I want to go to now Larry, and that is:
What should we
do in the short run? The issue on the table is how aggressively we
want to move to, in effect, pinch the bulge off, as you put it.
I'd
like to turn to that now, but before we do, let's ask Peter to give us
the normal background. But I think that is precisely the issue before
us.
The only thing I would note is that in the last week,
inadvertently, we already have moved more strongly to pinch it off
than we really intended.
We moved some distance in that direction.
So, why don't you talk, Peter, and then we'll go right to that point
and then come back to the longer-run decision.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

In the Bluebook the
Peter, may I ask a question?
MR. ROOS.
staff usually gives us several alternatives for the short-run targets
and also indicates an implied fed funds range for each of those

2/1-2/82

-51-

If my memory serves me, in the past as well as in this
alternatives.
current Bluebook the most expansive alternative usually reflects lower
fed funds rate projections and the more restrictive money growth
projections are accompanied by higher fed funds ranges. Now, at our
last meeting, if we actually had set targets for money growth that
were what has happened--money growth exploded--would you feel that
normally that would have resulted in a lower fed funds rate or a
higher one?
It seems-MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if the Committee had set the kind of
money growth rates that actually transpired over the past month, it
would have accommodated what has happened without getting the rise in
borrowing and the rise in the funds rate that has occurred.
MR. ROOS.
What I'm trying in a clumsy way to get to is this:
Is it not possible that our whole concept of how the fed funds rate
reacts to the aggregate targets we set is exactly the reverse of what
really happens?
When money explodes, it seems to me that the fed
funds rates and interest rates rise, as they are presently.
Is that
not true? And if that is true, why do you continue under the
alternatives that are suggested to imply lower fed funds ranges with
aggregates that show a higher money growth?
MR. PARTEE. Do you mean we ought to reduce the funds rate
range in order to choke off the money supply?
MR. ROOS.
No sir.
I'm suggesting that the relationship
between money growth and the fed funds ranges is just the opposite of
what our Bluebook shows us.
The Bluebook usually shows a lower range
of fed funds when we opt for the more expansive alternative and a
higher fed funds range under the alternative where money grows more
slowly, implying that that will bring rates up.
And that's exactly
the opposite of what happened, Chuck.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.

Yes, but I think-It depends on supply and demand.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Will you defend the Bluebook, Mr. Axilrod?

MR. WALLICH. One has to distinguish whether a movement is
the result of a shift in the demand function or a shift in the supply
function. We assume the demand is constant and, therefore, an
increase in the supply of money--just as of potatoes--increases supply
and reduces the price. Now, if it's the demand function that changes
while the supply function is constant, then price--that is, the
interest rate--and quantity move in the same direction. That is what
you've observed and what you commented on.
But the Bluebook targets
are based on the assumption of constant demand and a change in the
supply function.
MR. ROOS.
Regardless of the theory that relates one to the
other, Henry, if we see over and over again that when money grows the
fed funds rate moves up, we're getting our theory-MR. WALLICH. If the price of potatoes goes up and you know
that there has been no change in supply, it must have been because of
a change in demand. These markets work just the same as every market

2/1-2/82

in the economy and one has to distinguish what is the source of the
movement.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ.
I don't quite understand this, but I gather
that the argument is whether interest rates are the price of money or
the price of credit. You are arguing that it's the price of money,
and I have to agree with that; I think Larry's Reserve Bank would
argue that it's the price of credit that's-MR. ROOS.

Fred, all I'm trying to argue is that if--

MR. WALLICH.

Is that not accurate?

MR. ROOS.
If you look at what happens today when money grows
more rapidly than people anticipated, these rates move up.
It's just
exactly the opposite of the circumstances formerly, before we had
inflationary expectations.
MR. SCHULTZ.
But what Henry is trying to say is that if that
is because the demand for money increased, then it takes place that
way.
If it's because the supply of money increases, it has quite a
different result.
MR. AXILROD.
President Roos, may I just make a comment?
When you observe in the market that there is an increase in money and
short-term rates go up, it is not in my opinion because people believe
that there's going to be more inflation.
In my opinion--and this is
what is predicted in the Bluebook--it is because the market believes
that the Federal Reserve is going to hit its longer-run targets and,
therefore, will take action to restrain the growth in money that has
bulged in the short run because of the [increased] demand. And with
demand high relative to the supply, the price, as Governor Wallich
says, goes up.
And the price of money is the interest rate.
Therefore, they realize that interest rates are going to go up in the
short run and short-term interest rates are what we're dealing with.
But, Steve, regardless of what causes this--I'll
MR. ROOS.
buy any theory and I know you're both right--when money grows, rates
go up.
So it is just the opposite of the way we project these things
in our thinking in the Bluebook.
MR. WALLICH. Well, all that says is that supply is pretty
stable and demand is the source of most changes. This is what I and
others normally say about the money supply and money demand.
It's the
demand that is the more unstable variable. And that's why we get
movement of prices and quantities in the same direction.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If one were putting this is nonjargon, the way to explain it was just the way I think Peter started
to do.
When we project a more expansive money supply, the reason we
project that rates will go lower is that we are assuming we will
supply the reserves.
But when it happens not because we're supplying
the reserves but because the demand is going up, we don't supply those
reserves because it's not in our path. Then, of course, we get a
different kind of reaction. The rates go up instead of down.

-53-

2/1-2/82

that it
rate of
for it,
rate of

MR. ROOS.
But Tony if that's so--and I'll agree with you
may be--still if we have an alternative that implies a higher
money growth, then we should project, regardless of the reason
a higher range for fed funds than if we're setting a lower
money growth. That is my point regardless of why.

MR. WALLICH. But, Larry, we're the controllers of supply;
we're not the controllers of the demand.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think perhaps all of this will be made a
little more concrete by examining what we want to do in the short run
against all these alternatives, which have various demand and supply
assumptions implicit in them. But we can have any questions about the
market and dispose of those.
MS. TEETERS.
I have a tentative question for Peter.
I'm not
sure I'm totally correct but if I add up roughly [the figures in] the
footnotes in appendix 2 [in the Bluebook], you took $540 million out
in the multiplier adjustment, which is greater than I've ever seen
before. That must mean that you had a very unstable multiplier
relationship in your initial projections that you were constantly
adjusting. That also suggests to me that reserves were shifting
between categories at a greater degree than is normal. When all the
reserves went out last summer, they sort of disappeared. During this
period did you have a shift of reserves from low reserve deposit
categories to high reserve deposit categories?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I don't remember.
It was a relatively large
amount; whether that was a record amount of those technical
adjustments. I'm just not sure.
MR. AXILROD.
In large part, Governor Teeters, the [OCDs]
were a lot weaker than we had allowed for in the path.
So, if we
hadn't taken out the reserves that had been allowed to support them,
of course, they would have supported even more money growth. And for
similar reasons, if we had left the reserves in, they would have
supported more total deposits. Those were the essential multiplier
adjustments, and they were larger than they normally are.
MS. TEETERS.
Essentially, we had a reverse of the situation
that prevailed over the summer?
In a very technical sense, we had a
reversal of that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[OCD]

MR. STERNLIGHT.
growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think that's probably right, isn't it?
Yes, we had to adjust upward, then, for the
Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. I don't know for sure, Peter, whether you or
Steve ought to handle this question.
I just wondered if you had given
any thought to possibly changing this automatic reaction mechanism.
The rule of thumb you have, when you force the banking system to
borrow any total reserves above path, is on a one-to-one basis.
Have
you considered other combinations?
Looking at this period, one would
think running borrowing up from $300 million to $1.7 billion [in the
most recent week], with the target of $1.5 billion, would be a whale

2/1-2/82

54-

of a move.
Still, the money supply did spurt. Have you monkeyed with
the idea of maybe changing that automatic part?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, some of the move up was a
more or less automatic fallout of a strengthening in demand for
reserves.
We did, well along into the period, make a discretionary
downward adjustment in the nonborrowed path of $190 million, I think
it was, which added to that borrowing gap.
There is continual
consideration given to the size of those adjustments.
And the factors
bearing on it on this occasion had to do partly with trying to reach
judgments about how lasting this bulge would be.
If there had been a
sense that this bulge was likely to be more lasting, and particularly
if there had been a sense that it was occurring against a background
of a strengthening economy instead of a still weakening economy, my
view is that there probably would have been more of a discretionary
downward adjustment made to build up that borrowing gap even further.
MR. BLACK. Well, you actually made two ad hoc adjustments,
if I understand it.
One was on the 4th of January and then one was on
the 15th. What I was talking about, really, was not those ad hoc
adjustments but whether you had considered making the automatic
I just wondered what you-[response] a little stronger or weaker.
MR. AXILROD. One point, President Black--and this is
somewhat subjective because I don't have the data laid out--is that we
know for sure that, for one reason or another, the relation between
borrowing and the funds rate has become a lot looser over the last
year or two than it had been. Often we get a level of borrowing
without as much pressure associated with it in the funds market as one
might have expected.
It could be that in this period when things are
confused by year-end [pressures] and all that, and in addition it is
early in a period of pressure on bank reserve positions--that is, it
has only been three or four weeks or so of which the first week or two
are uncertain, because it was the year-end period--it may simply take
more time for those pressures to build up.
The function may be
somewhat asymmetric or something. The banks may have to be in debt
for a longer period before we get as marked a reaction as we might
have expected ahead of time.
So, if they have these kinds of
pressures for a more sustained period, we might see a more prompt
reaction in market conditions than when they first get in debt by $1
billion or so.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think that's reasonable;
can't suggest anything--

I certainly

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This situation has also been complicated
by the fact that in January we had some reserve misses that went in a
rather perverse way.
We didn't tighten up de facto as much as we
thought we were doing earlier in January simply because we had more
reserves in there than we thought we had. And then this past week it
reversed. And while the market didn't tighten up particularly until
the market [players] saw the figures, when they saw the figures they
exaggerated how much we had tightened up.
It gives us a bit of a
problem; maybe it does or maybe it doesn't, depending upon what the
future brings.
But, statistically, we had much more but later
tightening than we intended simply because of the way the reserve
factors went.

2/1-2/82

MR. BLACK. And the way we construct the path, the timing of
the first indication of the overrun determines the pattern of
borrowing for the whole period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We ran over in reserves and short in
That's-borrowings and then had the reverse.
MR. BLACK. Well, I was just expressing some hope that maybe
somebody had some ideas on how we could try an automatic mechanism
But I guess that's
that might work a little better than this had.
probably expecting too much.
MR. PARTEE.
close the window.
MR. BLACK.

Go to contemporaneous

[reserve accounting]

and

Well, that's one way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's one way of doing it; then we'd get
a very strong one.
Anybody else?
MR. BOEHNE.
Yes, I'd just like to ask Peter how he thinks
the market would react to either an increase in the surcharge or an
increase in the discount rate.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Given the events of the last week or so, it
wouldn't come as a total surprise, but I don't think there's a
preponderant expectation of a move either.
I think there would be
some reaction to either of those, probably less so if a move were
confined just to the surcharge.
It hasn't been fully discounted; some
people would say that they don't expect such a move because they still
don't see the turnaround in the economy that they think would be part
of the background of such a move.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.
there any other technical questions?
MS. TEETERS.
SPEAKER(?).

Are

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will ratify them and
turn to the immediate problem before us.
In terms of what we were
just talking about, Mr. Axilrod, is it fair to ask if all your
alternatives, A, B, C, and D assume no great change in the demand for
money? You're assuming that the money created is in there and it's
not going to relapse on its own accord?
MR. AXILROD. We have assumed a sharp deceleration in money
demand in all of the alternatives in that we don't think the high
double-digit growth rates of the past three months on average will
persist. We have not assumed in any of them a contraction in the
outstanding amount of money over a two-month period.
We could have a
1 percent [annualized rate of] increase--say, a -7 percent [annual
growth rate one month] and a +9 percent [in the next month] or
something. That is possible, but we have not assumed a contraction
over a two-month period in any of the alternatives unless action is
taken to make market instruments more attractive, which in effect
means interest rates rising, which is the assumption of alternative A.

2/1-2/82

That is, we believe that a contraction could be attained but with
interest rates rising substantially. Alternatives B, C, and D suggest
much slower growth rates than we have had and alternatives B and C
would hit the upper limit of the present long-run [range] later.
Alternative D remains outside [the range] if the Committee were to
vote for a continuation of the [previously set] growth rates over the
rest of the year.
I might add, Mr. Chairman, that because of this problem we
did suggest a second alternative in the Bluebook for the directive
language on the thought that the Committee may not wish to squeeze the
economy further in order to attain the contraction but might find such
a contraction highly welcome if it were to develop without squeezing
the economy further.
The second of the two alternative languages
presented, while it need not be different in the substance of the
numbers, is somewhat different in the public posture it portrays about
the Committee decision. It is meant to provide an alternative which
would in effect welcome a sharp drop [in money growth], provided that
the drop could be attained without squeezing the economy further.
MR. ROOS.
you mean by that?

Well, how would the economy be squeezed?

What do

MR. AXILROD.
I meant that if the Committee targeted on a
drop of 7 percent, our suggestion would be that to attain that we'd
need borrowing to start as high as $3 billion. But suppose the
Committee said no, we don't believe that; our thought would still be
that if you targeted on a drop as low as 7 percent and even if you
started with borrowings where they are now, the required reserves
would immediately come in higher than is consistent with that drop.
And borrowing would tend to rise very sharply, so that you would get a
sharp rise in short-term rates because the immediate demands for money
would be in excess of the -7 percent that was targeted.
If we're
wrong about that--and we may very well be--then we would not get this
rise in interest rates.
So, what I meant by squeezing the economy was
that the Committee may choose not to target on such a thing on the
grounds that it runs greater risks of raising interest rates in the
middle of a recession. But it may wish to target on something
involving a slower deceleration into the long-run targets--a more
gradual slowing on the grounds that that minimizes the chances of
rising rates.
On the other hand, the Committee might be quite willing
to accept a sharp decline if that could be attained without further
upward pressure on short rates at this time.
MR. ROOS.

But the most--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you want to say anything in a more
orderly way, Mr. Axilrod, without my asking you a leading question?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, I've just given the substance of the
comments I had written out, Mr. Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, since we don't know the
January figures--and we have done this before--why aren't we basing
from December to March rather than from January to March?
MR. AXILROD. Well, one could base it from December to March.
The first alternative left that blank in case the Committee wished to

-57-

2/1-2/82

The second alternative was
retain November or December or whatever.
designed just to make it clear that the Committee wants a deceleration
from the very recent growth rates, which was January essentially.
That was what was carrying the Committee beyond its tolerance point,
so it just seemed natural to base it on January. We have full data
through the 20th of January and partial data through the 27th; so
there may be a change in the base but not as substantial a change as
it appeared we would have in December because we had quite a bit less
data for December when the Committee met last time.
MR. PARTEE.

Page 10 has November to March.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I saw that, and I didn't
understand why we would do November to March.
MR. AXILROD.

That's what your base was before.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but to me [a December base] just
seems a little more logical, since we really know only 2/3 of January
and we do know December. And the numbers look more moderate if we go
from December.
MR. AXILROD. The December-to-March numbers consistent with
alternatives B and C, President Solomon, are 8 percent and 9 percent
for M1.
That's why in alternative I [of the draft directive language]
we left it for the Committee to fill in whichever base it felt most
comfortable with. Alternative II suggests simply [to base on]
January, to make clear that with January behind us the Committee
That's the
wishes to get money growth moving back toward the range.
essential reason for that approach.
Steve, did you say what the borrowing
MS. TEETERS.
associated with alternative A was?
In our judgment, it could go as high as $3
MR. AXILROD.
billion because we believe that we can't get that kind of reduction
for two months without a further rise in the funds rate, even though
But I have a certain degree of
the economy is as weak as it seems.
uncertainty about that because our quarterly model does suggest, if
you believe it, that given the amount of money that has already been
produced and given the weakness of the economy, that that amount of
money isn't in effect needed for transactions associated with GNP in
But it might be needed for precautionary purposes,
the first quarter.
so you have to force interest rates up to get it out of there.
MS. TEETERS. The $3 billion on borrowing that you're
tentatively estimating for "A" could go as high as $5 billion?
MR. AXILROD. Oh, it could go a bit higher; that's correct.
But it
We assumed that was consistent with a fairly high funds rate.
could be anything.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

It could go as high as what?

It depends on how hard you want to fight it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of this--I hope.

Let me try a common-sense interpretation

2/1-2/82

MR. FORD.

Of what?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

Of A, B, C, and D.

I thought you were going to do alternatives I and

II.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll suggest a possible approach as a
focus for discussion. I think you're saying, Steve, that either
because of transactions balances alone or transactions plus
precautionary balances--depending upon what model you look at--the
demand should not continue to rise at the rate it has been rising, but
it is going to rise a little anyway, or hold stable perhaps.
Therefore, if we're going to get [M growth] down, we have to take
some action to tighten up--well, for borrowings to be about where they
are or higher, up to $3 billion. That's the number you just gave in
terms of borrowing. Alternative A says, against the presumption which
may be wrong--it may just relapse on its own--that if we really want
to retrace January, we have to be aggressive in tightening up the
market. And that's going to push the funds rate way up because of
this demand factor. Alternative B says, if we stay more or less where
we think we are--lower than where we were in practice last week and
maybe this week, but where we were aiming--that we would get a
leveling off, but that's it.
Alternative C says, if we're a little
easier in terms of pressure on reserve positions, measured by $1
billion worth of borrowing, that we probably would get a small
increase in the money supply but we certainly cannot retrace the
increase we had.
And "D," of course, moves further in that direction.
It says that even if we were quite easy on reserve positions, we
wouldn't get much of an increase in the money supply compared to what
we have had, but we would certainly add to what we have had.
MR. PARTEE.

Because it has already occurred.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because it has already occurred, that's
right. Now, the question is what we want to do.
If we get any
significant increase from where we are, I am suggesting that we have
to resist it.
I would accept that as a starting proposition.
I think
there is some chance it could happen by itself. But who knows?
Tentatively, anyway, I reject something like alternative A, [which
implies] that we're just going to whack off a big amount in an effort
to get a quick reversal that we feel we otherwise would not get.
One
can take the view that it would tighten up the market very
substantially in the middle of a recession. I am not proposing that.
I do think we have to show some resistance, which means a tighter
market than we now have, if the figures carry us up significantly from
where we are.
And I interpret something like "B" or "C"--either one
or someplace in between--as saying we can ride along and we would be
satisfied.
It is not the happiest situation in the world, but we
would be satisfied at riding along if we have to be someplace around
where we are in terms-MR. PARTEE.
money supply?

By "where we are" do you mean the level of the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

--of the money supply, yes.

Not the rate of increase, but the level?

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the level. We would be willing to
We
ride along with that level without tightening the market further.
will wait longer and make another decision, obviously, in 6 or 8 weeks
or whenever we meet again. But, in balancing off all these
considerations, we would be content to see an eventual unwinding
without any substantial changes in the level of the money supply with
money market conditions more or less where we intended them to be,
which is somewhat easier than they in fact are at the moment in terms
of federal funds rates and borrowing levels. We are talking about
something around $1.5 billion in borrowing, which is lower than it has
That seems to me a reasonable approach.
been for the last 10 days.
But I would feel rather strongly about the caveat expressed
That if the assumption of
in that second version of the directive:
essentially unchanged demand for money proves to be wrong and, with
that amount of pressure on the market, the money supply relapses, I
I would not say that at that point we would put
would be delighted.
in money in order to keep the money supply at an unchanged level or a
In other words, if we could
+1 or +2-1/2 percent or whatever.
This may give too much weight to what we do in the
accomplish that--.
short run, but if the dynamics of the marketplace produced a relapse
in the money supply downward consistent with unchanged or even a
reduced level of borrowing, we should just accept that and count our
blessings and wait for the next meeting. If it doesn't happen, if
maintaining these pressures produced a result like "B," let's say, we
would be content with the situation. If the tendency of the money
And that
supply were to rise further, we'd have to act against it.
would send the level of borrowings still higher--maybe not higher than
So, that
it is now, but higher than what our target is at the moment.
is the approach that seems to me to make sense. And we would
incorporate--I don't know what the precise numbers would be--something
like 0 to 2 percent or whatever number we wanted to put in there for
M1 for the next couple of months with a borrowing level where it is,
or maybe even a little lower than that, depending upon what weight we
wanted to put on the possibility of a decline arising spontaneously.
And if M1 does decline, we would let it decline as a welcome reversal
of what we had [in January].
I'd like to ask Steve to verify whether the
MR. ROOS.
If M1 remains
following reasoning or these facts are right or wrong:
at its current level of about $450 billion throughout the first
quarter of 1982, would the estimated growth rate for the first quarter
Is that correct?
be about 12 percent?
MR. AXILROD.

That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
from now on.

That 12 percent assumes M1 is unchanged

MR. ROOS.
Then if money grows at this 12 percent rate over
the first quarter, if we do what the Chairman suggested and stay where
we are, what does that imply for the growth of M1 over the rest of
'82?
In other words, if M1 growth in the last quarter of last year
was 6 percent and in the first quarter of this year is 12 percent,
doesn't that imply, if we're going to stay within the long-term range
that we have been talking about, something like a 3 percent growth
rate for the next two quarters?

2/1-2/82

-60-

MR. AXILROD.
magnitude.

Yes,

in general,

it's right in that order of

MR. ROOS.
Okay.
If we had a 9 percent average growth for M1
over the last two quarters and we're forced to seek a 3 percent growth
rate of M1 for the next two quarters, wouldn't that have a very
traumatic effect on output late in the year?
MR. AXILROD. Well, our thought at the moment is that
something like what you described will develop more or less given
demands at something like current interest rates.
That is, we will
get a sharp deceleration in money growth to a 1 to 2 percent monthly
growth rate over the next couple of months--it's implicit in that--and
a moderate rate of growth over the second quarter. Where we would see
more of a sharp effect on output would be if that pattern required
higher interest rates because there were bigger demands for money than
are implicit there. Then we would see much sharper effects on output.
But our projection for GNP is based on a pattern somewhat like what
you were describing, on the thought that that will not be accompanied
by substantially different interest rates than we now have.
and I
funds
money
funds
makes
rates
about

MR. ROOS.
Steve, your most expansive case, alternative D-promise I'll shut up soon, Mr. Chairman--has the lowest fed
range of these four alternatives. Yet, with the explosion of
growth that we have experienced in the last few weeks, the fed
rate is already above the top of that alternative D range.
What
you think that we aren't going to have increasing fed funds
even if we go the more expansive route?
That's what worries me
this whole thing.

MR. AXILROD. It all depends, President Roos, on one's
assessment of the demand for money relative to the amount the
Committee is willing to supply.
MR. ROOS.

Can anyone accurately forecast the demand for

money?
MR. AXILROD.

It's very difficult.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ROOS.

You've got us on that one!

The prosecution rests!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The kind of consideration that you raise,
Mr. Roos, is what I have in mind.
If the demand were so strong that
it turned out, let's say, that with the amount of pressure we now
have, we were continuing to get increases in the money supply, I'd
begin wondering very seriously about our targets for the year, because
they wouldn't seem to hang together with what we know about the
economy and all the rest.
Now, we'd have to evaluate the economic
situation, but just sitting here now it doesn't seem to hang together
if the demand for money were that strong.
But we don't know that yet.
Mr. Guffey.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I understood what
you said earlier, the only quarrel I might have with you is what side
of "B" we ought to end up on. You are on the right; I'd go a bit to
the left.

2/1-2/82

-61-

Let me just clarify
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure.
that for a moment. As I sit here gazing at these numbers again, we're
essentially talking about how we are going to act between now and the
next meeting, of course. And given the great bulge that we've had,
I'm not sure it's the right thing to say--we can have another
discussion about what the borrowing assumption would be--but in terms
of the right posture, maybe the right number to put in there is zero:
The breaking point for us on whether to tighten or ease is whether we
get any further growth beyond this great big bulge that we've had.
What we would be doing is expressing some unhappiness with and some
resistance to any growth above the elevated level that we now have.
MR. FORD.
"B" and "C."

And that puts you between "B" and "A,"

not between

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's almost to "B."
Of course, it is
between "B" and "A" but it's a trivial distance from "B."
MR. GUFFEY.

It's on the left side of "B."

It's almost the

same.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It just looks to me a little funny, now
that I look at it, to say we want 1 percent growth. That's just a
fine [line] after this bulge.
What's so magic about one percent?
We're willing to accept, if we have to, what we already have but we
wouldn't like to see it going up any further.
[Zero] may make a
little common sense.
MR. GUFFEY. That's coupled with the thought you also
expressed that we would move against any evidence above zero and would
tolerate or accept and be grateful for anything below zero.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GUFFEY.

That's right.

Precisely.

I think that's precisely what I'd like to see

happen.
MS. TEETERS.

We could fall off the cliff on the other side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, this is about degree. I'm saying we
don't move very hastily if M1 begins falling.
If we got a couple of
weeks of decline--let's say in a few weeks it fell off $6 billion just
to pick that number out of the air--the market would be easing because
we would be quite satisfied with that and could afford to be somewhat
more relaxed about it.
I'm not making a fine judgment as to how much
to let borrowing go down.
I'm saying we wouldn't at the very least
begin making discretionary adjustments and we wouldn't begin pumping
more money in than the path said with a fairly sizable decline in M1.
We'd say we were happy about that.
We might let the automatic
[response] that Bob Black was referring to work, but we wouldn't begin
taking aggressive action to keep [borrowing] up while [M1] declined by
$5 or $6 billion. We'd be delighted.
If it began declining further,
we might well [respond].
Now, just where the number is, I don't know.
I have some figures that may not be out of the ballpark.
The
preliminary figures have been very poor in terms of indicators, but
suppose it came out [as a decline of] more than $2 billion--say,
$2-1/2 billion, which it could easily do. And suppose we had another
decline of that magnitude the following week. One can always hope.

-62-

2/1-2/82

We would then have a $5 billion decline and a sizable decline may be
in train for February and I think we just ought to be delighted.
If
that continued, then we would expect to see some easing in the market,
but would not be aggressive in trying to offset the decline during
this 2- or 3-week period.
We'd welcome the decline.
MR. RICE. If we saw an increase of, say, 2 percent over the
period, would you rush to resist that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
we would resist, yes.
MR. PARTEE.

I don't think "rush" is the right word but

We would let borrowings go up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would certainly let borrowings go up at
least, in accord with the automatic [mechanism].
And we might have to
do a little more than that.
MS. TEETERS. We have already signalled our displeasure to
the market. We are at 15-1/2 percent [on the funds rate] and $2
billion in borrowing. When we say "stay where we are," are we talking
about staying at $2 billion or $2-1/2 billion or $3 billion?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, a billion and a half dollars.
I don't
know how soon it would develop--we will want to discuss that
explicitly--but I am talking no higher than $1.5 billion of borrowing,
which presumably means an easier market than we have now even with
zero [M1 growth].
Just to be explicit, on the borrowing one could
It depends on what kind of
argue that maybe it should be even lower.
chances one wants to take.
MR. PARTEE.

What were we seeking?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. PARTEE.

I lost track.

A billion and a half dollars as I recall.

Right.
It got up from $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Essentially, what I am suggesting is
retaining that with a zero number [for the M1 growth rate].
If it
began rising above zero, we would go above that.
If for a while it
declined below that, we wouldn't be very quick about moving; if it
declined enough, obviously, we'd move; but we wouldn't be very quick
about it on the down side.
MR. PARTEE.
It's hard to imagine a negative between now and
the next meeting that would be so large that we would think it was an
excessive washout of the bulge.
I guess there is such a number--25 or
30 percent--but it has to be awfully big because it was a 22 percent
increase.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we would not be in too bad shape
by the end of the quarter, or we'd still be high. But that's compared
to where we are now.
I don't think we should assume that we couldn't
get a $5 billion decline in the money supply between now and March.
And then if March were stable, we'd look in not too bad shape. We
would still be high [relative to the long-term target].

2/1-2/82

MS. TEETERS.
of what--3 months?
MR. PARTEE.
getting concerned.

We more than washed out last April in the space
By the end of three months some of us were

If we get the washing out starting
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
If it
early in February, I don't think any of us has a problem.
doesn't work out like that, though, it seems to me that we might want
to build in a little extra protection by setting the initial borrowing
assumption at, say, $1.3 billion rather than at $1.5 billion because
otherwise we're going to get a rise in rates, I think. If we start
with $1.5 billion for borrowing and don't get a decline, there's a
We
greater risk that we're going to get a rise in interest rates.
would give ourselves a little margin if we start with $1.3 billion.
Why would we do that if borrowing is already
MR. SCHULTZ.
If we start out setting it at
running above $1.5 billion right now?
$1.3 billion, which is a considerable drop from where we are at this
point, and even $1.5 billion is a drop from where we are-SPEAKER(?).
MR. SCHULTZ.

No, it isn't.
Yes.

Borrowing is running--

$1.5 billion is what we have been aiming
MR. STERNLIGHT.
for; the actual came in at $2.3 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the actual.
MR. SCHULTZ.

One has to distinguish between the aim and

Between the aim and the actual?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
billion so far.

We're talking about the aim.

This week borrowing is

[averaging]

$1.7

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The nonborrowed reserve path right
now is based on the assumption of aiming for borrowing of $1.5
billion. At the moment I'm assuming that we don't want to see a
I'm assuming that we're talking more
15-1/2 percent fed funds rate.
about what we had hoped. which was that $1.5 billion in borrowing
would produce a fed funds rate of closer to 14 or 15 percent
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I would have said about 14-1/2 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
seems to me--

Right, about 14-1/2 percent.

So,

MR. CORRIGAN. But doesn't that argue that if we stay with
the $1.5 billion, we're going to get lower interest rates anyway?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, my instinct is based on our
discussions in New York, to the effect that the psychology in the
markets is such that if we aim at $1.5 billion and don't get any
decline [in M1], we're probably going to end up with a higher funds
And, therefore, I think there's some
rate than 14-1/2 percent.

it

2/1-2/82

advantage to starting with a modest safety margin in case we don't get
the decline.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what safety margin
we're talking about.
I view the difference between $1.3 and $1.5
billion as no big deal.
But you're talking about a safety margin in
terms of market reactions. Other people may think of the safety
margin in terms of what happens to the money supply, so it depends on
where you're looking for the safety. And that's what we're-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, but if we're living with the
January bulge, and I certainly agree that that makes sense, we're not
trying to correct it in the very, very short run.
If we start off
with $1.3 billion, basically what we're saying is that if all of the
projections worked out exactly as projected, we would get back to the
upper end of the target halfway between June and September.
Now, if
we start with $1.5 billion, what we're saying based on the staff's
analysis is that we would get back to the upper end by June.
MR. SCHULTZ.

I'm a little confused.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we get off on this question, let me
ask in general whether anybody is radically out of the ballpark I
suggested.
If people are, let's put it on the table and then dispose
of that issue and then come back to the fine-tuning. Mr. Roos.
MR. ROOS.
Well, I think it's obvious that we ought to do
what we did last year and pinch out this bulge.
If you recall, we had
almost the same experience in the middle of last year; and when we
took the action we did in April of last year, the fed funds rate did
rise from about 13 to 19 percent.
It stayed there a couple of months.
But then it came down again and we were in a much more favorable
position after we had taken the remedial action.
So, that's obviously
my point of view.
I think we ought to do something sooner.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just put this on the table and
dispose of it or not.
You are just an advocate of an aggressive move
at the moment in the hope and expectation that that will help in the
long run.
And you would take all the implications that that may have
for substantially higher interest rates in the very short run.
MR. PARTEE.
I just might point out, Larry, that when we
moved in April, we moved in the context of the strongest quarter in
GNP that we had seen for a long time--the first quarter. Now we would
be moving in a context of the weakest quarter in GNP that we've seen
since the spring of 1980.
The economic circumstances are quite a lot
different than they were then.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is clearly an aggressive view
on the table.
It's a legitimate view. Does anybody want to support
it?
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think what you have more or less
suggested is an excellent fallback position, and if it developed in
that way I'd be just tickled pink about it.
But looking at past
experience, these trends that develop are so like runs in stockings:
They sometimes keep going on.
It's like trying to drive on the ice,
as I have been recently. If you don't correct until you're way off

2/1-2/82

-65-

toward the ditch, you sometimes have to make a pretty big correction.
We have looked at this as carefully as we could and tried to find out
whether this burst was an aberration or permanent, and I don't think
So, I think it's safer to minimize the
we know the answer to that.
risk by assuming for the time being--though we may be dead wrong--that
the bulge is permanent, and I would be inclined to move more strongly
against it now, along the lines of what Larry was saying. But by the
same token, if it comes out the other way, which is probably just
about as likely, then we ought to be prepared to let the federal funds
rate come down and use the whole range for it if [M1] comes in overly
weak.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of thinking, but I--

It's hard to see it overly weak in my way

MR. BLACK. I don't think we could get that in one month, but
if that persisted for a while it could cause-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Oh, if it persisted for a while--

MR. BLACK. Until recently, I thought the economy was going
I've begun to wonder if it
to be much weaker than I now think it is.
might not be bottoming out, which is something I never thought I would
But if you look at what happened at the bottom
think at this point.
of the previous two recessions, the [M1] growth was not unlike what
we've had, so I don't think we can rule that out.
I don't know what
probability we should attach to it, but I just believe that's the
course of lesser risk, because I think further growth now is a little
more dangerous than moving the rates up temporarily to try to bring M1
growth down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are difficult matters of
judgment. The only thing I would say on the other side--without
saying this view is wrong because we won't know until afterwards--is
that we have had a pretty big tightening move in the market already
and we haven't had much chance to see [the response] because it was
delayed; in fact, to exaggerate, the market got no message at all
almost until very recently. We haven't had a chance to see what kind
of reaction that will bring. One can argue that being as aggressive
as you're talking about, particularly against the business background
that exists, takes too many risks.
That's what I feel.
MR. BLACK. I think that's a good point, and it does add
strong support to what you're suggesting. The only thing that keeps
me from doing that is remembering that it is so darn hard to hit these
short-term targets. And we have missed them so often, despite our
best efforts, that I just shift a little in the other direction. But
I think your position is a perfectly reasonably one and I would expect
most people would think that's the better one to follow.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've had some expression of view on
Does
I guess the next logic is to ask:
the more aggressive side.
Let's get that view
anybody want to be considerably less aggressive?
on the table if it has any support. Not hearing any, I think we're
down to fine-tuning. Just to repeat the specificity so that we have
something to fine-tune, the proposal is to use a zero in there for the
M1 number and I guess we can leave the M2 number where it is [in

-66-

2/1-2/82

alternative B].
And we have a $1.5 billion and a $1.3
borrowing assumption advanced so far.
Mr. Guffey.

billion

MR. GUFFEY.
I would opt for the $1.5 billion. Although
we've been above that over the past week or two, it seems to me that
things are moving in the right direction.
I believe Peter said that
we had a $600 or $700 million [run-off] last week and a potential at
least of some run-off again this week, which would bring the borrowing
level back to about $1.5 or $1.4 billion. That seems to me to be the
right place to start with a zero [M1] growth in the intermeeting
period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD.
I'm reasonably close to where you are, if I
understand you correctly--that is, "B" with a slight tilt to "A,"
which would say-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I would say a purely cosmetic one.
That
zero somehow looks more defensible than one percent in terms of what
has happened.
MR. SCHULTZ. Now, wait a minute.
I don't think "B" with a
slight tilt toward "A" is accurate because that's January to March.
The Chairman is suggesting zero [M1 growth] from now until the next
Committee meeting.
I think that's a different animal.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

Well, no, I meant it to be the same.

I understood it to be the same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I meant it to be the same.
roughly is until the next Committee meeting.

I think that

MR. FORD.
I would lean a bit toward the tighter end of what
you're describing by saying that we ought to assume $1.5 billion on
borrowing, especially given that the funds rate today, as it was
yesterday, is coming in close to the upper end of this band and we
ought to continue with the common sense notion of bracketing the funds
range around where it is when we leave this room and allowing some
leeway on the upper end of that range.
I know that's not going to be
real--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mention that but my
instincts are against taking the last 2 days on the federal funds rate
as the rate to bracket.
I would say the 14 percent is probably what
we ought to bracket on those assumptions.
MR. FORD. Alternative A shows 3 percentage points [of leeway
both above and below the midpoint of the range]; the others show 2
points.
If you are saying that you want to peg the fed funds and not
hit 16-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I didn't say that.
if the federal funds rate were 16 percent now.

I said I would worry
I surely would.

MR. FORD.
I can understand on an intra-day basis and it has
been 16 percent or right--

2/1-2/82

-67-

It touched 16 percent yesterday. The
MR. STERNLIGHT.
effective rate yesterday was 15.68 percent or something like that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But we're not talking about an intra-day

touching.
Still, I'd go along with "B" and the zero growth
MR. FORD.
rate for M1 and something like the [alternative B] M2 figure, but I'd
want to give ourselves a little room to breathe on where the funds
rate goes.

range.

I think we ought to do away with the funds rate
MR. PARTEE.
I think this is the perfect meeting just to do away with it.
MR. BLACK.
MR. FORD.

I second that.
All right.

MR. BALLES.
MR. FORD.
rate restrictions.

I think that's a great idea.

I'd agree.
We say we're shooting for zero growth in M1 and no

MR. BOEHNE.

Why is this a perfect meeting to do it?

MR. PARTEE.
It's the first meeting of the year. We're
totally at sea.
We have a very simple suggestion from the Chairman,
which is that we target for zero [M1] growth and we accept any
shortfall. And we take the rate that comes up.
MR. GRAMLEY. As long as we're going to put out extremes,
I'll suggest throwing out M1.
MR. PARTEE.

So we throw out zero and we come up--

MR. WALLICH. Not using a funds range makes a lot of sense
because that range is always misunderstood in the market. They all
believe that it cannot be breeched, but actually it is a checkpoint at
which consultation begins.
I think we'd do ourselves a lot of good by
removing it.
MS. TEETERS.

You're willing to remove the bottom as well as

the top?
MR. PARTEE.

Sure.

We opt to take it out; we don't want it.

MR. WALLICH. That doesn't mean that we can't consult under
any circumstances, I take it.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be very upset if, without any
evidence that the economy has bottomed out--I think the only evidence
suggests the economy is still going down--we threw out any constraint
on interest rates on the up side, as Mr. Partee suggests.
It seems to me that there are lot of people out
MR. BOEHNE.
there who think we're going nuts in the direction of the money supply
anyway, and if we just throw out any restraint on the funds rate,

2/1-2/82

given the economy where it is, it's going to convey the notion that
we've lost our sense of balance.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
that statement!

You can even leave off the "of balance" in

MR. GRAMLEY. And I don't think we ought to have a hidden
consultation rate that we don't tell the public about.
It seems to me
we owe the public [information on] the way we're looking at things and
the way we're operating and how that works.
If we're going to use a
16 percent and 12 percent as the upper and lower limits for purposes
of consultation, we should tell the public that.
MR. PARTEE.
our management.

Well, I have great faith in the conservatism of

MR. WALLICH. Now, if we use a borrowing assumption, which we
don't publish, and which is a much more operationally important thing
than the consultation ranges-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let us defer this particular argument and
settle on the other dimensions.
Mr. Corrigan.
MR. CORRIGAN. I have just one little anecdote here.
We talk
about all these statistics all the time, and I would note for the
record that many of the people who are always telling us what to do
tell us we should look at the monetary base.
If you look at the
monetary base for 1981, it's actually quite stable on a quarterly
basis.
But the most interesting thing is that the growth rate of the
monetary base was slowest in the fourth quarter when the growth of the
money supply was fastest.
And I think there's a little message there.
As to the substance of the short-run decision that we will be
making, I personally would have quite a strong preference for having
something like the second alternative directive [shown in the
Bluebook] as our basic marching order, with M1 at zero and M2 at 9
percent.
I would be very comfortable with a funds rate range of 12 to
16 percent.
I for one would feel very, very strongly that we should
maintain a band on the federal funds rate for some of the reasons that
have already been stated. I don't think there is a great deal of
misunderstanding in the marketplace as to what that band means right
now; most people know exactly what it means.
So, I would be very
uncomfortable getting away from having a federal funds rate band, and
I would fix it at 12 to 16 percent.
On the borrowings, again, I would
feel fairly strongly that we should start at $1.5 billion. At least
as I read the Bluebook and look at what has happened even since this
Bluebook was written, I would interpret the staff's analysis as saying
that over the intermeeting period as a whole a borrowing level of $1.5
billion should be compatible, from where we are right now, with both
lower interest rates and a lower actual level of borrowing. That's
how I would look at it, Mr. Chairman.
MR. ROOS. Mr. Corrigan, may I please just correct one thing,
sir?
The monetary base has grown much more quickly in the last
quarter of-MR. CORRIGAN. On a quarterly average basis, I think it is
the slowest growth rate of the year.

2/1-2/82

MR. PARTEE.
MR. ROOS.
our mailing list.

It was in the Bluebook.
No,

MR. WALLICH.

not

according to us.

There's

We'll have to put you on

a different base

in St.Louis; we know

that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

Boehne.

I like your general
I'm about where Jerry is.
MR. BOEHNE.
Zero seems right to me for M1
ballpark specifications, Mr. Chairman.
I feel strongly that we
and 8 or 9 percent is acceptable for M2.
ought to keep the fed funds range of 12 to 16 percent and $1.5 billion
And I like the alternative II specification of the
on borrowing.
I think that captures my sense of it.
directive.
I misspoke
You pointed out something.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I was looking at the numbers down below
when I said 9 percent for M2.
I just meant the same number as was
which were for November to March.
in alternative B, which is 8 percent and not 9 percent.
MR. BOEHNE.

Well,

8 or 9 percent would be acceptable.

I don't think it's critical but I was just
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Keehn.
reading off a piece of paper and I read the wrong number.
MR. KEEHN.
Well, philosophically, I'm very close to what Ed
I'd feel far more comfortable with alternative B.
has just suggested.
I would like a directive that would emphasize that we're trying to
maintain the current level as opposed to being slavish to any
I would be comfortable with the borrowing level of
particular number.
I would feel very strongly that we should not eliminate
$1.5 billion.
I'd be in favor of maintaining that at 12 to 16
the fed funds range.
percent; given the current rate, that seems reasonable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I'm very much with Jerry and Ed and Si on the
specs.
And I'm there because I am deeply worried about what would
I think Bob
happen to the economy if interest rates go up again.
Black said, perhaps inadvertently, that we can't rule out a recovery.
But we can't rule out the possibility that there won't be a recovery.
I'm particularly worried about what may be happening to business fixed
I think that all the risks are on the down side as
investment.
regards capital formation and that any inadvertent increase in
interest rates now, with the aim of pinching this bulge in the money
stock, would be a grave mistake.
I want to note what we're doing here around the table as we
We say that we'll take M1 of zero and
set specs for the short run.
that for M2, well, maybe there's something to that aggregate but we
I do care and I care a lot.
don't really care much [about it].
That's because I think we're looking at a world in which M1-B or M1-or what we use for M1 now with other checkable deposits in it--is
showing an enormous variation in response to changes in interest rates
that very much parallels what has been going on for several years in
If you look, for example, at the recent period
savings deposits.

2/1-2/82

you'll find that other checkable deposits had a turnaround; in terms
of annualized percentage rates their growth was around 26-1/2 percent
from October to December.
Savings deposits had a turnaround in terms
of annualized growth rates of roughly 32 percent.
I think the parking
argument is very much the reason for it.
People are using their
savings deposits as a vehicle for temporarily depositing funds that
they're going to put back into other forms of financial assets later,
and they're beginning to use their other checkable deposits for the
same purpose.
We're going to see a tremendous amount of variation in
Ml, I think, in response to changes in monetary policy and in response
to changes in the economy that affect interest rates that we will not
see in the nontransactions component of M2 to anywhere near the same
degree.
I think we get a more stable response to changes in policy,
therefore, in a larger aggregate like M2 than we do in M1.
I wouldn't
push this to the point where Frank Morris is of throwing out all the
aggregates altogether; I could perhaps be persuaded if you twisted my
arm, Frank. But I do think it means that we ought to give more
attention to what is happening to M2, not just for this meeting but
more importantly for the longer term.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want any remarks of mine that you may
have interpreted the other way stricken from the record because I
agree with what you're saying.
I just misread the M2 figures.
It's
not that I don't think it's-MR. PARTEE. Well, M2 growth in January anyway was
percent, or that's the estimate.

11.2

MR. GRAMLEY. But what does that mean about the
nontransactions component of M2?
MR. PARTEE. Well, do you believe that the parked money is
going to move entirely out of the Ms?
I think a lot of it will shift
from M1-B or M1 into M2 components and, therefore, if we set an 8
percent limit, we would have a pretty tough policy.
MR. GRAMLEY.
If you're that concerned, Chuck, about parked
money moving from one component of [M2] to another, then focusing on
the broader aggregate seems a way of dealing with that.
If you look
at the monthly growth rates in terms of the billions of dollars of
nontransactions components in M2, there was a big bulge in November,
but September, October, December and January were all very much the
same order of magnitude. We did not have this tremendous burst, and a
continuation of that burst, in the nontransactions components of M2.
That's exactly my point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest this.
We're going to have
a little time problem here; I'm going to have to do a little work
during intermission. The German mark has been very weak and there's a
question of whether we should intervene or not.
I don't have any
fixed view on this, but I want to talk to [the German officials].
And
I have to talk to a few people here.
So, I would like to wind up this
portion of our discussion fairly promptly, if that's possible. Let's
see where we are.
MR. SCHULTZ.
I'm ready to vote on it, Mr. Chairman.
I don't
have anything to add to the discussion.
I think we've settled in
here. There seems to be a very general consensus.

-71-

2/1-2/82

we have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mrs. Teeters.

I just want to make sure that that's what

Well, I don't object to starting at $1.5
MS. TEETERS.
billion on borrowings because that's coming down from where we are.
My only difference from the specifications suggested so far is that I
think we should be prepared to move toward $1.3 billion. The language
here does that, but I think it should be put on the table that we're
not going to be rigidly stuck at $1.5 billion of borrowing if things-I
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if things really turn around.
find it very difficult to specify just where we would be, but I might
be very reluctant on that first $3 or $4 billion [decline in M1] to
If it went beyond that, some gradual response would
make much change.
begin to--

The point I'm making is that we went from $300
MS. TEETERS.
million to $2 billion [on borrowings] in the last six-week period.
So, if we're going to be that flexible going that way, we should be
prepared to be equally flexible when we get-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, certainly if this January [M1 bulge]
There's no question about that.
washed out, borrowing would be down.
If it really washed out--I don't expect that to happen in that extreme
form, but who knows, it might-MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the only question Nancy is asking
Will you let the usual arithmetic relationship show through in
is:
lower borrowings if in fact there is weakness below zero in the money
supply?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hate to get very specific about
this, but I guess what I am saying is that I'm not sure I would react
Beyond that, yes.
to the first $3 billion below zero.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way Nancy formulated it, it's
basically a discretionary decision. It seems to me that the advantage
of starting with $1.3 billion as against $1.5 billion is that then we
have a carry-through during the entire period of the lower base.
That's because we make the adjustments and the amount of change that
results from the reality of the situation doesn't affect the starting
So, you get the carry-through effect of the $200 million
point.
increase in the initial nonborrowed reserve path by starting with
I will live with $1.5
borrowings of $1.3 rather than $1.5 billion.
billion--in every other respect I agree with what has been put
forward--but I'm just not sure that at $1.5 billion we will get 14 or
I certainly don't think 14
even 14-1/2 percent [on the funds rate].
percent is what it is likely to produce; it probably will be 14-1/2
percent at best. And given the psychology of the market, we may not
If we
I just wanted to have a safety margin to start with.
get that.
don't build it in to start with, Nancy, then it becomes simply a
discretionary decision at a later time. And I don't see that-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it doesn't have to be completely
discretionary. Even in that first little margin we could take the
position that we at least will let it go through to whatever extent it
automatically shows through, which wouldn't be very much, unless we've
got a big decline, right?

2/1-2/82

-72-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, there--

Mr. Balles, I skipped you completely.

MR. BALLES.
Well, just very quickly, since we are still in a
recession, I would go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman, but with
a strong plea or caveat as the case may be that we take such actions
as are necessary to avoid the big overshoots that we had on the
[monetary growth] paths we set at the November meeting and the
December meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.

I wish I knew how to do that.

I wish I did too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN.
I would be in agreement with the way you
specified it and with the second alternative on the language of the
directive.
MR. RICE.

I'd go along with your proposal, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Does anybody else have any comments?

MR. WALLICH. I have nothing to add.
I would go along with
zero and 8 percent.
I prefer not to mention the funds range, not
because I think interest rates are unimportant, but because I think
it's misleading. But 12 to 16 percent is fine as is $1.5 billion on
borrowing.
Let me try to repeat it and
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else?
maybe we can vote on it.
What happens during this coming period will
reflect on our longer-range strategy, but leaving that aside, what
we're talking about is zero for M1, 8 percent for M2, and $1.5 billion
as the initial borrowing assumption. Allowing for Governor Teeters'
and Mr. Solomon's comment, let me modify what I said and say we would
let [an M1 decline] show through in the purely automatic way but we
would be reluctant to make any discretionary adjustment without a
really big decline.
However, whatever presumably rather small
adjustment comes through by itself, if we do begin getting any
declines here, we let them show through.
It's a slight modification
from what I said before. And the funds rate range is 12 to 16
percent.
Frankly, I feel rather strongly that 12 to 16 percent is as
high as I want to go on that funds range.
If we were going to go
above 16 percent on the federal funds rate--maybe we'd do it--I'd want
to scratch my head and have the opportunity to scratch my head pretty
darn hard.
I'd scratch my head at 15-1/2 percent, I tell you. At 15
percent, it's-MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in view of what you said earlier
about being very anxious that we not go above that rate, would you
want it to be purely automatic if we did get a continued spurt or
would you want some discretionary adjustment in the nonborrowed path?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.

Yes.

If M1 goes above the zero?

-73-

2/1-2/82

MR. PARTEE.
MR. BLACK.
adjustment?

I think we might well have an adjustment.
Would you want that to be an automatic

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd certainly do the automatic
adjustment and we might have to do a discretionary one if M1 really is
rising.
It would call into question this federal funds range and if
and as it does, we'd have a consultation. I'd be much more quick to
make a discretionary adjustment on the up side, if we have to, than on
the down side.
MR. BLACK. I thought that's what you meant, but I just
wanted to clarify it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.

Is that clear enough?

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We might as well vote on this and have a

recess.
MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Boehne
President Corrigan
Governor Gramley
President Keehn
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Schultz
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Unanimous.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a recess and return to
the other regulatory exchange.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to go to Mr. Cross at
this stage and dispose of his report.
It's particularly relevant in
view of the question about intervention. I will just bring you up to
date.
The mark, of course, has gotten quite weak, with our interest
rates going up; other currencies have moved to a lesser degree in the
same direction; the mark had gotten to a rather high level.
[The
Germans] have pretty much given up doing anything. They made a great
or semi-great stand two or three weeks ago. but they think this
[weakness] so much reflects interest rates and the uncertainty about
what is going on [in the United States], that it's hard for them to do
anything through intervention alone. That's probably a correct
judgment. We have come to a conclusion with the Treasury that if the
mark did weaken this afternoon or tomorrow when they probably will be
announcing some economic expansionary measures--the latest movement of
the mark has been toward some strengthening--we would look kindly upon
an intervention gesture. We are not talking about huge amounts but

2/1-2/82

-74-

about moving in the direction that indicates some interest on our
part.
They probably have an interest, too, but they didn't want to do
anything alone.
And that's the way it stands at the moment.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be interpreted in the
market as dissatisfaction with the level, not as countering a
disorderly or a very volatile market, I think. Wouldn't you agree
that that's the way the market would see it to some degree?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I think some mixture.

MR. WALLICH. I think we could do this on the grounds that
there is an element of disorder when the market pays little attention
to fundamentals like inflation and-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that still comes back to a view
about the level.
I'm not unhappy about this because it's a beautiful
[chance] to finally get a change and a perception of a change in the
Sprinkel policy.
I do think, though, that the market will be a little
confused because when we've had these disorderly or volatile markets
[before] we have not intervened and all of a sudden we are intervening
in a situation--and this is a big movement-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not talking about doing it on a really
trivial movement; I'm not talking about a couple of pfennigs anyway.
MR. WALLICH. But we have never said anything other than that
we would fight disorder.
Now, disorder is in the eye of the beholder.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

And the beholdee.

MR. WALLICH. I think we can make our point in the market
without giving away the statement that we do it for disorder.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, I don't think we give that away to any

extent.
MR. BOEHNE. Does this reflect a slight movement toward
pragmatism on the part of the Treasury people?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

Maybe.

Maybe.

MR. GRAMLEY.

Where will this all end--this pragmatism over

MR. SCHULTZ.

Good common sense.

there?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
go ahead, Mr. Cross.

We can't have that!

Well, with that background, why don't you

MR. CROSS. Well, Mr. Chairman, that comes close to the
conclusion of what I was going to say.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any questions or comments?

-75-

2/1-2/82

MR. WALLICH. Sam, do you observe that the yen is more
sensitive to interest rate differentials now than it has been in the
past?
It seems to have followed pretty closely, at
MR. CROSS.
least during these recent weeks, the changes in the interest rate
differentials.
I haven't looked back to compare that very thoroughly
with earlier periods, but it does seem to have happened in this
period. Mr. Chairman, I also do have a recommendation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Proceed.

MR. CROSS.
[Secretary's note:
Text of Mr. Cross's
recommendation not extant.
Staff notes indicate that he recommended a
$1/4 billion increase to $3-1/4 billion in the informal limit on
holdings of German marks and an increase of the same amount to $4-3/4
billion on the limit of holdings of all foreign currencies to allow
for the accrual of interest on mark balances.]
MS. TEETERS.
these two-MR. CROSS.

If you're going to be intervening, aren't

If we intervene, then we will need to modify that

further.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it would be prudent to
increase that [informal limit] by even more than [the $1/4 billion
that] Sam is recommending.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think we could live with--

MR. SCHULTZ.
That gives us a little problem. There are
three of us on the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and I'm leaving.
MR. CROSS.

It's an informal agreement, I believe.

MR. SCHULTZ.

Oh, I see.

Okay, fine.

MR. TRUMAN. Maybe the Secretary can correct me, but in the
past we haven't dealt with this in terms of a formal vote.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It doesn't require a vote of the
Committee.
This is purely an informal understanding.
I think we can
just leave it the way you are proposing, Sam, and understand that if
we do intervene, you are not going to exceed this [new limit] right
away anyway.
MR. CROSS.

We're very close to the

[current]

limit at the

moment.
MR. PARTEE.

[The leeway]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

added]

MS. TEETERS.
in there.

Yes,

is only $12

It's only $12

million.

million at the moment?

$12 million.

With $200 million of interest

[earnings to be

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

When does that $200 million--

MR. CROSS.
If you raise it now, then we have that much scope
and we will be receiving those interest receipts over the next five
months.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
We can do it any way we want
to, but I don't feel hard pressed [to change it].
If we say this
[increase from $3 billion to] $3-1/4 billion is generally acceptable,
the understanding would be that if we intervene [the limit] is going
to have to be more. And the Foreign Currency Subcommittee would
presumably review that.
Maybe we can [raise] it $1/2 billion, if you
want to do that.
MR. CROSS.
The present overall limit is $4-1/2 billion. The
Committee could raise it to $5 billion, which would give us a little
scope just in case.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we ought to [raise] it $1/2
billion because sometimes the situation moves fast. And it does seem
to me that there is no issue of principle here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any big issue one
way or the other. Which do you feel more comfortable with?
MR. CROSS.
I would recommend [raising the overall informal
limit to] $5 billion and raising [the informal mark limit] by $1/2
billion [to $3-1/2 billion].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that acceptable?
understanding, we will proceed.

With that

Now we can return to our long-run ranges in the light of the
decision we just made. Let me describe one variable that if I were
doing it today I'd do differently than I did a few weeks ago.
I
agreed to testify on February 10th, which isn't very far off.
I
wanted to do that in part because I just don't like the idea of a long
lapse between our decision and the time that it's announced.
I think
we should try to get it out of the way as soon as possible.
Then
there's a recess of the Congress, long in this context, for Lincoln's
birthday and Washington's birthday. The alternative, if I don't
testify on the 10th or 11th, is that I can't do it until the 23rd or
something like that. At this point, if I hadn't semi-committed myself
otherwise, I'd just as soon wait until the 23rd and see what happens
to these numbers over the next three weeks.
I note that because it's
not impossible to go back and change that if we want to.
There's no
point in changing it if everybody is happy with the decision today.
But if there were a view that minds could be swayed strongly one way
or another by what happened to the money supply over the next--.
We
would have three weeks more of data, Mr. Axilrod?
MR. AXILROD.

Pardon?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Winn here?
MR. AXILROD.

If I didn't testify until

[later]--is Mr.

The 23rd would be the alternate date.

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is the alternate date, which is a
Tuesday, isn't it? We would know-MR. AXILROD. We would have partial data for the 17th and the
3rd and 10th would be published.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The 23rd is Tuesday.
partial data for the 17th. What do we have now:
3rd?
So we would [know] two more weeks' data.
MR. AXILROD.

yet?

So we would have
partial data for the

Tomorrow we'll have partial data for the 3rd.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have partial data for the 3rd
So, we'd have three more weeks' data if we waited.
MR. AXILROD.

That's right.

MS. TEETERS.
There's also the delay in the
economic report and the budget.

[President's]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd use that as part of the excuse
for delaying.
I wouldn't delay unless there were a strong feeling
that it would add a great deal.
Before you respond to that, I'd note
that in a more general way, as I suggested earlier--based upon what we
know now and a feeling that there is some reasonable chance, though I
don't know where I would put those odds, that a considerable amount of
this January surge in particular will wash out--I would feel
comfortable with essentially the same targets we announced before with
the same base.
I think that would minimize the difficulties all
around. What I would be inclined to say is that we would feel quite
comfortable as we see things now--I am issuing a nuance statement-[with growth] in the upper part of the range, if that's the way things
came about on M1.
That's not quite the same as saying we would aim
there deliberately.
I don't think we can aim that finely a year away
but we could say that we find that quite acceptable based upon
everything we know now. I think that is consistent with what I said
overtly before--but I don't remember precisely the reason we put in a
bottom [for the range] as low as [2-1/2] percent--that the only
purpose for the lower part of the range was the concern that a
technological change, such as the rise of money market funds and sweep
accounts and so forth, might have such a depressing effect on M1 that
we would want to allow for that.
It wasn't a policy assertion; rather
than being a sign of a real policy objective, it was a concern that
[M1 behavior might reflect] a technological response. All other
things being equal, we wouldn't have growth as low as 2-1/2 percent.
On M2 we have a set of projections, for what they're worth,
that say as I understand them that the range is more or less adequate.
In other words, even at the upper end of M1, we'd expect to be within
the M2 range; that may be a good or a bad judgment. And if we were in
the middle of the M1 range and were presuming implicitly all other
things equal--technology and everything else--we would expect more
likely than not to be in the upper part of the [M2] range. We would
certainly be in the upper part of the range on M2 and maybe
threatening the upper limit, which is where we've been all along. And
Why not
Now, one can obviously argue logically:
I would say that.
just raise the M2 range?
I wonder a bit what we would gain by that as
against the explanation that we have been running slightly above the

2/1-2/82

upper end of the M2 range for recent years and as a result of that I
think it's understood in the market that the operative part of that
range is around the upper limit.
One could argue that raising the
range puts us nearer the middle, but I'm afraid we might get some
interpretation that the operative part of the range remains the upper
part.
So, if we moved, let's say, to 10 percent as the upper end,
people might say 10 percent or slightly above is what we're aiming for
because that's where we've been in terms of that range. And that
would give us a higher M2 [growth] figure than we have had in any
recent year.
We also have this pattern where we haven't had any real
declines in M2 [growth rates] for a number of years as I recall.
In
fact, we've had increases I think.
It has been fairly steady for
three years as I remember, but if you go back to the mid-1970s, M2
growth was much higher. That was back when we had this large
component of fixed deposits.
It got high when interest rates went
down; it got low when interest rates went up.
And since basically a
flexible rate [has been paid on M2 deposits], M2 has closely tracked
GNP very well.
I don't know whether that will last, but it has so
far.
It has been hanging roughly just above 9-1/2 percent, plus or
minus every year for those three years.
Now we have the staff telling
us--for what it's worth and I assume it's worth a lot--that M2 growth
should be lower, consistent, of course, with the lower nominal GNP
that is being projected.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the staff's view is that the data
would have suggested there were stronger arguments for raising the
range for M2 in the previous two years than there are this year, given
our [GNP] projections.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that was reflected earlier when we
were at this position. The staff told us we'd be threatening the
upper end quite clearly and maybe would exceed it.
That's not
impossible this year, but as I interpret it you feel more comfortable
about the range this year than you felt at any time in the past two
years anyway.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, there are these arguments that were
presented yesterday, which I think have a degree of theoretical
validity. There were two that I recall:
One was that if we get more
savings, we may get more M2 because that's a savings vehicle for
individuals; the second is that if the IRA/Keogh accounts pull money
out of what is [not] now encompassed in M2, we would get an upward
bias--assuming that we continue to count IRA/Keogh deposits in M2,
which is a doubtful proposition. But we'd have the opposite problem
of a downward bias if we took [those deposits] out.
I was thinking
about that just last night and maybe somebody can confirm my off-hand
judgment that either of those events would involve literally tenths
[of a percentage point] because we're not talking about the whole
increase in IRA/Keogh but only about the part pulled out of market
instruments and into M2.
If the saving rate went up 1 percentage
point, let's say, it doesn't mean a one percentage point increase in
M2 [growth] by the wildest stretch. The saving rate is first of all
calculated against disposable income, which is much lower than GNP. A
one percentage point increase in the saving rate isn't one percentage
point against GNP, which is where we are measuring this. And it's not
all going to go into M2-type deposits.
It can go into housing equity

2/1-2/82

-79-

or into many other things.
So, I think we're talking about tenths in
either of those things, although they probably work in that direction
and they're theoretically correct observations as near as I can see.
But it has struck me that they are not the kind of thing--and I'm just
getting a staff comment on this--that would have a really large impact
on M2, although, if they happen, they would tend to go in that
direction.
I don't know if there is any equally clear offset.
One
could argue that on technical grounds, but we'd be arguing about an
adjustment in the nature of 1/2 percent or something of that kind to
allow for those things. That is my feel for it, but I don't know
whether the staff has any other view. Of course, the staff made an
estimate.
I don't know to what extent you consciously took these
things into account.
MR. AXILROD.
Not very consciously at all, Mr. Chairman.
I
don't know what one would say.
One percent on M1 is about $18
billion, which is probably as reasonable an estimate as one might make
if you consider 10 million people at a $2,000 maximum per person.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we're not going to get that.
I
don't know what your estimate is for IRA/Keogh deposits, but certainly
a large proportion of what goes into IRAs and Keoghs already would
have been in M2 anyway.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.
I'm saying as an upper
limit I would think 1 percentage point is not unreasonable.
So, it
would be small in practice.
MR. PARTEE.
The saving rate could be more influential
because presumably this would be money that otherwise would have been
going into consumption.
I don't know what a 1 percentage point
increase in the saving rate would be-MR. CORRIGAN.
MR. GRAMLEY.

$25 billion?
It would be about $20

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

billion.

Yes, but how much of that would appear in

M2?
MR. PARTEE.

Most of it. I should think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Why?

MR. PARTEE.
Well, you said more equity in housing.
seems to me extremely unlikely this year.

That

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People just don't borrow. We know one
thing, which is that borrowing is going to be low in that area.
I'm
not sure I've thought this all through, but I think the major change
there is how much new mortgage [financing] somebody puts on in
exchanging houses and so forth.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. FORD.

Housing is nonexistent.
That's one way it would show up, but I would

2/1-2/82

-80-

MR. PARTEE. But housing is not a personal consumption
expenditure. Housing investment is an investment expenditure, not a
consumption expenditure.
MR. FORD.

That's not what he's talking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When one increases the equity in one's
house, it shows up in the saving rate, right?
MS. TEETERS. We're not adding housing next year anyway when
we have a 17 percent mortgage rate, so why worry about it?
I don't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm saying.
think this is a year in which people are going to be consuming by
borrowing on mortgages and in effect running down the equity in their
They're going to be paying off
houses and building up consumption.
those mortgages because they're stuck with them. And that shows up
with an increased saving rate, I think. Right, Mr. Zeisel?
MR. ZEISEL.
We were involved [in a side conversation]
If people don't spend money on
The answer, I think, is yes.
consumption items, it shows up in the saving rate.

here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the form in which that savings is
lodged if one is paying off mortgage debt?
It's a decline in
indebtedness rather than an increase in-As Jerry said, if one
I think that's true.
MR. PARTEE.
takes cash income and pays off mortgage debt, then obviously that cash
income isn't used to consume and, therefore, it raises the saving
rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I'm saying it's not unlikely that
that's going to happen because ordinarily we get some new borrowing,
which people in effect can use for consumption. This year we're not
going to get the new borrowing side of the equation.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Well, we really didn't have it last year

either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

That's right.

We didn't have any.

MR. GRAMLEY. The issue is that if there's some deliberate
decision to consume less and save more, the logical disposition of the
proceeds is to pay off debt or increase financial asset holdings.
And
I would think that for the average homeowner who has a mortgage well
below 16 or 17 percent or whatever he could earn on money market
mutual funds, he's not going to pay off his debt, he's going to add to
financial assets.
So, the counterpart of the consumer balance sheet
would be an increase in financial asset holdings and it would likely
go into M2--not the whole thing, but maybe 3/4 of [it].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Some portion of it.
about the magnitude of this effect.

We're just talking

2/1-2/82

-81-

It seems to me that the bigger [issue with
MR. GRAMLEY.
respect to] what we want to do with M2 is not the fact that we have an
additional bias or lack thereof this year relative to last year but
that last year we were well over the upper end, or several tenths
over.
If what we want is an increase in nominal GNP of, let us say,
between 8 and 9 percent, then we ought to be choosing a range for M2,
given the recent velocity figures, that has a midpoint between 8 and 9
And if we put out another 6 to 9 percent range, particularly
percent.
if, as I hope, we will be giving increased stress to M2 this year
relative to M1, then we would be aiming almost certainly at a target
that we will tend to violate on the up side unless we're not going to
get that kind of economic performance.
MR. PARTEE.

That's

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

right.
I think we are to the presentational

question:
Is it worth it?
If we were going to aim at the midpoint as
you say, does that follow the record?
I don't think that's the way it
will be interpreted because people see that growth has been around the
And it just looks as if we're raising the target.
top of the range.
I think we would have to say that we expect [M2 growth] to be toward
or at the upper end of that range.
I have no problem with that
because it has been there for three years.
MS. TEETERS.
constraint.

But we used

[the upper end]

at least once as a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying we wouldn't use it as a
The relevant
I'm not saying we will ignore M2.
constraint again.
issue is where it becomes a constraint.
I'm saying a constraint is
I'm not saying it's a
someplace in the neighborhood of 9 percent.
I'm not
constraint at the logical midpoint, which is 7-1/2 percent.
saying that. And then we have a presentational problem.
MR. PARTEE.
I would emphasize the incremental possibilities
I think M2 has about an even velocity, which
more than Lyle would.
would suggest 8-1/2 percent. But then there probably is a bias on the
side of getting a little larger increase. So, I think it's very
possible that we will be over 9 percent this year. Now, if you say to
me that you don't care if it's over by a few tenths, because it was
over by a few tenths last year and the year before, then you're
telling me that it's not a binding range. And then I don't care where
we put it; we can put it at 3 to 5 percent or whatever!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying that. There's a
difference between being at 9.3 percent and being at 10.5 percent.
That is a difference.
MS. TEETERS.

Not if the range goes up to 10 percent.

If the range goes up to 10 percent, I
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No.
And that's
think it will be read that 10.5 percent [growth] is okay.
the issue.
Obviously, we can we raise the range and say cross our
hearts, hope to die, we're going to stay in it; we won't be [above]
it.
That's the alternative.
MR. BALLES.

I'll vote for that.

2/1-2/82

MR. WALLICH. M2 is very hard to control in a direct sense;
we can control it by controlling GNP essentially.
Savings is a
function of GNP and in that sense, if we get a good M2, we have done a
good job on GNP.
But I would not get too firmly ensconced on an M2
target precisely for that reason.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Given the imprecision of the numbers,
it seems to me that we all ought to agree with the general proposition
that we are doing our job well if we come in anywhere within the
ranges.
We should not give the impression that we are aiming for
midpoints.
MR. PARTEE.

I agree with that.

SPEAKER(?).

I agree.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Therefore, I think there is a
considerable disadvantage in raising the range for M2 because then [it
would seem that] what we are really trying to do is to come in closer
to the midpoint and we would be disturbed with coming in around the
upper end of the range.
So, in addition to the staff predictions that
we probably will be more comfortable with the M2 range this year than
in the previous two years, it seems to me that there is a pretty
strong case for not raising the M2 range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we elaborate any more on M2, let me
just complete my story and go back to the [presentation] problem. As
I said earlier. I would feel very uncomfortable with this M1 target if
I thought that this bulge were semi-permanently built in.
I do not
have the evidence for that now, but if we just go ahead with our
targets on the same base, I would be inclined to say--and it is not a
very easy thing to say and get it just right--that if it turned out
that this bulge more or less stayed in, this Committee would be
prepared to review that target rather promptly, particularly in terms
of this basing problem that we have. And we would report back even
before the normal midyear review if we have sufficient evidence that
this is a more permanent kind of-MR. PARTEE.

Shift in

[demand].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A shift that we did not anticipate. With
the passage of, say, a couple of months, one way of looking at it
would be that on balance we would conclude that coming up to last
year's target range right at the end of the year was a more meaningful
[event] than the earlier declines, in terms of the basic outlook
regarding the need for money.
I'd just lay that out on the table and
say that if that is the kind of evidence we get in the ensuing couple
of months, we are prepared to review that target. We are not making
that assumption with regard to the target right now, and that is why
we are sticking with the convention.
Now, one thing we could do is to delay the testimony; it
would give us three more weeks and maybe we would have a little more
evidence one way or another. I guess everybody would feel more
comfortable if [M1 in] those next three weeks showed a decline; then
this target would look much more reasonable.
If it showed no decline
over those three weeks, I would feel more uncomfortable with it than I
do today.
We still would not know. It might decline in March,

-83-

2/1-2/82

obviously, but I would have substantially more uneasy feelings that we
So, we could play around for another three
are too low on the range.
weeks before making a judgment if you thought that added something.
But the alternative--this is just the way I feel--is to go ahead on
the present schedule but just say reasonably clearly that this is our
feeling at the time based upon a feeling that there is a temporary
element in that figure and that it does not reflect a lasting
I don't think I would use the term "shift in demand"
[phenomenon].
but some English that reflected that. And I'd say that if it does not
wash out with the degree of pressure in effect that we judge is right
in the market, we would sense that something more fundamental is going
on here, which would suggest that we may be using the wrong base for
this year's target. And we would be prepared, as I said, to report
that.
MS. TEETERS.
Does no one share my concern that the forecast
If all our temporary problems get [unintelligible] in
is too low?
I find myself
essence that we are negating the President's program.
in the odd position of being the only supporter of President Reagan in
Basically, [the staff is] projecting a major continued
the room here.
And the overall policy may
recession at very low rates of [activity].
be too tight.
Whether we have problems with the base or any of the
rest of it, we are just making monetary policy too restrictive to get
the sort of recovery that I think all of us want.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, these questions are
Let
interrelated, and you raise the issue in a more fundamental way.
me just say that, mechanically, the impact of changing the base is
In
just a little over a 1 percentage point [increase] in the targets.
terms of the end of the year, the contour is different than raising
the target, but mechanically it gives us the result of being up 1
percent at the end of the year, because we are up 1 percent at the
beginning of the year and it just carries through.
MR. ROOS.
If Mr. Meese's comment this morning that the
President would want to consult with you turns out to be meaningful,
would that have any effect on the timing or on any aspect of this
scenario that you are talking about?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I do not know. I did not hear him,
and I do not know what to answer to that question.
MR. FORD. He said--I saw him--that he is going to be
consulting with you very shortly.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. FORD.
MR. ROOS.
timing in--

Who, Meese?
Yes, on the Today show, I think it was.
I just meant could that have an effect on your

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the timing question, you seem to
feel that there are no disadvantages, particularly, in delaying for
three weeks.

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there is a disadvantage in that we
would have to change something that has been announced.
I think that
is a disadvantage.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I see.

I just wanted to be

sure.

MS. TEETERS.
I think there is a disadvantage in going [to
testify] as early as the 10th because [Congress] might come back and
say that we did not give a proper evaluation of [the Administration's]
economic policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I do not think that is the excuse we would

use.
MS. TEETERS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure how credible it is because
they assume we know what it is anyway.
MR. GRAMLEY. When you say that something would have to be
changed that was announced, are you talking about the date of your
testimony?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Yes.

Or the decision itself?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, the date of my

[testimony].

MR. GRAMLEY. Allegedly, no one knows that we are making a
decision on long-run targets today. That is always a big deep secret
that is reported in the newspapers, but no one really knows for sure.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am saying that if we delayed the
testimony, what I would do is attempt to arrive at a very clear
tentative decision today but we would then confirm it [later].
MR. GRAMLEY.
So there would not be any question of a leak
because we would not have made any final decisions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
final decision.

That is right; we would not have made the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
It is worth pointing out on the other
side that there is an advantage in testifying on the scheduled day
because then we would begin to accustom the committee, the Congress,
and the public [to the idea] that we are willing, when there are
technical or structural shifts, to be more flexible on midyear--or I
should say intra-year--adjustments.
If we wait the three weeks then
you are somewhat less likely to put forward that point of view. So,
it seems to me that there are arguments on both sides.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.

I agree with that.
We have been so flexible!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
We have not.
And that is why we
should begin, when we have a good reason to support it such as when

2/1-2/82

these technological changes and innovations result in shifts, to get
people accustomed to our being flexible within the year.
I learned 25 years ago that monetary policy was
MS. TEETERS.
a flexible policy instrument, and we have been rigid for 2-1/2 years
now, which is ridiculous.
MR. SCHULTZ.
years ago.
MS. TEETERS.

The world is a little different than it was 25

No, not that different.

MR. SCHULTZ. But I do agree very much with Tony Solomon that
if indeed we do want to be a bit more flexible in the future, then the
way to do it is to go ahead and testify--we have the best opportunity
we are ever going to have--along the lines that the Chairman has just
put forth.
MR. GRAMLEY. The counterargument is that if we are not
willing to be flexible from July to early February, what makes anyone
think that suddenly we are going to resolve to be flexible between now
and, let's say, March?
MR. SCHULTZ.

Because we say so.

We say it and that does

not--

If we can agree that we are going to be
MR. GRAMLEY.
flexible, let us start flexing. Let's not postpone this by notifying
the public that we are flexible.
Of course, certain market participants are
MR. ROOS.
allegedly upset because we have been flexible--if you want to use that
word--or volatile. They say that we have not really been able to
stick with, on a rather inflexible basis, a set program. One can look
at it either way. Does the press know the date that you are presently
scheduled [to testify]?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume they must.
is much public discussion, but-SPEAKER(?).
MR. ROOS.

I do not think there

They may not.
Because there could be dangers in misinterpreting

a delay as--

I assume
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they must know about it.
that if we change the date, it will be known that we have changed it.
MR. COYNE.

Yes, they do.

Well, Mr. Chairman, what do you think could
MR. BALLES.
really happen between now and the next few weeks that would cause any
tentative decisions today on ranges for the whole year to be changed?
If I saw a
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to give an extreme view:
continuing tendency for the money supply to rise despite the actions
It is hard to predict everything
that we have taken to reverse it.
else that could go on, but if I see no sign of liveliness in the

2/1-2/82

economy and we have rising interest rates and a rising money supply
over the next three weeks, I'd be ready to change.
SEVERAL.

Which way?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

I would rebase.

You would add the 1.2 percent that rebases it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That is right.

MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me that if one is uncertain
and later may have to say that we need flexibility because things have
turned out differently, then one would strengthen one's position by
showing this uncertainty a little earlier rather than coming in
[firmly] early and then having to backtrack. I think we would have a
harder time making that change.
If we go ahead
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not saying that.
right now and I testify on the 10th and then the same thing happens
that I have just described, I wouldn't change it right then.
I would
wait another month or so, having already been on record, before I
would make the change.
But I might be prepared to make it if we had
announced nothing at that point.
Let me just say, too, that there was some comment yesterday
about rebasing being hard to explain.
I do not think it is at all
hard to explain. The explanation just flows as smooth as silk. Or
maybe I am overestimating my capacities to explain. But I distinguish
that very sharply from the market reactions and suspicions we would
get.
They would understand what we are doing; I do not think there is
any problem with that.
And we do have a logical explanation for it.
That does not mean that there are not going to be people in the market
who will say that we used this particular technique in order to ease
[policy].
That is what they would say, but they would understand.
MR. BALLES.

Have we ever rebased before?

I am trying to

recall.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.

No, that is the problem.

We have always had overshoots in the past.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But this has always been discussed as a
possibility and then we have not done it.
So it is not a new concept.
MR. BALLES.

It is not a good idea.

MR. GRAMLEY. Look, how many times have we been accused of
base drift? We hear "You people always have base drift," to which we
are going to say now "By Jove, no more!"
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The criticism that we would get is that we
did not adjust for the base drift when we had it on the up side but
now when we have it on the down side we are adjusting for it.
SPEAKER(?).

[Unintelligible]

be the other way.

-87-

2/1-2/82

MR. FORD.

That is right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is not that they would not understand;
it is that they would say there is a bias.
MR. FORD. They would say it is a one-way deal and we are
faking it.
It comes across as being dishonest.
MR. CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

This is a reversal of Nancy's problem.
Imagery.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
explanation is-MR. PARTEE.

Some people will say dishonest, but the

Visually.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When we set these targets, we say we
We just
expect [growth] to come in around the bottom of the [range].
say we would like to be around the bottom and that's what we're
assuming. That is what we assumed when we set the target and we did
not change our mind.
That is what we say.
MR. FORD.
Well, of the two approaches you have described, I
would very strongly prefer the one you described when you started
talking a few minutes ago of implicitly leaving the base unchanged the
Then, if we
way we have been doing and taking the hit on the [range].
need to come back, I'd overtly state what we are doing, which is that
we have decided for good and sufficient reasons to raise the band.
I'd be up front with [it].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even there, my inclination would not be to
It would be to change the base and say we think we
raise the band.
are operating off the wrong base.
We would be
MR. FORD. Well, I would say change the band.
It is just a question of which is-doing the same thing either way.
That is
I don't think it is [the same].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
my point.
If we raise the band, we are saying that from now on we
want a higher growth rate.
If we change the base, we are saying we do
not want a higher growth rate from now on; we have forgiven what
happened.
I think that is saying two different things.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.

Yes.
It comes to the same thing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
at the end of this year.
MS. TEETERS.
of monetary policy.

It comes to the same thing for the number

That is right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
implication for 1983.
MR. GRAMLEY.

And either way it is an easing

There is a difference in the

That is the important point.

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is right.
implication for the trend that we are on, not the-MR. GRAMLEY.

It is the

Only the expansionists want to change the

range.
MR. FORD.

It is not going to do much for our credibility.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, the short-run decision
that we just made early this morning does logically lead to what Paul
said.
I don't think it will happen, but if we find that the money
supply is strong in February, then we have to do something to give
ourselves more room.
As I say, I don't think that is going to happen,
but it does seem to me that we are better off sticking with the
scheduled date for testimony and going on record and preparing people
the way you indicated.
I would point out that the uncertainty also
exists because of the question of whether the innovations that we saw
in 1981, which tended to depress demand, will continue in 1982.
There
is uncertainty not simply on the up side but also on the down side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To exaggerate a bit, it may be that what
the Federal Reserve Board does on sweep accounts for money market
funds and what the DIDC does on a new short-term instrument may have
more to do with what M1 does this year than any decision we make.
SPEAKER(?).

Sure.

SPEAKER(?).

I would second that.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Unfortunately, if we are not careful, we will
end up with targets so low that we really have no option as a
regulatory body but to permit sweep accounts to save the economy!
I
am not entirely joking.
I just don't think that we can possibly have
anything like a well performing economy unless two things happen:
One
is that this bulge proves to be very temporary; and the second is that
we have more innovations that are pushing down the money demand
function.
That is built into the staff forecast.
And if both of
those do not come along, we are going to be in tough shape.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There has been an element of that in our
targets right along, because that kind of change has led to this
persisting increase in velocity. And we are assuming it is going to
continue.
MS. TEETERS.
Have you thought through the implication of
these interest rates for the savings and loans institutions?
[Their
representatives] were here the other day asking us if we were
deliberately putting them out of business. And I would say that, yes,
we are deliberately putting them out of business.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I want to reject that.
I think the
implications for savings and loans are very important, but it is not
all that clear--I will join Mr. Roos to some extent here--whether the
savings and loans would be better off by greater or lesser expansion
in the money supply and what that means for interest rates over a
period of time. That is a dilemma we are fighting all the time.
If
we literally believe the savings and loans that it takes a bill rate
of 8 or 9 percent to save them--I do not know about that but we will

2/1-2/82

have to redo these estimates--then the only way to save them is by
putting the economy in a real-save.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it is a question of how many we want to
I think then-MS. TEETERS.

Or how many we want to put out of business.

MR. PARTEE. I think we may lose another few hundred as a
On the other hand,
result of policy, but we would not lose them all.
I cannot think of any way we could save them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

[How to]

save them, that is the problem.

When the FDIC--

I would say they are one of the many casualties
MR. PARTEE.
of monetary policy, but we did not intend it.
I
MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'm not sure I agree with that either.
still contend that long-term interest rates are the key.
And they are
I think Governor
not going to come down until the deficit comes down.
Gramley is making the assumption that we by monetary policy are going
to make these changes in what happens to the economy.
I do not happen
to believe that that is the case because if we give up, then the
inflation problem is just going to explode again and the economy will
We are in a box.
I do not think we have the
be in terrible shape.
We
opportunity to move.
We have to stay where we are and do our job.
cannot control the economy; we cannot control what the Administration
does.
You say, [Nancy], that you are supporting the President.
It
seems to me that the President has to support his program, which he is
not doing right now.
MS. TEETERS.

But he is.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I do not think the key to the thrifts is
But in general I agree with
long rates; I think it is short rates.
what you have said.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one other rather psychological
observation: Bill Ford raised it yesterday. If we are going to rebase
--and I do not think we would do this--it would look nicer if we
M2 does not make that much difference, but it
rebased both M2 and M3.
happens to go in a direction that a lot of people are uneasy about
That is not terribly
anyway. It is only what--a .4 difference?
important; it would not be important except for the concern of
overshooting there anyway. And since that concern exists, it is
important. That would make it more logical in some sense.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

But then we would tighten the M2.

Yes, slightly.

But we are talking about liberalizing the M2

range.
People
I know; that is what I am saying.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
are concerned about whether it is too tight to start with, so it runs

2/1-2/82

against that grain. And that is why we presumably would not do it
even though it looks better.
MS. TEETERS.

We could rebase the top.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
range; that is what to do.
costs .4 percent.

Well, we would rebase at the top of the
But even rebasing at the top of the range

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
raising the M2 range-MR. PARTEE.

If we offset the tightening by

Because we were above the range.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
--and we rebase M1, we are in real
danger of getting a major reaction by the market, the press, and the
public that we are definitely easing monetary policy very
significantly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make one more comment and then get
some other comments.
All this worry about our credibility is there,
but at some point if we think we should change, we have to change.
We
do not build up credibility for the sake of building up more
credibility. We build up credibility to get the flexibility to do
what we think is necessary.
If I were convinced now--more convinced
than I am that this change is appropriate--I would say the heck with
that point. My trouble is that I am not convinced [the bulge] is
going to stay. And if we rebase and then find [M1] falling on us, we
would have [allowed for] quite a lot of growth--too much in my
judgment--between now and the end of the year.
We would have a
possibility of growth of a little over 6-1/2 percent, which seems a
little too much to me, if M1 declines [and the bulge is washed out].
And since I think there is a good chance it will decline, I would hate
to present that now.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I am saying--I think you are
misunderstanding me--is that I think we could get away with rebasing
M1.
But to rebase M2 and then offset it by raising the target range
another 1/2 point I think is overkill.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I agree with you on that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We are better off, if we are forced
into rebasing M1, not to rebase M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, I agree.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And there are some arguments on why
it does not have to be symmetrical.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I do not disagree with that.

MR. SCHULTZ.
I disagree with your comments on credibility.
I think there is an enormous sense out there that we are still the
only game in town in the fight against inflation. If we do something
to change that, we are going to do something very important.
To me
that credibility question is really critical. We are right back in
the situation we have been in before, particularly now that the

-91-

2/1-2/82

President will not do anything about the deficits. We are in this
uncomfortable, improper, nasty situation that we have to deal with,
which is that the central bank of the United States has far more
But the fact of the matter is
responsibility than it ought to have.
that we have it because of the way the political system works. And
We have not yet
this credibility question is just absolutely vital.
changed those inflation expectations because everybody thinks that we
are going to cave in to the political pressure that is going to be on
us.
They do not understand all these nuances about demand shifts and
linkages and all this other stuff; all they see is that the Fed is the
only inflation fighter we have in the country. If we give an
indication that we are caving in and if we start making some changes,
I
there are some really serious costs in terms of credibility, Paul.
think that credibility factor is more important than you just gave it
credit for.
MR. WALLICH. The central banks that have the most
credibility, such as the Swiss National Bank and the Bundesbank, are
Sometimes one of them
pretty relaxed with respect to their targets.
even abandons its targets. And yet they do not lose credibility
because there is that basic belief that they will achieve better
stability.
More people perceive that we have 15-1/2
MS. TEETERS.
percent interest rates and 17 percent mortgage rates than whether we
are [fostering growth of] the money supply at 1 percent or 2 percent
or 3 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
here is true.
MS. TEETERS.

The trouble is that everything we say

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Even when we say different things.

Fred Schultz's comments suggest that we should
MR. MORRIS.
not make a change unless it is clear that if we don't, we are going to
be following a policy that we really do not believe in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I believe that.

That would lead to not making a change until
MR. MORRIS.
If we find that we have to, fine, we ought to change the
midyear.
targets at midyear.
MR. SCHULTZ.

Well, it could be earlier.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how things go, but I could
well see circumstances where we would want to do it before midyear.
MR. MORRIS.

Well, that could be.

You will be subjected, I am sure, to further
MR. ROOS.
questioning about our procedures and whether we just assume that we
That is
are doing this in the most satisfactory way, technique wise.
where we are going to get some flak, I think. I assume that nobody
around this table really would welcome or advocate any major changes,
such as targeting on total reserves or taking the step that we have

2/1-2/82

heard over and over again, which is going to contemporaneous reserve
accounting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the contemporaneous reserve
accounting issue is going to be on our desks very quickly.
I will
tell you my view of contemporaneous reserve accounting very simply.
I
do not think it is going to make a lot of difference in and of itself.
There is a certain logic in doing it.
And if we were living on
Neptune, I would do it because I think there is a certain logic just
in terms of being consistent with our present techniques. My concern
is that people will read into it more than it is worth and we would
get more flak rather than less.
But that is a psychological point and
not a technical point.
They will say: "Now that you have
contemporaneous reserve accounting why isn't everything perfect?"
And
since I do not think it is going to change things very much, we may
end up even more on the defensive. Now, that may not be persuasive as
a reason for not doing it because just looked at as a purely technical
matter it may well be desirable but marginal.
So, my main concern in
doing it is only that it will get over-interpreted.
If we do that and
combine it with some other things, such as closing up the discount
window, that would be an entirely different kettle of fish.
I am just
prepared to argue against that.
MR. PARTEE. Well, at least change the conditions [for access
to the discount window].
We do not let them close it altogether.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To make it very much tighter. Yes,
obviously, it is [an] extreme view to say close it altogether.
MS. TEETERS.
I would say to Larry Roos that having gone to
the reserve targeting and monetary aggregates targeting with a great
deal of reluctance and skepticism, and having all the troubles and
criticism that we have had, I am getting more and more to the point
that I do not think it is the right way to [conduct policy].
We ought
to be moving back toward interest rate targeting combined with
aggregates targeting, knowing that we are not going to achieve either
perfectly, but we would have a better monetary policy than we have had
and a better economy. We have bounced this economy all over the mat
for three years with no growth.
MR. ROOS.
Of course, Nancy, what disturbs me--and I say this
with humility--is that I fear that what is being done may not produce
the results we sought.
Procedurally, I don't think we really are
doing what ought to be done to conduct monetary policy in the way that
those who wanted to target on reserve targets had sought initially.
What I think will happen in the real world--I am not going to be
around--is that this will not work. And everybody, broad-brush, will
say that the monetarist approach failed when I really do not think
that we have conducted a true monetaristic experiment here.
But we
could argue that for forever and a day.
MS. TEETERS.
I have a much more practical point.
I do not
like what we have done to the economy in the past three years.
I do
not like 9 percent unemployment rates and I do not like interest rates
in the 17 to 20 percent range.
MR. ROOS.
But, Nancy, I think a lot of people could say they
did not like what happened when we were concentrating on controlling

2/1-2/82

-93-

That record is a very poor one and probably led to
interest rates.
these high rates. Anyway, I do not mean to be cantankerous.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
problem this morning.

Well, we are not going to resolve that

Let me just put this question on the table and dispose of it
Do we want to try to delay the testimony and
one way or another:
delay the decision?
Do people think that is going to help them enough
so that it is worth whatever public question that arouses?
MR. BOYKIN.
SEVERAL.

I vote no.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
Let us dispose of that option
then. We are left with making a decision today, essentially. What I
would put on the table is what I said earlier--we can skip to the
fine-tuning--that the basic decision would be to keep the targets the
same as we already said, or very close to that, with a statement that
we are prepared to relook at this, particularly M1. in the relatively
near-term future, meaning probably a couple of months, in the light of
the concerns I expressed.
MR. CORRIGAN. With it being clear that if something were to
change, we would be making the base adjustment?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We do not actually have to commit
ourselves to that, but I would throw that out as the logical
possibility without committing us to it.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You would do it in an even-handed way
in the sense that you would mention the possibility of a shift in
demand due to the innovations and to technology?
If so,-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would not do it in an even-handed
way in that I do not visualize any possibility that I would say we
would come back in two months and lower the [ranges].
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand that.
would mention that there is this--

But you

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would distinguish between two
things.
In describing the range, I would say that the lower part of
the range is basically designed to take care of the innovations that
might appear and that we would not be at all unhappy, as we now see
things, to be in the upper part of the M1 range and, indeed, we would
expect to be toward the upper part of the M2 range. Okay, that
finishes that discussion.
Then I would go on to say that if this
[bulge] in M1 is more permanent than we think, we would come back to
Congress with a new M1 range--presumably rebased, but not committing
ourselves to that--in the space of a couple of months.
If it became
clear on the basis of the evidence that accumulated over this period,
that the November-December-January spurt was more indicative of the
underlying demand relationship than the August, September, and October
low levels-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I would vote yes.

-94-

2/1-2/82

MR. BOYKIN.
I would be in agreement with that, provided
that--.
Well, you said something about the ranges as specified or
close to it.
Do you mean as specified?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am leaving that question until we
get to the precise part.
I presume we are going to have a [detailed
discussion] on exactly what those numbers will be, so I am just
talking generally about something the same as or very like what we
have. That is the next thing I will take up.
MR. BALLES.
I would be concerned, Mr. Chairman, about the
boomerang effects of creating that [specter] of further possible
change and all the uncertainty that may [foster].
The Fed watchers
will be going right up the wall and looking at us every minute instead
of every hour.
If, when we first talk about those ranges, we say they
may be subject to near-term change, somehow that does not strike me as
a very stabilizing influence in terms of expectations.
MR. PARTEE.
I do not think we are saying that the range
would be subject to change, John. What we would do is rebase the
range.
In a way we would consider January a part of last year to a
degree.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That is a--

MR. WALLICH. We have rebased every year through base drift
only we do it nondeliberately rather than in this way.
MR. MORRIS.
Using the Federal Reserve calendar rather than
the standard calendar!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whatever we say other than that
these are the ranges and come hell or high water we are going to be
within them, we are going to raise some questions in some people's
minds.
There is no question that people will be talking about it, for
two weeks anyway, if we say anything but that. But the problem is:
Do we want to say that?
We also may get ourselves in so deep that we
can never change the darn things and we may be doing things
substantively that we do not want to do.
So, we have to balance that
off.
The fact is that there are going to be a lot of people out there
who would heave a sigh of relief if we said that, because a lot of
people think policy is too tight.
MR. GRAMLEY. May I question what it is we are assuming about
the behavior of M1 from here on out which would give rise to a change
in the targets?
Do we, for example, decide that if what we have voted
on this morning for our short-run targets materializes, which would
get us essentially zero growth between now and March, that we can
breathe a big sigh of relief and live within our targets?
Making some
very rough calculations, that seems to me to imply at most a 3 percent
annual rate of growth from March on out to get within the upper limit
of the range.
So, are we going to say then that we made it and now we
can supply 3 percent money growth and that will be enough?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think that depends on what has happened.
You cannot just give me the figure on money growth. What is happening
in the markets?
What is happening in the economy?

2/1-2/82

-95-

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, let's say the economy begins to show
signs of a modest recovery along the lines that the staff has
forecast.
But the staff forecast was built on the assumption that
there was going to be a big drop in M1 during the course of the first
quarter. Given the policy targets that we set this morning, we are
saying that is not happening; we are saying it is going to stay level.
So, from March on we are going to be applying a tighter monetary
policy than was built into the forecast, which means that if we want
to stay within the range, we will be opting for a weaker economy. Do
we want less than 1.3 percent real growth from the fourth quarter to
the fourth quarter?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot answer your question precisely.
But if you say zero growth from now on and that is accompanied by
interest rates as high as we have them now and a weak economy, yes, I
would question whether we might not want to ease up on the range.
I
would begin getting pushed on that.
I already have the question, and
I would have more questions then.
MR. GRAMLEY.
I would opt to wait a couple of weeks, if I
thought I could get anyone else to go along with me, on loosening the
reins.
But I doubt very much--no matter what happens over the next
two weeks--that this Committee is going to be willing to loosen up the
ranges. Maybe they are, but I suspect that your suggestion has appeal
because I do not think this Committee realizes yet how harsh a
monetary policy it is imposing on the economy with the kind of targets
we are looking at now, given what I think is going to happen to money.
Maybe we will be lucky and money growth will turn negative and we will
have a lot of room from then on. But I doubt it.
So, I think we are
looking at a situation, if we are not awfully careful and if we do not
stay really flexible, where we are going to be opting for a still
worse economy than what the staff is forecasting.
MR. AXILROD.
Governor Gramley, if I might say, believable or
not, the staff forecast is based on the scenario you described--that
is, virtually no growth in money over the next couple of months and
then three quarters of growth averaging 1.3 or 1.4 percent quarterly.
And as you have pointed out, that requires, if you believe the models,
a resumption of the downward drift in so-called money demands after
this quarter at a rate almost as rapid, but not quite, as we had all
of last year.
So, if that does not develop, then we would get much
higher interest rates, at least in the short run.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly true in your assumption
of velocity.
But let me put it the other way around. If I understand
those staff forecasts as best judgments, if in fact we sat here now
and said we were content with being in the upper part of that M1
range, we would have a better business outlook than you have.
MR. AXILROD.

That is right, on that assumption of a--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With all the other assumptions you are
making. And that is reflected in these alternatives that you give.
It is scenario 2 instead of scenario 1. We would get a 1 percent or
whatever it is higher nominal GNP.

shifts in

MR. AXILROD. That is right, but with some further downward
[unintelligible].

2/1-2/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know.
wrong, but just holding that assumption.

That assumption may go

MR. CORRIGAN. But if we have Governor Gramley's situation
now and we did end up rebasing, say, in March or something like that,
the combination of rebasing and being in the upper part of that M1
range produces a couple of percentage points at least in terms of the
money growth that is implied just by looking at the midpoint for the
period from March through December.
MR. BLACK. Well, we must not forget that that forecast
implies a certain assumption about inflation. If we are lucky enough
to do better on that, we can do still more on the real side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to say if we are
unlucky enough to do worse, we would have a bigger problem.
MR. BLACK.

Well, I agree with that too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Both statements are true.

MR. BLACK. Expectations of which way that will go depend on
what we decide to do, presumably.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At the risk of being mischievous, may
I point out that this process or line of presentation--namely, getting
a decision sequentially on this particular issue--[may prejudice the
decision].
You are asking for a decision on that and saying that you
are going to inform the [Congressional] committee and prepare the
ground that under these conditions we might be willing to make an
adjustment and that it would be logical to do it in the form of
rebasing.
If you get an affirmative decision from this Committee now
on that and then go on to ask if we should fine-tune on the target
We will look
ranges, then the answer I think becomes clearly no.
silly, it seems to me, if we make minor adjustments in M1 or M2 even,
and then on top of that say we are prepared to take another look at
So, if you do not want to prejudice the
this and do some rebasing.
decision on the last point, it seems to me that you really have to ask
for a decision on both.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We will get to it in good time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
it logically leads.
MR. PARTEE.

I see.

I am just pointing out where

Well, we are only talking about rebasing M1,

I

believe.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think so, yes.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I wonder how we lose credibility the fastest:
By saying, in effect, that we are going to go back to the base we had
for the fourth quarter of 1980 and use the same target range that we
had for 1981 and now a lower target range for M1 for 1982, explaining
in the footnotes what the numbers are; or by going out in March or
April or thereabouts and saying we give up, money is running too fast
and we cannot hold it within those targets, so we are going to raise
them and retroactively change the base.
My feeling is that we are

2/1-2/82

less likely to upset the public and give rise to those concerns Fred
Schultz was talking about, if we tell them right now that money growth
very recently has been rapid but the fourth quarter was very, very low
and, therefore, we are taking a longer-range point of view and still
reducing the growth of M1 but basing it from the fourth quarter of
I think we could sell that point of view.
1980.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes,

I think we could

sell

it.

The

problem is that it may be the wrong decision. We would have committed
ourselves, then, to the decision. I have no problem with that if this
[bulge] is going to be semi-permanent. But suppose it does wash out
in February and March? Then I think we have too high a target.
MR. GRAMLEY.

With 2-1/2 percent as the lower end?

MS. TEETERS.

With 9 percent unemployed?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

People would be looking at the upper ends.

MR. GRAMLEY. Taking the 1.2 percent or so that we are
raising it by the implied base shift, then we are talking about 3.7
percent growth in M1 after this shift.
And that is not likely to give
rise to a new wave of inflation.
MR. ROOS.
Whatever adjustment is made in March or April,
especially if you have a meeting with the President, anything that can
be construed as being more expansionary at that time of the year will
be interpreted immediately as the Fed caving in to political pressure
in view of the November elections. They are going to be watching us.
Are you fellows going to be able to stand the
The question I hear is:
And I think we
heat from the politicians during an election year?
have to be awfully careful that we do not fall into that trap and do
something that may be better but that will be interpreted, in effect,
as our climbing into bed with this Administration or any other-MR. SCHULTZ.
MR. ROOS.

I think we have that problem right now, Larry.

Even now I think we do.
Well, I think Larry is right:

MR. PARTEE.

It will be worse

in the spring.
MR. ROOS.

It will

be worse in the spring.

MR. GRAMLEY.
It will be worse if, in fact, the quotation
from Mr. Meese that Bill Ford mentioned is correct--that the President
We have not heard
is going to pull you over for a little conference.
We would be better off as a Committee to make
that officially yet.
our decisions before that occurs.
MR. BALLES.

MS. TEETERS.
MR. BLACK.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Absolutely.

Exactly.
Did Meese say he or the President?
I did not see it.

2/1-2/82

MR. ROOS.
It was just a passing remark in which he said he
felt that the President was going to get together with [the Federal
Reserve Chairman]-MR. GUFFEY.
fiscal policy.
MR. RICE.
passing remark.

--for the purpose of coordinating monetary and
It really was not an announcement;

MR. BLACK.

it was just a

I thought it was Meese who was going to do the

talking.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably is going to happen anyway.
Senator Baker has been saying it is going to be done all along. So,
there is going to be a natural response to that.
I would not read
anything more into that than when people like Senator Baker are all
over the paper saying it should be done.
I see him sometimes anyway
and there is going to be a certain amount of hullabaloo about it.
MR. SCHULTZ.
We have real costs in terms of credibility if
we change the targets.
We ought to change them only if we have good,
strong reasons. And I disagree with Larry Roos; I think if we have
good strong reasons to change them, we are better off changing them in
March or April than right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the problems that Larry mentioned are,
of course, there.
It just depends upon the setting. If we came out
of the clear blue sky and said we are going to change them, that is
one thing.
If people saw the economy in bad shape, interest rates at
18 percent and so on, we have a different setting.
It is awfully hard
to predict these things.
MS. TEETERS.

What are the consequences of being--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ordinarily I would agree with you that it
is better now. But then, better now in which way?
MS. TEETERS.
The political consequences of being the sole
cause of a continuing 9 percent rate of unemployment can be greater
than anybody is talking about around this table.
MR. SCHULTZ.
But I do not believe that at all.
I just do
not believe that the monetary policy that we have carried out has been
the sole cause or even the primary cause.
I think this country was in
for some real economic problems.
Inflation was just shooting up like
crazy. And I do not think that we can be held responsible for all of
this.
It is clear that if we are going to change inflation, we have
to go through a painful period.
There was never an easy way out of
this. I refuse to accept the view that monetary policy has to take
credit and I do not think it is correct to say that if we change
monetary policy, everything is going to get better all of a sudden. I
just do not believe that that is going to be the case.
SPEAKER(?).

Hear, hear!

MR. WALLICH. It seems to be a pretty widespread view that it
is the budget that is responsible.

2/1-2/82

-99-

MS. TEETERS.
this year.

Not this year.

Our problem is 1983; it is not

I think the market looks ahead; and interest
MR. WALLICH.
rates went up for no particular reason other than the budget.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me come back and see whether we
We have a proposal on how to present this on the
can resolve this.
There are problems with
table.
There obviously are pros and cons.
it, as expressed by Larry Roos and others; they are clearly there.
If we contemplate that
There are also, obviously, some advantages.
approach, to some degree it is going to affect how people look at the
Do we proceed on the
precise decision, which I want to get to next.
basis of making that decision against that kind of background or not?
What is the consensus?
MR. PARTEE.

What are the options?

[The issue is] whether we open the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
possibility of coming back at midyear or before and in effect confess
that we have some question in our mind about whether the range is too
tight on M1.
MR. PARTEE.

Or whether we rebase now?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whether we rebase or not, we just
exclude that point and we do not express any doubt about our target.
That is the only question on that. Then we get into an argument about
whether to rebase now or not.
MR. ROOS.
Paul, would it be possible, without tipping our
Can't you
hand, to say that we might come back if it were tight?
build a case that there are a lot of imponderables and that it may be
necessary to change the targets without saying in which direction-just signalling that we are always flexible.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. SCHULTZ.

Our record shows that.
We are always flexible; we just haven't flexed

yet.
MR. WALLICH. We do expose ourselves to [heavy] pressure if
I
we say we are flexible. And one has to take that into account.
really prefer the flexibility, provided we can resist [the pressure].
MR. BALLES. Our problems remind me of a definition I
It is usually the choice between the
recently heard of diplomacy:
undesirable and the unacceptable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, I think, precisely where we are.
One is going to be
I am just asking for people's judgment on this.
affected by the next question, so all we can do is ask for a
preliminary view on whether that generally makes sense and whether for
the moment that is the way we want to approach the other decision.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I am not sure what the other decision is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Where the target should be precisely.

2/1-2/82

rebasing;

100-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
There are two alternatives:
the other is just to stick with the targets.
MS.

TEETERS.

Or

One is

change them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Or we can change them.
We have three
alternatives; that is right.
Can we pass on to that decision,
operating on the presumption for the moment that there will be in the
statement something to the effect that upon further examination of
this recent bulge and depending upon developments, we would be willing
to consider the possibility that the M1 target might be too low?
MR. CORRIGAN.

to

And

it would be

rebased.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Presumably.
I am not
that, but I would refer to the base question.
MR. WALLICH.

The target is not too low;

committing ourselves

the base

is too

high.
MR. PARTEE.
You want to be pretty specific about it,
the way you just stated it, it sounds as if we have flinched.

because

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
All right.
Well, I just did not want to
prejudge the Committee.
I am willing to state it as the target, with
the base the [fundamental] question.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes,

that is the analytic argument.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Well,
think I have much [support];
MS.

TEETERS.

I prefer to rebase now, but I do not
not too many people are with me.

I would prefer to rebase now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Well, I am sure some have that preference,
but I take it that it is not the prevailing preference.
So, let's go
to the targets.
We have 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent [for M1], 6 to 9
percent [for M2], and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [for M3].
I must say
regarding that 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent:
What is your projection for
next year?
MR. AXILROD.
9 percent.

For M3?

For M3 we would have growth of around

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
And there we probably have the clearest
technical reason for saying something; there's just more [financing]
running through the banking system.
Why were bank credit and M3 so
divergent this past year?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, we have in M3 many things that are not in
bank credit, such as the money market funds and Eurodollars held
overseas.
I think that is a good part of the reason.

M2,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
We had a big differential between M3 and
and one would think that that would reflect the banking component.

2/1-2/82

-101-

MR. AXILROD. That would be the large CDs, the long-term RPs,
and Eurodollars other than overnight--those maturing in more than one
day.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know what it is statistically.
Why are large CDs, Eurodollars maturing more than overnight and so
forth going up so much more rapidly than bank credit?
MR. AXILROD.

I stand corrected on the Eurodollars, which are

in L.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, there are a number of factors
involved here. Arithmetically and I think analytically, one is the
way the banks financed their asset growth.
It was much more through
the issuance of large time deposits and much less through Eurodollar
borrowings and the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is what I assumed was the
answer, as a matter of fact.
MR. PRELL.

That is one factor.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Another factor--

Eurodollar borrowings are not in M3,

right?
MR. PRELL.

slowly.

That is right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they went down, in effect, or rose
That is the answer, I guess.

MR. PRELL. The money market funds are another factor
contributing to the divergence.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

What are your latest data on L?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have already said this but just to get
other responses, assuming what I took as the consensus:
The argument
seems to me pretty strong not to horse around with the figures.
MR. PARTEE.

That is one view.

There is a minority--

MR. BALLES.
Well, some of us had a different view yesterday.
I have not changed my mind, but obviously those of us who felt that
way appear to be in a minority.
MR. PARTEE.
I don't know; there were quite a number on M2,
think. I did not distinguish between voting members and other
presidents.

I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there was a majority for not
changing it, but there was quite a difference.
A number of people did
suggest changing it; that is true.
At least five of the whole group
and some [voting members] did not address themselves to it directly.
MR. SCHULTZ.

Why don't you have a show of hands?

2/1-2/82

-102-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's just take the whole proposition that
we say we do not change any of the targets.
Who would have a
preference for that?
MR. PARTEE.
MR. ROOS.

That we are not going to change anything?
Voting members or everybody?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take voting members first.
Six. This is all against the background of admitting that we might
change later.
I do not know how the nonvoting members feel about it.
That adds a little weight here when we-MR. ROOS.
If we went with the present M1 target, would you
consider saying that we would seek something at the upper [end of the]
range?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I prefer not to say it in terms of
seeking that, which just implies a degree of fine-tuning that I think
is beyond this.
I have no trouble saying that the upper end is
perfectly acceptable and that it may well come out that way, as we see
things at the moment.
It is just a subtle distinction from saying we
actually will aim at the upper end.
But I have no problem at all
saying that as we now see things the upper part of that range would be
perfectly acceptable.
I think the open question may be what arguments
people want to make for changes and we'll see whether that can command
any more people than we now have.
What would be the nature of [any
proposed] change in the ranges for M1 or M2 or M3?
MS. TEETERS.
not like the outlook.

Well, I have stated my argument before.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I do

You want them all higher?

MS. TEETERS.
I want to change the ranges and I want to give
more opportunity for growth and some opportunity to reduce the
unemployment rate, some opportunity to reduce the interest rates, and
some help to the savings and loan and the housing industries.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No matter what we say about the future,
you want to increase everything?
MS. TEETERS. Yes.
I think monetary policy is much too tight
for the state of the economy.
MR. GRAMLEY.
I would like to argue the case for raising the
range for M2.
Given the fact that we are postponing any decision on
rebasing, changing the range for M1 would make no sense at all.
We
would lose any credibility that we might otherwise hold by sticking
with this postponement. But for M2 the most persuasive case seems to
be the fact that in the past two years growth has been running over
the upper end of the target range.
I grant that there may be some
arguments to the effect that that problem will be a little less in the
future.
But, as Governor Partee pointed out, we do not know what
these IRA accounts are going to do to the magnitude of M2; and more
importantly we do not know what will happen to M2 growth if in fact we
get a one point or thereabouts increase in the saving rate.
That
could add [to M2] considerably. And I would much prefer a target

2/1-2/82

-103-

range that
context of
Therefore,
range to 7

had some realistic hope of being realized within the
a growth in nominal GNP in the 8 to 9 percent range.
I think a persuasive case could be made for raising the M2
to 10 percent.

MR. BOEHNE.

I second Governor Gramley's comment.

MR. BALLES.

I third it.

I think we could [present] this,
I fourth it.
MR. PARTEE.
Paul, as being consistent with the President's program. The President
is after more savings and more investment, and we have major changes
in tax policy that are designed to bring that about. Therefore, we
anticipate that we might have a somewhat higher M2 because that is the
In addition, we have been high on M2
form in which it would show up.
anyway because it is so closely related to the nominal [GNP] increase
and expenditures in the economy and, therefore, we are raising it.
MR. MORRIS.
accounts out of M2?

Wouldn't it make more sense to take the IRA

Well, that is going to be very hard to do I'm
MR. PARTEE.
afraid. They are in a bunch of different deposit forms.
They are not
just in-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We are going to get statistics on it,

though.
MR. PARTEE.

I anticipate real difficulty.

MR. MORRIS.
But they are not liquid assets.
we cannot identify them?
MR. PARTEE.

Are you saying

A lot of them are in small saver certificates

and-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We cannot identify them, as I understand
it, without collecting more statistics.
MR. AXILROD. We will be collecting data to the end of
getting the aggregate instead of just the various subcomponents that
we now have.
But an IRA is not a liquid asset unless one is
MR. MORRIS.
59-1/2 years old or older.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There
But, of course,
taking them out.
I think one could say flatly that
more distortion in the trend--but
leaving them in.
But it moves in

is a good logical argument for
then we have the opposite problem.
in taking them out there would be
we could adjust for it--than in
the opposite direction.

I received a solicitation this weekend from
MS. TEETERS.
Sears to establish an IRA account.
If you were
MR. PARTEE. That probably would not be in M2.
prepared to say that we would take account of growth in IRAs and Keogh
accounts and any change in the saving rate that occurred in response

104

2/1-2/82

to the President's program, then I guess I could live with 6 to 9
percent, because I think that would be saying that we would accept
something higher than that.
MS. TEETERS.
saving rate?

How would you feed back the change in the

MR. PARTEE. Just take account of it.
that it would be higher if we say--

All we do is conclude

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think Chuck's suggestion opens up
an interesting area of compromise.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, from my standpoint, I am inclined to give
I do not regard that as a-more explicit weight to M2.
MR. PARTEE.

It is very fuzzy.

MR. GRAMLEY. It is very fuzzy and it says, in effect, that
we really do not give a damn what M2 does; we are really concentrating
It says:
If M2 goes up above the upper end, so what?
on M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is an implicit tradeoff in your
proposal, as nearly as I can understand it.
You want a little higher
number but you would make it more rigid, in effect, than it has been.
MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.
I would like to pay more attention to M2.
I think it is important for us not just to do that internally but to
communicate that because I believe the volatility of M1 is giving rise
to a great deal of misunderstanding--and indeed misunderstanding on
our part as to the effects on interest rates and the economy of our
decisions, which I think is unfortunate. We have to be more tranquil
about these short-run movements in M1.
And if we do not develop that
attitude ourselves, we are going to be building increasing problems
for the future.
MR. CORRIGAN.
I don't know; frankly, I am very troubled at
the prospect of opening up this rebasing issue and changing the M2
target.
I think Governor Schultz is right on the mark on this
question. The issue, as Governor Teeters suggests, is getting
unemployment down and all the rest, but not for a quarter or two.
The
issue in some sense is trying to be supportive of a sound approach to
fiscal policy. But we are sitting here looking at a fiscal situation
that is just untenable. And one of the concerns I have--and maybe it
is tilting at our windmills a little--is that if the perception is
that we really are easing, any prospect of being able to do better on
the fiscal side is weakened as well because that creates the
impression that we are going to sit here and monetize all that debt.
I am under no illusion that we are going to have a magic wand come
over fiscal policy in the next six months; but if we are perceived as
easing, I think fiscal policy will go in the direction of further ease
rather than the other way around. So, I must say I would be troubled
at the prospect of doing both of these things, because for the long
term it does not produce the result of lower unemployment and
healthier thrifts and all the rest.
I think it works the other way.
MR. BOEHNE.
I wonder if there is a common ground here with
what Chuck Partee has proposed.
It seems to me that the allowances he

-105

2/1-2/82

I think
has spelled out do give us some flexibility on the up side.
there is some merit in that in terms of bridging the gap here.
I have no problem with that. Maybe that
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
is the practical alternative on the table. Let me leave M3 and bank
credit aside for the moment. Let's not get into those; whatever we do
I think what I have
with them is literally almost insignificant.
heard, obviously with the exception of Nancy Teeters, is that if we
have this note of reservation, nobody wants to argue about fiddling
I will proceed
Do I hear that correctly?
around with the M1 range.
on that assumption.
Quite clearly, there are people who want to raise the M2
range. Let me give you two alternatives that I see now. One,
consistent with this idea that we open up the possibility of rebasing
and review, is that we stick to the targets we now have with the
What concerns a lot of
comment that Governor Partee made about M2.
people about fooling around with any of these is whether we are going
The alternative is to go ahead and change M2 and not make
to rebase.
Let me put
the comments about rebasing. Would anybody prefer that?
We stick basically with the M1 range; we raise the M2
it this way:
range by 1 percentage point; and we do not say anything about the
possibility of rebasing. Does that seem preferable to anybody?
MR. ROOS.

That is a lesser of the two--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
see any others.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. RICE.

I would join those three to make it four.
I would too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

would be
It might
past and
seems to

I saw three people saying yes; I did not

Okay.

MR. MORRIS.
Not saying anything about rebasing, I think,
the sensible thing. That raises the imagery of manipulation.
cause some people to remember that we have not rebased in the
It
this selective rebasing charge could be [unintelligible].
me if we are going to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to do anything about it
today. We never do anything about it because we never consider it
But what we do now seems to me rather silly,
until we get there.
frankly. We do it all the time because we get trapped into it; I just
regurgitate every time we have to put all this emphasis on what
We get locked into
happened in a particular three months of the year.
Well, that is what we did before, so we have to do it
that. We say:
There is some sentiment, though I
again.
But that is where we are.
do not detect a consensus, to go that way, which is a possibility.
That leaves me with the degree of consensus we have on the other
[alternative], which is basically leaving these ranges and making a
specific comment about M2 and the savings connection and that we think
it is quite likely M2 will be near the top of that range. We say that
is perfectly acceptable and, in any event, M2 could be over [the
range] if the savings and the IRA and Keogh accounts turned out to be
That is what
significant. Thus, we are putting you on due warning.
On M1, based upon what we know now, we think this range
we say on M2.

-106

2/1-2/82

is appropriate. We do not exclude the possibility that, if this
recent development seemed to be of a more permanent character, which
bears upon the basic demand for money, we would come back to you at
midyear or before and change that.
That carries some connotation, but
I think it is consistent with the decision that we just made that we
are not going to fight tooth and nail to reverse January. We already
decided that, so I think it is perfectly consistent with what we have
already decided.
What is the degree of consensus as to how acceptable
that is?
I want to put it in terms of acceptability at this point.
It seems we have the voting members.
I guess what I hear is that it
sounds pretty acceptable,
MR. GRAMLEY.

We are doing it with words not deeds.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I do not detect any other
course that is more acceptable at this point.
In the absence of any
comments that [some alternative would be] more acceptable, let me just
describe it again so there is no doubt in people's minds. This is
what would appear in the record:
We reviewed these targets;
considerable concern was expressed about the recent developments in M1
which suggest that some relationships could be developing that we did
not anticipate. We think it is too early to make that judgment.
We
want to reaffirm the continuity of policy, but if we get further
evidence that the presumption upon which we established this target is
wrong, particularly considering the fact that we ended up below the
target last year, we would be prepared to reconsider this matter. But
we think it is more likely that we will have some relaxation here,
which would make the present target appropriate. On M2, we say we
think it is likely and desirable that growth be toward the upper end
of the range; it is possible that a higher saving rate combined with
the impact of IRA and Keogh accounts would introduce an element here
that has not been there in recent years, which would change this
relationship somewhat.
If that were a discernable influence on M2, we
would be satisfied with being somewhat above the upper end of that
target.
I think that is about as clearly as I can state it.
And we
just leave the M3 range [unchanged].
Does it make any difference to
anybody where M3 and bank credit are?
What do you have for bank
credit [growth]?
MR. AXILROD.

8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

That is your projection?

That is our projection.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And what is the range you are suggesting?

MR. AXILROD.
I think the Committee might as well stay with
the range it has of 6 to 9 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A very small wrinkle:
If people wanted to
raise the range for M3 on the very simple argument that we expect more
financing to be done through the banking system and that affects M3-MR. PARTEE.
credit, don't we?

Then we almost have to raise the range for bank

2/1-2/82

107-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
slightly, too, then.

We might raise the bank credit range

But suppose we get a switch from
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
large CDs to Eurodollar financing?
MR. GRAMLEY.

Well, nobody pays any attention to those

MS. TEETERS.

We have yet to--

targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
one way or the other.
MR. CORRIGAN.
some bond financing?
MR. FORD.

Well, I guess it is not important to me

Suppose interest rates come down and we get

Why not drop

[those two targets]?

I do not think it hurts anything to have
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[them].
So, forget about M3 and bank credit; we just take what falls
out.
Leaving the ranges unchanged is the preliminary suggestion.
MR. AXILROD. We will make the proper adjustment for the bank
credit base because of the IBFs. We either have to go from DecemberJanuary or the fourth quarter, properly adjusted, because of the IBF
shifts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it would be a good idea just
to change the base on that to get in the idea of changing a base.
Here we have such a clear technological change that hardly anybody
could question it,
MR. AXILROD. It would still be 8 percent [growth]
December-January base. That is how our estimates fell.

from the

It would still be the same target,
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
but we would rebase [bank credit]?

Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, because of the introduction of IBFs.
If there are no other questions, we can vote.
MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Boehne
President Boykin
President Corrigan
Governor Gramley
President Keehn
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Schultz
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Eleven for, one against, Mr. Chairman.

2/1-2/82

-108-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you very much.
something, Governor Schultz?

You wanted to say

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, everybody has heard enough from me
already, and I guess you are going to hear a little more. But just to
make you feel better, I would remind you that this will be the last
day that you will have to do this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We might have an emergency shortly.

MR. SCHULTZ.
I wanted to sing a little swan song today. You
understand that swans do not sing very prettily but they generally
sing a long time, so you will have to indulge me.
Just remember that
I am very shortly going to turn into an ugly duckling!
There are a couple of points that I wanted to make before I
leave.
You people are going to be under a lot of political pressure
this year and a lot of outside pressure, and I have a little political
advice for you.
You understand that you have to be careful about
political advice from a losing politician, and I fall within that
category, but that is not always true.
It is my belief that over time
what is right is the best politics.
I believe that if you do what is
right and you are steadfast and consistent in your policies, the
political pressures will ease and you will not be in great danger from
them.
You are also going to have considerable internal pressures.
I know I felt enormous internal pressures about whether what we were
doing was right and whether what we were doing was the best way to go
about it.
Clearly, there are costs to this technique that we are
using; we have all kinds of problems.
But when the question is asked
of me:
If you were going to do anything differently than you have
done over the past 2-1/2 years what would you do?
I say that I did
not like the credit controls and that I think we might have reacted a
little better to the increase in 1980, but I honestly believe that the
technique we are using now is considerably better than what we were
doing.
It is like Winston Churchill's comment about democracy being
the worst form of government ever devised except for all the others.
I think the operative question is not whether this technique we are
using now is better than some other technique in an ideal world but
whether it is better in view of what we have had to face.
It just
seems clear to me that it has enabled us in a time of great volatility
to adjust interest rates more quickly and to adjust them far enough to
I do not
have some market impact. I am with Tony Solomon on this.
know what these linkages are; they are getting looser and the demand
shifts are coming more and more often; I don't know what the heck is
But the real
money; all of these kinds of things are very difficult.
question is:
What alternative do we have at this point in time?
And
it seems to me that what we are doing is the alternative that is best
at this point.
I read the other day that somebody criticized us for playing
to history.
I would certainly hope that we do indeed have a sense of
history.
It strikes me that with the political system we have in this
country and an election every two years, it is impossible to take a
We are the only organization
long-range view in the political sphere.
that seems to have the opportunity and the ability to take a longrange view. Again, I think the pressures are going to be enormous

2/1-2/82

because, whatever you do. the economy is not just going to get better
very quickly. And the question that is going to be asked of you is:
I do not
How much pain are you willing to inflict on the economy?
happen to think that it is [the Federal Reserve] that has been
inflicting the pain on the economy, but that is the question that you
What is the alternative?
are going to get asked. And the answer is:
If you stop now in this fight against inflation, if you do not carry
it through, what kind of pain are you going to inflict on the economy
then?
It is an issue that just has to be faced and I believe it is a
lot easier to face it now and overcome the problem now than it will be
later on.
Finally, I would urge you to remember that you have a
remarkable degree of support out there. Nobody is going to love a
But
central bank; and heaven knows, nobody loves high interest rates.
the fact is that the Federal Reserve has built up an awful lot of
respect out there. People in this country want to believe in
something and you are about all there is to believe in at this time.
I think there are a lot of people ready to come to your defense; you
have been seeing some comments recently in the news magazines and the
newspapers in response to the current criticism. A lot of people out
there want to support you.
I think you really do need to try to keep
in contact with those people and marshal that support when it becomes
necessary, because the fact of the matter is that you are still the
And good luck to you!
only game in town.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Fred, without prejudging any
comments anybody may want to make later, I think your contribution on
this Committee has been immensely important to all of us and I think
we can acknowledge that around this little circle now before we go to
lunch where, prejudging it, we can do you a little honor.
We
appreciate very much those comments on what has been a variety of
experiences in your life and your full devotion to this one in the
past 2-1/2 years.
We ought to adjourn to lunch but I am reminded that
I have forgotten two things that we ought to do in the nature of
cleaning up.
I mentioned Mr. Reuss' proposal to you yesterday and I
understood from the reactions that you did all consider that in your
I just want to
minds and did not choose that as a desirable course.
be able to report that to him.
Can I take that as a-MS. TEETERS.

Not me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your position is clear and I can report
that his proposal was considered and that one person rendered rather
strong support to his point of view, but it did not command the
I think that is a fair representation of what I
support of the group.
have heard.
The other thing to clean up relates to the short-term
decision. I assumed that what we were talking about was the second
version of the directive. Mr. Altmann has a slight revision, which I
"...for the January-to-March period no
have not seen.
It says:
growth in M1 and growth in M2 at an annual rate of around 8 percent."
That is a slightly different way of saying it.
MR. PARTEE.

Why don't we say

"no further growth"?

2/1-2/82

-110

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "No further growth;" good.
Maybe we can
just stick in a phrase "Considering the size of the recent growth, no
further growth...."
Maybe this is better:
"Taking account of the
recent surge...."

And then the next sentence is

about

as he has it:

Some decline in M1 "would be associated with more rapid attainment of
the longer-run range and would be acceptable in the context of
declining market interest rates."
MR. PARTEE. Would it be acceptable without declining
interest rates?
It would be acceptable period, wouldn't it?
MR. GRAMLEY. If this happened to be a movement along the
function instead of a downward shift in the function, we would get
real trouble.
If, for example, the economy started to collapse-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one could catch a nuance here which
might not be in the sentence; but if it declined in the context of
rising rates, we would presumably ease.
MR. PARTEE.

It struck me as being an inconsistency.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not know whether there is a technical
word or not.
I guess it is not a full description of what we mean.
It certainly would be acceptable in the context of rising rates,
except then we presumably would move to ease.
I do not know whether
there is a better way to say that.
This is basically a phrase we have
used before, isn't it, Steve?
MR. AXILROD. Well, the last time it was used was in December
1980.
We said "In the light of the rapid growth of money and credit
aggregates in recent months, some shortfall [from what had been
specified] would be acceptable in the near term if that developed in
the context of reduced pressures in the money market."
That is what
the directive said in December 1980.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we say "in the context of
reduced pressure in the money market" instead of "declining interest
rates."
I think that is a little more polite way of saying it.
Okay,
then we are agreed and we can go to lunch.
MS. TEETERS.
Wait a minute, we have the date of the next
meeting. That is eight weeks away. Do we want to wait that long?
is a long time.
SEVERAL.

It is a long time.

MR. PARTEE.
I think we probably do, but
conferences [by telephone].

[we can]

have

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I would just leave it.
It
is a long time, but if we want to have a meeting in between we can
obviously do it on the telephone.
I do not think we need to decide
this, but if we felt like having a meeting in person four weeks from
now, would that be welcomed?
MS. TEETERS.
keeping them open.

It is a matter of clearing our calendars or

It

-111-

2/1-2/82

MR. SCHULTZ.

It makes no difference to me!

I think eight weeks is a long time in the
MR. MORRIS.
context that we are in.
Well, what we can do is just pick out a
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Maybe I will send you two dates or something and ask you to
date.
We will not call a meeting, but if
make sure your calendar is clear.
we want to call a meeting, you would have kept a clear calendar.
SPEAKER(?).

Four weeks would be around March 1st?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably it would be approximately
four weeks from now. I will look for some dates about four weeks from
now if that is desirable, but I do not know what my calendar is.
MR. SCHULTZ.

I will be in Hawaii.

MR. GRAMLEY.
You can come back. There is a place for you.
We will give you another lunch if you come back!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you look around March 1st.
I
will not call a meeting now, but I will not be allergic to calling one
if it seems at all desirable.
MR. BOEHNE.

Would you think in terms of a one-day meeting?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I do not know about my own calendar,
but I do not see any reason why-MR. ROOS. A meeting on March 1st or coming in then for a
meeting on March 2nd?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As close to March 1st as I can make it.
may say March 1st if it looks all right from my standpoint.
MR. BALLES.

That happens to be a Monday.

MR. PARTEE.

March 2nd then.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

March 2nd, I think.

I

When is the next

meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

March 30th.

MR. AXILROD.
If that were an updating meeting, Mr. Chairman,
I assume you would not need the full panoply of staff presentations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we would have a more informal
meeting than usual.
More precisely, we would not have the full
panoply.
END OF MEETING

