Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 5, 1982

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 5, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balles

Mr. Black
Mr. Ford
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin 1/
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice

Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Messrs. Ettin, J. Davis, R. Davis, Koch, Prell, Siegman,
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,

System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Entered the meeting following approval of minutes.

10/5/82

- 2 -

Mr. James McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Secretary, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Mullineaux, Scheld,
and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively
Messrs. Broaddus, Bisignano, and Soss, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, San Francisco,
and New York, respectively
Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer and Senior Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 5, 1982
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

We need to approve the minutes.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection.
foreign currency operations.
MR. CROSS.

Next is the report on

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Questions or comments?

MS. TEETERS. We hear rumors through the paper about other
problems in South America. How much of that can you [verify]?
MR. CROSS.
problem situations.

Well, there certainly have been some other

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
must say so.

That's the understatement of the day, if I

MR. CROSS.
The Argentines have been mentioned a great deal,
and currently they have an IMF [team] down there looking toward the
possibility of a Fund program for Argentina. They also are seeking
some assistance from the BIS and from commercial banks.
The
Brazilians feel that they are being [adversely] affected largely by
the spillover effects of the Mexican and the Argentine problems.
For
a period they found it very, very difficult to roll over their
maturing debt, but more recently they sounded a bit more encouraged
[so] that situation looks a little better.
But you're quite right
that there are a number of these very difficult situations, with
monetary troubles in the period [ahead] for a lot of countries down
there.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think the [Brazilian] problem is
particularly sensitive with regard to their foreign exchange deposits
[and whether their] backing by foreign banks will be resumed [as was
the case for] the Argentine agencies.
In New York we have 17
Brazilian agencies and they have been having difficulty getting new
We have
deposits or getting people to leave in the foreign deposits.
a liquidity problem here because, like the Mexican agencies, most of
that money was used to finance Brazilian borrowers, either public or
private.
Tony?

MR. PARTEE.
Did you say you have 17 Brazilian agencies,
Is that right?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two of them are much larger than the
others. But this is part of the whole credit contraction going on in
the foreign member bank markets between-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I want to come back to some of these
questions later.
I think it's better to take them up later in the
context of the whole policy problem. But immediately, we intervened
yesterday, as Sam said, and we may intervene today. The market is
still high. Technically we have to approve yesterday's transactions

10/5/82

anyway.

So,

do I have a motion to

SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

that effect?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, it is approved. As for
the Mexican swap [drawing], whatever our "druthers," the situation is
So, I don't
that I don't think they have any money to pay it off.
As I understand
think we have much alternative to rolling it over.
it, that doesn't take a Committee action but I think you should be
informed.
If somebody wants to object, he or she can object, but the
intention would be to roll that [drawing] over as it matures, noting
that we still have first claim in effect on any Fund drawing that the
Mexicans make, assuming they come to some conclusion with the Fund.
But as to the immediate rollover, we
We'll consider that at the time.
With that
can roll that over cooperatively since otherwise....
understanding, I think we can return to some of these other problems
Mr.
later in the midst of a more general discussion, as I said.
Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Comments or questions?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

MR. FORD.
[If] we can't get the new legislation and this
ruling gains weight in the marketplace, what restructuring would you
How
anticipate in the market with regard to day-to-day operations?
would the market accomplish that?

things.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they will be looking at different
I think there will be some effort to see whether there's a

way to restructure the basic
the same thing but in a more

up better than

[now].

repurchase agreements to do pretty much
acceptable manner in that it would stand

To some extent there may just be a lessened

willingness by a number of "lenders" in the market who provide funds,
When the issue
particularly to smaller, less well-capitalized firms.
is settled--and I get a little sense of this already and that could

spread with [unintelligible]--I don't think it would affect the Desk's
But it could thin
technical ability to [make] repurchase agreements.
out the market in which we do those agreements or we could have
somewhat less [access] to instruments or operations [of this kind].
MR. ROOS.
Peter, do the nonbank dealers let your
surveillance group come in?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. ROOS.

Oh, yes.

On what general basis?

That it's the only way--

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they've been cooperative right along
in doing that and are particularly keen to cooperate now. They prefer
the--

MR. MORRIS.
recognized dealers?

Peter, is the surveillance limited to the

10/5/82

MR. STERNLIGHT. In an [unintelligible] way, yes.
We are
Certainly
exploring whether we would want to extend it beyond that.
if we hear of any problem situations that go beyond the regular
reporting dealer group, we would want to take a look quickly at those
situations.
MR. MORRIS.

Because that is where the problem has arisen

thus far?
Thus far, yes.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

MR. RICE.
Peter, you said that you had the feeling that the
market would be much more tolerant of increases in the money supply
from the target ranges today than it would have been, say, two or
three months ago?
That is my impression.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

MR. RICE.
What's the evidence of that?
How does this
manifest itself? By discussion on the part of some of the dealers at
the Desk or by-MR. STERNLIGHT.
[Unintelligible] from the market who have
written commentaries and from discussions with market participants.
I might
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions?
say that I think this surveillance business involves a moving target
[if that] is the right term; we are feeling our way.
We have to ratify the transactions.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Without objection, they are approved.

Mr.

Kichline.
MR. KICHLINE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to suggest short comments or
questions and we can return again to the general problem a little
later.
I have a question. Your forecast and almost all
MR. BOEHNE.
"The
the forecasts have a phrase in them that says something like:
consumer is going to lead us out of this recession," and economic
logic would suggest that there's something to that. However, when I
talk to people who are in the consumer business--retailers, for
example, and bankers who are in the consumer loan area--they hear that
statement with almost disbelief. The attitudes both on the part of
the sellers, and it seems the buyers, are pretty sour. At least in
the northern part of the country, one hears a lot about selling
blankets and heaters and worries about oil bills and gas bills for
what is supposed to be an unusually cold winter. My real question is:
How do you weight these attitudinal factors versus the real factors.
I think
such as the tax cuts and personal income increases and so on.
how one comes down on that says a lot about what one's forecast is.

10/5/82

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think that's right.
I would say to
begin with that heaters and blankets count as consumer spending as
does natural gas use, so that may be a plus in terms of the forecast.
Secondly, I would say that for some time the views that have come out
in the Redbook and elsewhere from retailers are fairly gloomy; in
fact, one might be led to the view that personal consumption
That
expenditures were declining dramatically, just looking at that.
In the first half of the year, personal
is really not the case.
consumption expenditures were up at an annual rate of 2-1/2 percent.
Our estimate for the third quarter is a rise at a rate of 1-3/4
So
percent and we have 3-1/2 percent for the fourth quarter.
consumption will be up, in our view. But I would say that one would
have to be cautious interpreting what retailers anticipate and what
[Your
their results were. They have been disappointed, very clearly.
comment about] the consumption-led forecast is quite correct in that
if two-thirds of the GNP doesn't respond in the way we have forecast,
we're in a great deal of difficulty in part because of the rather poor
So,
prospects in the investment sector and the export sector.
I would only
overall, [the consumer sector] is a source of concern.
remark that in our forecast we have what is a very mild cyclical
It's a bit weaker than many of the other forecasts and the
upturn.
It's probably very important
attitude issue, I think, is important.
in the short run where the economic news is likely to be very
negative.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Well, coming at this confidence factor from a
little different direction, since as we all know both consumer
confidence and business confidence do play a key part in what really
I was wondering,
happens, and both I'm afraid are quite weak today:
Jim, if you have given any thought--and I'm sure you have--to the
likelihood that we may see a triple-dip recession. What probability
would you assign to that, if you really had a chance to think it
through?
MR. KICHLINE.
Well, I certainly wouldn't make it the most
probable outcome. Our forecast represents our highest probability
[outcome].
But for the near term, and let's view that as over the
next quarter or two, there are clear downside risks in that there is
quite likely to be a negative [GNP] number in the third quarter or a
negative number in the fourth quarter, and one might classify that as
I wouldn't say the same if I were to take a bit longer
a triple-dip.
I'd just like to say that in the
horizon, particularly over 1983.
first year of recovery in the postwar period we've had rates of
The staff
increase of real GNP on the order of 7 to 8 percent.
But
forecast is for 3 percent. It is 3 percent for good reason.
lowering that number, I think, begins to get a bit risky on the down
side.
It's very difficult when the economy, hopefully, is near the
bottom of a recession to spot the potential sources of strength, but
for now it seems to me that there are clear risks on the consumer
side.
On the business investment side, while we have had a major
So, I think
downturn in this cycle, it could very easily go weaker.
the short-run risks are on the down side.
MR. BALLES.
Jim, one other question, if I can follow up on
that:
As we look back to, say, last spring--I haven't really checked
the record so this is strictly my recollection but it is reasonably

10/5/82

clear--your forecast, our forecast, and most private forecasts were
confidently expecting an upturn in the third quarter.
Month after
month has gone by and we haven't seen it; I still don't see it.
It's
still a forecast and not a fact.
Do you have any insight into what
has delayed that widely expected and anticipated upturn?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, in our own forecast, one of the major
things that we have done is to write down business fixed investment;
there has been a greater deterioration there. And in the third
quarter, while we had the tax cut, it came along a bit smaller than we
had anticipated earlier; nevertheless, it was there.
In fact, other
income didn't come along, so that we didn't have as large a growth in
disposable income in the third quarter principally because of the
sharp cutbacks in business fixed investment and the lingering
inventory problems. So it's in these other sectors that we
underestimated the weakness or overestimated the performance.
I don't
know of any other major area.
I guess net exports is another area, as
Jerry is telling me; that indeed is one of the reasons why we're much
weaker than the Commerce Department in the third quarter.
The
expected performance of net exports is much below Commerce's estimate
and the August data that have come in are even weaker than that.
So,
exports and business fixed investment have been quite weak relative to
our expectations and actual experience.
MR. BALLES.
I wonder, in the final shot at this:
To what
extent, in your opinion, do the still unprecedentedly high levels of
real interest rates explain some of this weakness or failure to
recover?
MR. AXILROD.
MR. BALLES.

I intend to get into this in my briefing.
I'll wait for your words of wisdom.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. You have an impressively low inflation
prediction.
In evaluating the impact of interest rates on investment,
business, and housing, does that mean that you're also looking at a
higher real rate and consequently a greater restraint on investment
than other observers?
MR. KICHLINE. I have a lot of trouble with real rates--well,
a lot of difficulty in terms of knowing what inflation expectations
are.
It seems to me that real rates are high; if inflation rates are
going down and expectations of inflation allow for that, then we
indeed do have higher real rates.
That's one of the elements, I would
say, in that some of the major commercial forecasters have assumed
higher rates of growth of M1 for next year--a percent or a percent and
a half faster--so they indeed have lower nominal interest rates than
the staff. So, interest rates are one of the drags here, and they
have been for some time, in terms of monetary constraint standing in
the way of recovery.
MR. MARTIN. Let me ask a question with regard to consumer
attitudes and the [role] of the consumer balance sheet, if you will,
in that. Which way, if any, does the substantial improvement in the
consumer's liquidity position cut vis-a-vis attitudes toward

10/5/82

residential [property] on the asset side?
That is:
Is the consumer
likely to consider his wealth as a plus or a minus factor?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, that differs with individual consumers.
I think you are quite right in pointing out that short-term borrowing
has been rather moderate; in fact, repayments relative to income have
come off from their peak in late 1978.
But at the same time one of
the major sources of wealth in the household sector, namely housing,
has clearly become less liquid for many.
MR. MARTIN.

And less valuable perhaps.

MR. KICHLINE. And the price may well have gone down. Those
are offsetting factors and I don't know how one would come out, but it
certainly-MR. MARTIN.
That was my question.
You're not coming out?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

together.
alone.

How does one come out?

The answer is he doesn't know.

MR. KICHLINE. One simply has to put those two things
One can't look at the improvement in short-term liquidity

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I heard a commentary on the radio when I
got up this morning indicating that fuel is in ample supply for this
winter season.
I don't know the survey, but what surprised me is that
they said prices are going to be--I forget precisely what number they
That surprised me a little
used--6 to 12 percent above last year.
because I thought that oil prices had leveled off during this period.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

This was oil.

Did they say that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.
heating fuel.

Gas has gone down.

Yes, it was about oil supplies.

I think the reports have been on private home

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
talking about.

This was home heating fuel that they were

MR. GRAMLEY.
Supplies of home heating fuel I think are
rather low relative to the stock of petroleum generally.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was a two sentence comment in the
news.
They said they had done a little survey and stocks were ample.
People were going to have plenty of fuel this winter but the price was
going to be 6 to 12 percent higher.
MR. PARTEE.
Being a consumer, Paul, [I recall that] the
price rose as the last heating seasonal went off and it hasn't
So, this season will start out
declined except by two or three cents.
with prices materially higher than at the beginning of last season.

10/5/82

MR. KICHLINE.

Well,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
while but it may be that it
surprised me that they were

we don't have that

in our forecast.

I thought it had been level for a long
got back to where it was a year ago.
It
up that much in a year.

MR. FORD.
I have one quick question about your forecast.
Looking at your forecast compared to others we track yours against-Townsend-Greenspan, DRI, Citibank, and Chase--you are uniformly the
most bearish for the next three quarters, and by a substantial margin.
You have far and away the lowest GNP growth rates, the lowest
inflation forecast, and the highest unemployment forecast, which are
all consistent in a very bearish pattern.
I just want to understand
if what you said in answer to a question--from John, I think--was that
your next-best forecast was even more bearish.
MR. GRAMLEY.
May I point out one other factor in this
respect?
The staff forecast has been uniformly the most pessimistic
for the past year-and-a-half and it has overestimated the performance
of the economy.
MR. FORD.

You are

saying they

are right.

MR. GRAMLEY.
We're looking at a situation in which I think
Jim is quite right that all the risks at this point are on the down
side, both from the domestic demand side and from export demand.
MR. FORD.
One thing that worries me is what none of us
Do you
expects.
We are all very bearish and you are very bearish.
give zero probability, then, to the possibility of a surge in the
economy?
The consumer's car is getting older and older; more and more
consumers are looking for a place to live as all these baby boomers
get married or whatever [and create households].
With household
liquidity getting stronger and stronger and with savings up, you don't
see any possibility of a surge in the economy?
MR. KICHLINE.
Not in the very short run.
We have indeed
built in a bit of an increase in auto sales.
In that market, all of
the news I've run across has to be viewed as rather negative.
I
wouldn't perceive any of these areas as bursting out on the up side in
the very near term, but I wouldn't extend that forecast through 1983,
as I said.
We have in our forecast some pluses in these areas.
It's
a matter of how much.
I don't know of anything at the moment that
would suggest to me that we are likely to see major growth in the very
But these issues are debatable and I certainly wouldn't
short term.
want to argue the consumer case very strongly [even] in the short
term.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE.
Well, I was one who believed that there would be
a recovery in the second half.
But I must say that over the years the
two indicators that I have watched and thought most consistently
indicated the future were new orders for durable goods and initial
claims for [unemployment] insurance.
And they both have [tended] to
We had a 4 percent decline in durable goods
vary significantly.
orders in the latest month and we had a very substantial increase in

10/5/82

initial claims for insurance.
So I see no reason that we shouldn't
predict a decline in activity in the period to come.
MR. ROOS.

Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes,

sir.

MR. ROOS.
Just to avoid total desperation, we have a little
more positive view of [the outlook].
First of all, we weren't
surprised at the fairly slow growth in output in the third quarter
because we feel that it was to a great extent a reflection of the
However,monetary contraction that occurred earlier in the year.

[went]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I never figured out where that expansion
from the monetary expansion still earlier in the year.

MR. ROOS.
We think--and again it's a matter of relative
value--that the contraction in output would have been even worse had
there not been that expansion. However, we feel that if money is
allowed to grow at, say, 5 to 5-1/2 percent or slightly above that, we
will see a much more positive effect on output certainly starting next
year.
We observe in the record that the economy always tends to move
toward about a 3-1/2 percent trend growth of output. We think,
inasmuch as we've had about 3 years of very slow growth--and we blame
it on monetary contractions--and price increases have finally slowed
and real interest rates are approaching normal levels, that much of
the adjustment that was caused by that and by foreign competition
being a factor in heavy industry has been completed. We think that
quite conceivably we could have a bit faster rebound next year, based
on 5-1/2 percent money growth, than some others have forecast.
If I'm
wrong, I won't be here, Mr. Chairman; if I'm right, you'll hear from
me!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Larry rescued us from the straits
of desperation and said some of the things I had in mind.
There are
two things that might be helpful to remember here. One is that it
always looks very, very bleak right at the bottom and we all get very
pessimistic, and I'm much more pessimistic than any of my associates
in Richmond. The second point is that there's a very low pickup in
velocity projected over the next four quarters. And traditionally
most forecasters at this stage of the business cycle--maybe I should
say at this apparent stage--have underestimated the pickup in
velocity. We ought to bear those things in mind as we move through
the meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
we'll turn to Mr. Axilrod.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. MORRIS.

If no one else has an immediate comment,

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Steve, I think the answer to all your questions

is "yes."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
hastily.

We don't want to prejudge these things too

10/5/82

MR. ROOS.
Well, isn't this similar to the NOW account
situation?
Didn't we adjust for NOW accounts?
Can't we do the same
thing and avoid the possibility that people would misconstrue this as
a major change in policy?
MR. AXILROD.
We could make efforts to make shift adjustments
in somewhat the same way, probably with the same degree of
credibility.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might feel differently if I
thought they had the same degree of credibility. I don't think the
staff is capable of making them with the same degree of credibility,
however great that was, as last time.
MR. AXILROD.

I thought it was small.

MS. TEETERS.
Steve, how would you actually operate?
How
would you draw your reserves paths [with a] wider specification?
MR. PARTEE.

Run on the funds rate!

MR. AXILROD.
If there were not a specification for M1 and
there were for M2 or M3, we would draw them on the basis of the M2 or
M3 specifications and we would draw an M1 path, unless told otherwise,
that we thought was generally consistent with that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of ourselves in this.

I think we may be getting a little ahead

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I have a question on the instrument
the DIDC [plans to authorize].
As I understand it, it seems that at a
minimum what we're going to get out of the DIDC is an instrument that
goes into M2.
But it depends on how they word it.
If they put out
two instruments, one of which is reserveable, then the one that is
reserveable would be in M1.
Is that correct?
MR. AXILROD. Well, the one that is reserveable certainly
would be in M1.
Where the other one would be is a question one would
have to consider carefully, I think. It will [allow] at least six
transfers. Our present boundary line, other than for money market
funds, is about three transfers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't make any difference where we

put it.

MR. PARTEE. But, Tony, a ceiling-free reserveable deposit
has a lot of different implications for M1 than one on which the
maximum [rate] paid is 5-1/4 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right; I understand that.
But if the
DIDC words it fairly broadly, and we insist that because of the number
of transactions exceeding the six--I gather it's three drafts or
checks and three other forms of authorized transfers--then we could
put a reserve requirement on it so that in both cases on anything
over, let's say, $5,000, they would be paying market rates, except
that one would be marginally lower than the other because of the
reserve requirement.
It seems inevitable to me that the reserveable
one would be in M1, in which case we might get a major bulge.
It's

10/5/82

unpredictable as always. But the other one, which we're sure to get
I don't see-even if they word it narrowly, must be in M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I'm not sure it makes any
difference analytically. It makes a difference in the number,
But in either case we won't know what the heck the number
obviously.
means.
If it were in M2, it could lead to a very sharp
MR. AXILROD.
contraction in M1, if NOW accounts shifted into [that instrument].

enormous

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
swings.
MR. AXILROD.

We would get two unknowns with

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
that may begin in October.

I don't think you touched upon the problem

MR. AXILROD. No, I didn't mention in this briefing the all
savers certificates, Mr. Chairman. We mentioned in the Bluebook that
this week $22 billion of originally issued all savers certificates
mature, with a maturity value of $25 billion including interest. Our
limited preliminary estimate of the likely effect on M1, which is
nothing more than a very informed guess-Steve did a
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's informed about it?
survey of four people all of whom are going to put it into M1,
including himself!
We are at the moment guessing that there will
MR. AXILROD.
be about a $7 billion increase in M1 in the current week from that.
But it could, depending on how long it lasts--though we think it would
And there are a
be temporary generally--have a very sizable effect.
total of $33 billion or so maturing in the course of this month.
MS. TEETERS.
People could roll it over into another all
savers certificate, couldn't they?
MR. AXILROD. Yes, if they haven't used up their $2,000 in
tax-free interest. But to the degree one is going to invest in
something else, it could go into a NOW account or demand account
temporarily as one waits to invest it.
And then the all savers certificate disappears
MS. TEETERS.
You can't go into it afterwards?
completely on December 31st?
MR. AXILROD. That I'm not sure about.
MR. PARTEE. You can't go into it, but of course there could
be a lot of outstandings for quite a while.
MR. BALLES.
MR. AXILROD.

Where is that now--in M2?
Yes, they are all in M2.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you think the country would rally
patriotically, if we made a public call that maturing all savers
certificates should be reinvested in M2?

-11-

10/5/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.
worth fighting for?
MR. MORRIS.

It's a little late,

I'm afraid.

On the theory that only the lost causes are

You ought to get your moat up and keep them out!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black, please.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Tony touched on my question. I was
just going to ask Steve if he would elaborate a bit more on conditions
under which this might increase M1 as opposed to decreasing it.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. BLACK.

Do you mean partly the all savers certificates?
I'm talking about the money market account.

MR. AXILROD. Well, if an account were offered, let's say a
Super NOW account, where you could write all the checks you wanted and
that was already in M1 and it was [ceiling] free on funds over a
certain amount, I would see sizable transfers out of money market
funds as well as other savings deposits right into M1 from that. That
would occur almost instantaneously.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If we counted it in M1.

MR. AXILROD.

and it would--

Yes,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically we could get an increase in
M1, I guess, without counting it in M1 if it was so attractive that
everybody went into NOW accounts for their basic account and got an
automatic sweep arrangement into these new accounts. We would get
more increase in the below $5,000 portion of NOW accounts as a kind of
tail on the dog of this new account.
MR. AXILROD.

It's quite conceivable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know how we'd ever measure it.

It's like suddenly permitting a
MR. AXILROD.
We could.
And to the degree the
market rate of interest on demand deposits.
account is like that, it's in M1, which ought to increase.
MR. BLACK.
I have been assuming that the instrument would
not have that much in the way of check-writing privileges and it would
probably depress M1.
MR. AXILROD.
It may very well.
I was answering your
question on the conditions under which it would increase M1.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, would you comment on the likelihood
in your judgment that it would have that much check-writing ability?
There's very
The law says so.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
little left to decide on this.
I think the size of the check is the
only thing that will be--

10/5/82

That might limit its
MR. BLACK. That's what I had in mind.
use to no more activity than present money market mutual funds, which
have a very low rate of turnover relative to the NOW accounts and
That's what
other kinds of transaction balances as currently defined.
I was thinking was the most likely outcome.
[The DIDC] clearly can't circumvent
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
the intent of the Congress by putting a minimum value of $5,000 for
checks.
MR. BLACK. Even $500, Tony, might give it characteristics
more like M2 than M1.
But one could certainly debate that.
MR. CORRIGAN. Even then, we still could get a very sizable
It's very
buildup in M1 balances in connection with the account.
simple to conceive of that situation even with a $1,000 limit.
MR. MORRIS.
Is there any work being done by the staff in
anticipation of the time when we will have to decide what to do with
monetary policy when we finally admit that M1 is no longer a sensible
target?
MR. BLACK.
MR. MORRIS.

You're prejudging our conclusions!
I'm talking about contingency planning.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with Frank, strange as
it may seem, that before we bury my old friend M1 at this meeting-this [new instrument] won't take effect for a couple of months--there
ought to be some work done by the various economic staffs to try to
There are a lot of people who don't like my old
project the effect.
friend M1, and whenever anything changes they say this is a good time
to bury M1.
MR. MORRIS.

We love it.

We just can't find it!

MR. ROOS. But couldn't some study be done prior to changing
I'm a little paranoid--I guess I
our basic approach to policymaking?
have been for most of my life with the Federal Reserve--that every
time something comes up that casts some suspicion on M1, there's an
Does our policy action today
awful lot of readiness to bury it.
require that we do something that's a significant departure from the
Couldn't this matter be studied and
way we've been doing things?
couldn't we have a summit meeting if necessary, a la Jerry's
[suggestion], prior to our next meeting of the FOMC to see what the
best brains in the System think will be the result of the DIDC action
and everything else?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, yes and no is the answer, I think.
I see no prospect that any amount
Obviously, we can study the matter.
of study is going to tell us what the behavior of M1 is going to be in
the short run.
It is unknowable, in my opinion, to all the best
It's going to be an empirical question; we will
brains in the world.
And we have to look at it over
discover what happens when it happens.
But I don't see that any amount of rumination--is
a period of time.
that the right word?--is going to produce an answer to a knowable
The wish for a study is fine; but
question but an unknowable answer.
the sense that it's going to give us an answer in a month before we

10/5/82

get the new instrument I think is totally unwarranted just by the
nature of the problem that we face.
MR. GUFFEY. If I understand what we're discussing, you are
really talking about M1.
The impact on M2 would be considerably less;
it is a more reliable guide.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. GUFFEY.
type deposits--

A little more subtle, I think.
More subtle perhaps but nonetheless--.

And M3-

MR. PARTEE.
Other things equal, it ought to increase the
value of M2-type instruments compared with market instruments.
Therefore, M2 ought to be larger relative to total credit flows than
before.
And by the way, I think the real world effect will be
fantastic shifts of funds.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think there's any question,
however, that Roger is right. The impact is going to be much less on
M2 and M3 than on M1.
The only place it can come out of basically is
Treasury bills.
MR. AXILROD.
President Roos, I wasn't suggesting burying M1;
I was suggesting that there is a problem over the next two or three
months.
MR. ROOS.

Well, you didn't suggest we praise it!

MR. FORD. This is sounding more and more like Pericles'
oration on Caesar's burial!
MR. ROOS.

It was Mark Antony's.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will get to the issue of what to do
with M1 a little later, but I-VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Just one last question on the DIDC
instrument:
Based on your information, what kind of rate do you think
the depository institutions will pay as the so-called market rate?
Will they simply be competitive and vary it with the average money
market fund rate or will they pay a Treasury bill-type rate?
What do
you think they will pay?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think there will be a tendency among
some to pay a money market funds rate plus; the question is whether
the market gets driven there.
I'm just guessing. Among other things,
we approved what I think of as the "bucket shop relief regulation" at
the last DIDC meeting, where an institution can broker all of this
money. So, we'll have people advertising all over the country. These
will be insured deposits and people will keep it with the guy paying
the highest rate.
And that will tend to force the rates higher.
I
would think there would be two tendencies initially:
To pay a money
market funds rate plus, or to pay something related to the Treasury
bill rate.
My guess would be that the bill rate fellows might get
forced higher.
In a tight money situation, I would feel rather
confident of that result. With rates going down, if they are going

10/5/82

But I think those will be the
down, I think banks would be cautious.
two polarities.
The question is where it will end up.
If there is any erosion of the banks'
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
core deposits moving into these Super NOWs or whatever we call this
new instrument, it's going to put a terrible squeeze on their profits.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this had been done three months ago, I
think it would have been an utter disaster.
It may just be a disaster
now. You know, I joke with the banks at times.
I tried it out with
the banks this morning and they said fine; they haven't thought this
out.
But I said that the simple way to do this and be perfectly
consistent with the law is to say [to a depositor] "If you have a NOW
account or a savings account [with a balance] above $5,000, it no
longer has a ceiling rate and it's checkable."
If a financial
institution thinks of it in those terms, immediately that puts its
cost of funds up by a significant amount.
I'm sure when they think
about it, they won't want it that way.
It will take time for the
savings depositors to pull out their money and go to the bank and say
instead of my savings deposit, I want this new account.
Some of them
will never get to the bank, so the banks will retain some of their
savings deposits and NOW accounts by a kind of "discrimination by
ignorance" approach. And who knows how long that transition period
will take!
MR. PARTEE. They don't have to pay a market rate or tie it
to a market rate; they could pay the CPI plus 4 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
The European bankers look at this
deregulation process going on in the United States and they react with
horror. In their view, this whole deregulation is such a disaster
both for monetary policy and for the stability of the banking system
that I think we are once and for all--through our experiment, if you
want to call it that--making sure that no deregulation process is
going to be copied in foreign countries.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will mention one other aspect of this
and then I want to go back to somewhat broader subjects.
If there is
a big drain on money market funds, there probably will be a big drain
on bank CDs.
Money market funds have become the major source of bank
CDs for a group of major money market banks who are already in
difficulty in the CD market.
And since I'm almost certain that bank
CDs would be the favorite instrument for money market funds to cut
back on now, there is going to be a squeeze [on] banks and possibly
commercial paper; there will be a squeeze in the other direction, too,
on banks that are not anticipating or have not thought through that
particular consequence of re-intermediation.
In any event, as a setting for reaching a policy decision or
a broader discussion first, let me try what I might term from my
international experience a tour d'horizon because I think we have a
rather wider setting that has to be brought to bear [on our decision]
A large part of that, of course, is the domestic business situation,
We can discuss it further
which we've just gone over to some extent.
but I don't have anything particular to add there. We have been
disappointed at least on the timing of the recovery. The inflation
picture is going well but the business picture certainly is not.
I don't see any place else to look.
Everybody looks to the consumer.

10/5/82

Whether he will appear or not is necessarily in some doubt. We have
obvious pressures on the investment sector and the commercial building
sector and the agricultural sector.
It's hard to see any of those
pressures going away in any short period of time, and I have to agree
with the conclusion stated earlier that the risks here, just looking
at the domestic economy, are quite asymmetrical.
But let me look around the world and say what somebody did
mention--I guess, Sam Cross--right at the beginning:
We are in a
worldwide recession. I don't think there's any doubt about that.
Mr.
Truman's imagination may be larger than mine, but I don't know of any
country of any consequence in the world that has an expansion going
on. And I can think of lots of them that have a real downturn going
on.
Obviously, unemployment is at record levels.
It is rising
virtually everyplace. In fact, I can't think of a major country that
is an exception to that. There are particular sore spots in the
developed world. France is a leading example where they have tried to
expand over the past year or more and they have been forced to reverse
that.
They are in increasing trouble internationally, although it
hasn't been the focus of the same attention that it has in some of the
countries I will get to shortly. But they have a rather massive
current account deficit and heavy external borrowing needs. They have
come through a couple of devaluations with the question [remaining] of
whether they can hold the franc at the current level.
The German
situation is rather sour looking, with political uncertainties
affecting that country and its prospects.
The British have had
momentary signs of advance off and on for the last year but the latest
signs are negative there as well.
Japan has caught a kind of sour
despondency as well.
I mention all this because it does affect the
prospects for our own outlook as well as the world outlook; there is
obviously a feedback among all the world markets.
World trade is
doing poorly and our exports are doing poorly.
It also contributes to
a feeling of nervous uncertainty throughout the world. And I think it
all has had an influence on the exchange rate, the next subject I will
get to.
One can have different opinions about the exchange rate but I
think it is an obvious fact that we have had a considerable narrowing
of interest rate differentials in recent months and the dollar has
gone up instead of down.
I saw a comment yesterday on the ticker from
Jacques Delors, the French Finance Minister, who said that something
has to be done because whatever news comes out of the United States
the dollar goes up.
If it's good news, the dollar goes up; if it's
bad news, the dollar goes up.
And that's about right these days.
It
is very hard to argue that the dollar is not out of line, with very
serious repercussions for our export industries.
I can't think of any
advantage, really, to the rest of the world of our present situation,
partly because it is obviously a factor inhibiting their own monetary
policy flexibility. The only explanation that one can see of the
dollar's behavior in a very nervous and uncertain world where
everything looks bad is that the dollar looks less bad for political
and economic reasons and may even look good. Maybe I ought to put a
positive cast on that, but it is a situation that itself is an
important distortion in world markets.
When I look at developing countries, there are well known
problems in Poland that have not been of largely political origin in
the sense that Poland has very serious economic problems but they are

10/5/82

terribly complicated and sui generis in terms of the political
problem. There are other problems in Eastern Europe in that the
Polish situation is to some degree infectious there. The problems in
Eastern Europe should be manageable in magnitude, but initially the
throw-off from the Polish situation affected them and they are now
being affected by the more general world situation.
More acutely, we
have the situation in Latin America, which is an interesting panorama.
We have gone over the Mexican problem as nearly as I can see on the
basis of inadequate information.
It may not be at dead center, but it
seems to be at dead center for the moment.
That's the best guess that
I have in a period of very difficult political transition, strong
differences of opinion within Mexico about what to do and, in the best
of circumstances, an extremely difficult adjustment problem within
Mexico with important social and economic consequences. Whether an
orderly or halfway orderly solution to the Mexican problem, with its
$80 billion--or probably realistically $100 billion--of external debt,
can be foreseen in the next weeks or months is problematical. I hope
so, but I don't think anybody can bank a lot of money on that
particular situation.
When one looks elsewhere in Latin America, at the other end
of the continent we have Argentina, which is basically unable to
finance its needs in the markets and is in substantial arrears on its
indebtedness.
The financial officials there are willing to go to the
International Monetary Fund.
Fund negotiations are starting with
rather an unknown situation as to whether Argentina has a government
of sufficient strength to sign a reasonable Fund agreement even if
they want to, or to carry out a Fund agreement if they do.
That is a
situation that in some sense doesn't look unmanageable economically,
but there is a question as to how manageable it is politically. When
one goes up in that continent, there is Ecuador, which may be facing
an inability to service its debt in a matter of weeks.
We have Chile,
which as nearly as I can see is unable to finance itself at the moment
and is rapidly depleting its reserves; and at the rate of depletion of
reserves one can perhaps measure their debt difficulties in a matter
of months, if not weeks.
We have Bolivia, which has had chronic
problems for years and is no better; it is basically in default.
Costa Rica is in the same position.
Peru is not much different. And
then we come to the strong countries in the continent like Brazil!
That is another $80 billion debtor, which in my eyes has undertaken a
strong adjustment program for the past 18 months, has had a recession,
has had monetary restraint, and has attempted to get its budget in
shape.
Their balance of payments deficit is as big today as it was
when they started the program, reflecting in considerable part the
sourness of the world economy. Then of course we have Venezuela, the
premier country in terms of financial strength of the continent.
It
is a relatively small country with big oil reserves, but it also is
apparently unable to finance itself freely in the market currently
[despite] more substantial reserves; it is not an imminent problem in
the same sense that the other countries are, but it is affected by the
total situation.
Those countries have a collection of debt of what,
Ted--about $300 billion more or less?--of which a sizable fraction is
owed American banks.
But every big bank around the world is more or
less equally committed. All of these countries are dependent upon
sustained borrowing to maintain a semblance of equilibrium during this
period; indeed, all of them are dependent upon sustained borrowing
simply to keep the loans that are now on the books in a semblance of
good order.

10/5/82

All of which brings me to the banking system. We have had
some rather well-known problems with respect to individual
institutions, stemming largely from domestic concerns in the United
States. Those particular institutions have had financing difficulties
in the market for some time. They are basically unable or unwilling
to sell any substantial amount of domestic CDs and are having their
lines from other banks cut back in the day-to-day market. There is
concern, obviously, more generally about banks with large external
exposure. And when we talk about banks with large external exposures
there are no exceptions among the major American banks or among a good
many of the regional banks.
There has been a tendency quite clearly
in this circumstance not to test the domestic CD market and a feeling
that everybody could run to London for the money. That [approach] is
a little more anonymous; it isn't [unintelligible] futures markets,
and what premium which bank is paying above the prevailing rate isn't
gossiped about to quite the same extent as in the American market.
But it is quite apparent that the Eurodollar market is in a state of
some confusion and concern.
One can see that specifically in the fact
that the Eurodollar rates have a margin over domestic rates that is
not explicable by normal arbitrage calculations between the two rates.
And we have a situation in the Euromarket, according to my
understanding, that normal trading procedures--somewhat like in the
U.S. CD market--have now broken down. Trading that used to be done
more or less anonymously or indifferently among banks is now done on a
personalized basis with each bank rated on its own and differential
rates among particular participants, and there is a sense of a
contracting market.
Whether it is really contracting ex post seems to
be problematical.
The volume is probably going up because that is
where the demand is going, but there is a sense of a contraction in
credit. I might say that it is complicated by the fact that some
American banks that have liquidity problems have chosen to do
placements in the Eurodollar market as obviously their only source of
liquidity, so they're running them down.
I think we have, as I mentioned, an unwillingness to put
pressure on the CD market domestically not only by the particular
banks that have been in everybody's mind but much more generally in
recent weeks as the international problems have gotten more severe.
Tony mentioned earlier the particular problem that is beginning to
stick out like a sore thumb with what I think of as motherless banks,
by which I mean banks whose home country either doesn't exist in any
real way or doesn't have any dollars or doesn't have any means of
putting its hands on any dollars.
These banks are funded in dollars
or other foreign currencies but largely in dollars.
Their assets are
nominally in dollars but often are in effect in frozen form because
they are backing a country--Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Korea-that hasn't the money to make those debts liquid if they had to.
We
have had further attention to this kind of problem from the Banco
Ambrosiano affair where subsidiaries of a good--at least "good" in
quotation marks--G-10 country were in the position of not having a
mother, so to speak, because they operated through a subsidiary. And
when liquidity pressures began in that case, or when the bad loan
became evident, there was no obvious recourse to provide liquidity to
them.
In these circumstances, I think it's fair to say that the
rates of interest on government securities that we tend to look at
very frequently are not a reflection of what the rates of interest are

10/5/82

in the market because the spreads are substantially wider even in the
quoted rates both on government rates and private rates, reflecting a
There is the
tiering of successive risks or precautionary premia.
situation, for instance, in financing developing countries now where
the CD rate is high relative to the bill rate by a considerable
These
margin. The Euro-rate is high relative to the CD rate.
countries are financed at LIBOR plus a margin; those margins are
So by the time you go from the bill rate to what a
increasing.
foreign developing country actually is paying, there hasn't been a
decline in interest rates; the decline observed in our market has only
a pale reflection in the actual interest rates paid by those
There is a sense, repeated to me again this morning by an
countries.
ABA group that I had breakfast with--it's put quite openly on the
table by some of the banks--that they are attempting to withdraw from
international markets.
They say "We are doing our best to do so.
We
realize everybody can't do that, but we have our boards of directors
and that's what we are doing."
MR. FORD.

Excuse me, who is this group?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was a group of ABA bankers, but that's
incidental.
It is going on.
That is why all these South American
countries together suddenly can't find financing or financing in
anywhere near the volume that they were anticipating. And to the
extent that that financing demand is going on, that presses more and
more on a relative handful of major money market banks that are
already, of course, very heavily extended. The extent to which this
is going on in domestic markets is less clear, but I would sense that
In a sense
some of this atmosphere is developing in domestic markets.
that means that market rate quotations don't mean quite the same thing
as they meant some months ago, because there's a question of who can
All of this
get those rates and with what degree of aggressiveness.
in a way, it seems to me, is explained in the velocity numbers. There
is a little liquidity preference or desire, or however you want to put
it, which is why the relationships that we look at all the time
between liquid asset totals and money narrowly or broadly [defined] do
not seem to bear the same relationship to economic activity that we
might have anticipated. I find it difficult or impossible to explain
that except, in part, because of a change in liquidity preference.
People want to be liquid; they want to hold as many liquid balances as
they are permitted to hold and the constraining factor is how many of
those are made available to them.
I'd say all of this leads to a considerable feeling in
financial markets and elsewhere of developing disarray, a certain
floundering. And that in itself contributes to uncertainty, which
I don't
feeds upon itself. And it is dangerous in and of itself.
mean to suggest going back to point number one about the domestic
outlook and saying that the prospects as a matter of probability
Hopefully, as
aren't along the lines that Mr. Kichline suggested.
attitudes change, it could turn out to be significantly better than
that. But I do think we are in an extremely tricky period of
transition that is complicated enormously by the factors not just of a
period of potential transition for us, but for the world economy as a
whole.
There is not a single source of real strength or certainty out
there.

10/5/82

-19-

So far as the international situation is concerned, let me
just suggest that we sorely need a victory, or a series of victories,
in terms of stability in some key countries.
We would like to have
that in Mexico.
Whether that's possible or not I already expressed my
uncertainty about.
If it's not going to be in Mexico, there had
better be dikes built pretty promptly around some of these other
countries so that there is not a feeling of absolute inevitability,
which is developing rapidly in the market, that all of these countries
are going to go down like a bunch of tenpins.
If we cannot deal with
that prospect, we are going to be in sorry trouble indeed.
There are
obvious cases in point; Yugoslavia and Argentina are both now in
negotiation with the Fund.
Neither of those countries has
[irreparable] economic conditions by any means, as nearly as I can
understand it.
The amounts of money involved are relatively small but
not exactly trivial in either case.
Right behind them is a country
like Chile, and not very far behind that, of course, is the big one,
Brazil.
I don't see how any of those situations, with the possible
exception of Brazil and conceivably Chile--if the dikes are strong
enough around Argentina and Yugoslavia--is going to be handled without
Fund assistance and without further official assistance outside the
Fund.
I think this is logically the Treasury's job.
Whether the
logic is going to prevail in the end here is something that at some
point we're going to have to consider, given the stakes involved.
Domestically, I would simply say that I don't think this is
any time for taking any great chances.
There is a substantive need
for a relaxation of pressures in the private markets in the United
States.
How best to achieve that seems to me is the question before
the house.
I will cease and desist at this point.
I note that coffee
is ready and maybe this is as good a time as any to have it.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can now have a general discussion.
At
some point I will give you some directive language that is somewhat
different [than shown in the draft provided by the staff].
But before
that, we can have a general discussion of the business scene, the
international scene, or whatever.
I would like not to neglect the
international situation with respect to some of these countries.
This
is not a time, as I undoubtedly implied--that's a mild word--for
I don't
business as usual, certainly, in the international area.
think it's time for business as usual in the domestic area either.
Extraordinary things may have to be done.
We haven't had a parallel
to this situation historically except to the extent 1929 was a
parallel.
MR. MARTIN.

And 1931.

MR. PARTEE.

1931.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
And I might say that I commend you all:
I
detected no leaks after the last meeting.
We are discussing obviously
highly sensitive subjects in this particular meeting and I can't
impress that too strongly upon you.
I'm talking about some of these
international financial problems, especially their domestic ones.
Any
one of these things can be blown by inadvertent comments.
There is
discussion going on, particularly with respect to Argentina and
Yugoslavia, of central banking monetary authority packages.
The

10/5/82

question is whether those packages are big enough for the situation in
both cases. As I said, they are in negotiation with the Fund.
Yugoslavia has been operating under a Fund program, but it's a rolling
The third year of it is under discussion at the
one-year [credit].
moment. These are in theory governmental matters and in our
institutional structure more appropriate for the Exchange
Stabilization Fund than for the Federal Reserve.
I think the Treasury
would say that, too.
But they have concerns and limited amounts of
money, and at some point I think it's possible that we will have to
make a decision within the confines of this room as to whether we
contribute to them too, simply in order to get the money big enough.
And that raises issues that we have not had to face before--except
perhaps marginally in the case of Mexico.
I don't know if it's going
to come up; I hope it doesn't. My position is that it should not come
up.
On the other hand, I cannot exclude it, given the nature of the
problem.
MR. ROOS.
How should we respond, if we are on the speaking
circuit and are asked what our impression is of the international
situation?
How do you respond to that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.

Well, with difficulty.

Very carefully.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, you give some sense of
confidence as best you can.
MR. PARTEE.

Say "I have another appointment."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Let me say in that connection--and I
should have said it more clearly before--that I think this situation
is manageable.
In a very big sense, I think we are on the verge of
victory in what we've been trying to do.
It's a delicate situation,
but it's also a very risky situation.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

What kind of victory, a Pyrrhic

victory?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, though it could turn into a Pyrrhic

victory.
MR. PARTEE.

We're going to get prices going down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But, in my opinion, it's only going to be
manageable with unusual exertions.
And in the end I'm afraid this
institution may be called upon for unusual exertion simply because
there is no other in a comparable position.
It's the only possibility
in terms of having the leadership and the resources necessary to deal
with some of these problems.
I don't know whether we can
[unintelligible] that issue. But I think that is the nature of the
problem.
MR. ROOS.
Is it possible to assume that this international
problem is not a consequence of our anti-inflationary efforts and that
if our [anti-inflationary] program had never been undertaken this same
sort of international situation could exist in a highly inflationary
[environment]?

10/5/82

-21-

I think all of these problems in a
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
considerable degree emerge out the inflationary situation most broadly
--a decade or more of loose practices, if that's the right term.
Sooner or later Mexico was going to get in trouble. They borrowed $20
billion last year. And they borrowed heaven knows how many billions
of dollars net this year when they still could borrow--before they got
in trouble. The timing of it is affected by recession, high interest
But I think it's patently obvious that
rates, and all the rest.
Mexico was going to borrow all it could borrow and all the banks were
going to give them and at some point that was going to come to an end.
I think one can say that
And it was going to be a crisis situation.
So we may be talking about the
about most of these other countries.
timing, but we are not talking about the essence of the matter in that
many of these countries, as are companies at home and banking
practices at home, are on an unsustainable course. We can't have a
banking system that's totally loaned up to Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela,
Argentina and Yugoslavia, but that's the direction they were going in.
And some day that had to stop.
MS. TEETERS.
Will these containment efforts be done in
cooperation with the BIS the way Mexico was?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the current ones are under discussion
with the BIS but there is the inherent management difficulty of these
problems. There are very substantive economic problems and,
underneath that, social problems and political problems. But from the
management standpoint, the difficulty is that there are so many
actors. Mexico is the extreme case, but it's only a more extreme
In Mexico, we are dealing with 1,100 banks or
example of reality.
something like that.
When you're dealing with that many banks around
the world, not just all over the United States but all over the world
--and I mean banks you've never heard the name of in [Saudi] Arabia or
the Far East or wherever--getting all those banks to sit in the canoe
The same problem exists when dealing
together is a little difficult.
with the BIS or in any cooperative international effort. There are a
lot of actors. They don't all understand the problem in the same
degree and they all see a little different self-interest in the
I think almost all the central banks recognize some common
situation.
interest in seeing an overall solution to the problem, but they have a
lot of individual interests, too, and getting them all to negotiate
Everybody wants all the countries in; that's
together is difficult.
the tradition. And we get into this ridiculous situation where a
country that is putting in $12-1/2 million has the same voice as the
That's a bit of an exaggeration, but there is
United States does.
that kind of problem. They are all dealing with their own
No central bank wants to touch these
institutional structure.
situations in the sense of a traditional central banking operation.
They all would take the same attitude that we probably would take:
It's a governmental problem. And some of them have institutions to do
it and some don't.
In virtually every case the central bank has more
flexibility in the short run than the government; some governments
have none.
Some central banks may not have any. We have this kind of
problem, of course.
The U.S. government itself is like dealing with
four different countries! But you multiply that and the difficulty
becomes geometric, I guess, even when we're only dealing with 10 or 12
countries.
It's obviously important to get not just a facade but the
reality of some international cooperation in these things--not just
because of the money, which is significant, but because of the general

10/5/82

feeling of solidarity, a common problem,
And the banks, of course, are
the rest.
countries, too, including some countries
need the support of the central banks in

a common approach, and all
distributed among all these
that are not involved, and we
dealing with their own banks.

MR. WALLICH.
I think a fairly persuasive way of answering a
question about how all those countries are going to pay back all the
money is to say that basically these countries--and I'm speaking not
of the East bloc--are viable. They can produce enough to take care of
their needs.
They may go through a difficult time, but it's a
question of the policies that they pursue and, therefore, how they can
It is possible
be influenced by the IMF rather than whether they can.
for them to meet their obligations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I agree with that; that's another way of
saying the situation is manageable.
But they all do have very heavy
And it gets into political questions as well as
debt burdens.
economic questions at some point. The country may say "Is it
worthwhile to meet them?" whether they can or cannot theoretically.
[The problem] is exponential for some of them; they have gotten so
deeply into debt.
But, of course, in that sense, there is no question
that lower interest rates, to the extent that is reflected in their
For a country like Mexico or Brazil
borrowing, are very important.
their debt service--not their total debt service but their external
interest payments for a year--are $10 billion plus.
MR. TRUMAN.

$12

billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

$12

billion.

And their exports are $20 billion.

I have a question. You made the point earlier
MR. BOEHNE.
that even with the drop in interest rates we've seen that very little
has trickled down to the real problem cases because of the tiering on
quality considerations.
Just suppose that it were the view of the
Committee that an effort ought to be made to have a significant drop
in rates.
In your judgment, how much can we realistically expect that
it would trickle down to some of these countries who really need this
kind of relief, in light of the experience we've had in recent months?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would not propose reducing interest
rates simply as a method of getting their interest burden down.
It's
a by-product there.
MR. BOEHNE.
that as a vehicle.

I understand that.

I was just asking--using

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that I can give you an
adequate answer.
I suppose the answer must be that it's going to be
that much less than it would otherwise be.
I think the indirect effect on other
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
industrialized countries' exchange rates and their ability to lower
their interest rates, and the reversing if possible of the decline in
the real volume of world trade that is going on, would probably have a
bigger impact on the exports of, say, Mexico and Argentina and Brazil

10/5/82

than the direct reduction in the interest rate burden unless that
lower interest rate prevails over six months or a year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the more important thing would
certainly be a sense that there is at least enough money to lend here,
given the bank liquidity incentive that they don't have now.
MR. GRAMLEY.
Isn't the more basic problem that, in order for
all of these countries around the world who have severe difficulty
servicing their debts to find a way out, we simply can't rely on
internal adjustments within those countries to do it.
We have to have
some world economic expansion. That's really a necessary condition
for finding a way out of this whole problem.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not disagreeing with the thrust
of what you're saying.
That is very important in setting the climate
of the whole thing.
But I don't think one can honestly say that some
of these countries [around which] you could build a dike, are totally
dependent on world economic conditions.
I think of Yugoslavia or
Argentina in particular, where the balance of payments is not in that
bad shape to start with. Wheat is a big export in Argentina; that's
not, I think, terribly sensitive to world economic conditions.
I
don't mean to detract from your point about a climate of expansion;
particularly for a country like Brazil, it's critically important.
But I don't think one can argue that we can't deal with a lot of these
individual situations without an absolute necessity of having strong
world economic expansion, although it obviously may [help].
MR. GRAMLEY. No, I wasn't talking about strong [world
expansion], and I would agree with your point on individual countries.
But it's no longer a question of just one individual country and what
it does to get its problem solved.
It is how all of them together are
going to get out that I think requires some degree of economic
expansion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

I don't disagree with your basic comment.

One might say the same thing domestically.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Indeed. I think growth of the U.S. economy and
of the world economy is a necessary but not sufficient condition to
get us out of this severe difficulty we find ourselves in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

On a global basis I don't disagree with

you.
MR. WALLICH. I'm sorry. I feel like turning it around and
saying it is a sufficient but not absolutely necessary condition.
We
can find equilibrium at the level of some degree of recession.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, you're also assuming that we
can have a stable level of recession in the world.
MR. WALLICH. That is true.
to keep going down all the time.

[The world economy]

doesn't have

MS. TEETERS.
The political implications of that, Henry, in
some of these other countries may be much more severe than they are

10/5/82

here.
Put a country into a situation of restraint in order to correct
its external debts and I think there is the potential for political
upheaval.
Has our governmental
MR. GUFFEY. Just a related question:
posture with respect to intervention in foreign exchange markets
I noticed we did some purchases yesterday, as Sam
changed at all?
reported.
It's a nice semantic question, I guess, of
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
whether the attitude has changed or whether the circumstances have
We are certainly intervening.
changed.
MR. FORD.
MR. GUFFEY.

Any pressures?
Not in any size

[unintelligible].

We have this not
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not aggressively, no.
But I think the attitude to
terribly aggressive [unintelligible].
begin with is that there is a concern about this repetitive
appreciation of the dollar and the dollar reaching levels that seem-SPEAKER(?).

Overdone.

--unusual, overdone, or whatever the right
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
There is no great
word is.
So, there is a more sympathetic climate.
feeling, which I share, that this [intervention] is going to
But that-revolutionize the world in and of itself, by any means.
MR. GUFFEY.

That together with some lower interest rates may

help.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And at the very minimum that at least
reduces the [tensions] in international relations at a time when we
don't need any more.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The loss of U.S. exports due to an
uncompetitive exchange rate, as best as one can make rough estimates,
has been estimated in work I've seen as the equivalent of 2 percent of
our GNP in real terms.
I don't know what the staff here has.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, my question is whether or not there is a
And I assume the answer
recognition by this government of that fact.
is, to a greater extent, yes.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but I don't want to suggest that
there is great eagerness to intervene. It is a reluctant willingness.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There was a major surge in the dollar
I don't think there's any
yesterday. To answer your question:
willingness in this government to try to get the exchange rate value
Given Paul's talks with the Secretary [of
down in terms of levels.
the Treasury], there may be a tad greater willingness to be in the
market on days when there are surges but not a [willingness to]
sustain the effort, I don't think, to get the level down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Not yet.

10/5/82

MR. WALLICH. Well, it's very doubtful that we can change the
[exchange rate] level substantially unless there are policies that
support it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm afraid that this [discussion] is
getting a little ahead of us in some sense.
I don't know whether
there are any policies that support it now. There's something to
Delors' statement that whatever happens, people want to go into
dollars.
In the long run obviously one can change that, but whether
or how changeable it is in the short run [involves] some fairly basic
premises.
Germany may not be able to have a stable government because
it is going to get polarized politically or the French may not be able
to manage their internal situation or whatever other concerns there
are in the exchange markets may change rapidly but are not amenable to
obvious kinds of policy measures.
MR. WALLICH. One would think that the market would observe
the outlook for [some period] to come and tumble to the implications
of that after a while.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I just came back from Europe. I am
struck by the degree of malaise and of nervousness there--fears of all
kind--and the willingness of players to move enormous sums of money to
Switzerland and the United States on gut instinct that things are just
going wrong in Europe and that the future just doesn't look good for
Europe. And, of course, this was happening even in Japan where the
statistics look better. There is a lot of money going out of Japan.
And the exchange rate now is ridiculous; it's 270 yen for the dollar.
MR. MORRIS.
U.S. businessmen.

Well, I find the same kind of attitude among

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
[unintelligible] the world.
MR. MORRIS.

Yes,

that is pushing the money out

No, no.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

All right.

MR. MORRIS.
I am seeing an attitude that I have never seen
before, not even in the depths of the 1974-75 recession. There is a
feeling of apprehension, a vague apprehension that maybe things are
going to get out of hand. And it's leading businessmen to take a very
defensive posture.
I talked to the head of a quite successful company
that is being cushioned by a big increase in defense contracts.
But
the firm's domestic business is off, and he said--and I thought this
was a rather striking statement--that the objective of his company was
to generate cash.
If that kind of thinking is very widespread-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that that thinking is
widespread.
Somebody was telling me the other day, a member of an
investment banking firm, that he had visited a number of companies and
was struck by one fact.
These companies were in various businesses.
Obviously, everybody is affected by the business [situation] to a
greater or lesser degree; these happened to be profitable companies.
And at company after company, they were all building up cash
liquidity. He was just amazed at the size of their cash balances.

10/5/82

MR. MORRIS.
So we shouldn't be surprised if liquid assets
have grown relative to nominal GNP at a rate that is out of line with
past experience.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My mental image of the business world is
that those that are profitable are sitting on cash. Those that are
not profitable are being squeezed.
MR. KEEHN. But even with the profitable ones, the level of
malaise is rising very dramatically.
So, I sense that with the
passage of time-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
This isn't a comment that they are not
experiencing malaise; their sitting on cash is an indication of a
malaise.
MR. PARTEE.
There is a sense of pull-backs, though.
Do you,
Si and Frank, get the sense that they are pulling back on their
spending plans in order to generate this cash?
MR. MORRIS.

Absolutely.

MR. BALLES.

Yes.

SPEAKER(?).

Universally.

MR. KEEHN. At Caterpillar, for example, they are not
[unintelligible], but they are being particularly hard hit.
Their
sales [in the third quarter] and their estimated sales in the fourth
quarter of this year will be 50 percent under the sales for the third
quarter of last year.
That's a massive decrease. They went back
through their records and the last time that they had a decrease was
in '29 and in '30. And then they had their first loss year-end '32.
They're going to have another loss year this year, and they are at the
end of their string.
Of course, the discouraging thing is that
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
their workers are out on strike.
I don't know what they're asking
for, but-MR. KEEHN. Yes, but they are not posturing for negotiations.
Their comments are based on their-MR. MARTIN.
these realities.

The point is the militancy in the unions despite

MR. KEEHN. Yes, the union is basing its position on '81
results, which were pretty good comparatively, and they are not
being--

MR. PARTEE.

That strike might

run a long time.

MR. KEEHN. Also, Caterpillar is being killed by the yendollar rate.
[A Japanese company] has just taken their ears off.
MR. MORRIS.
We're seeing in New England highly successful,
very rapidly growing companies such as Digital Equipment being hit.
They have had traditionally a "no layoff" policy; so they announced

-27-

10/5/82

that in order to substitute for the cash flow improvement of a layoff
they were going to have a wage freeze for 3 months. This really hit
Boston.
If Digital Equipment is in trouble, then the issue is:
Who
is doing well?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I ran into a fellow the other day at
dinner--unfortunately I think this is an atypical experience of a
major multi-national company with a foreign base with a big U.S.
operation--and asked him how things were going and what his
inflationary expectations were and what else was happening. This guy
is obviously quite conservative, but he said he had just come from a
meeting of his American managers and the purpose of the meeting at
least in part was to decide upon what he called "merit increases" next
year.
It sounds like the Federal Reserve! He went around to the
managers and asked them what they thought was appropriate for merit
increases this year.
They all gave him figures of 10 to 12 percent,
and according to him he started off by saying:
"Are you laying off
workers?"
And all the managers said "yes," they were laying employees
off.
He suggested to them that merit increases this year should
average 3 percent so long as they were laying off workers.
I said to
him:
"Managers don't like to do that because it may affect their own
salary scales.
What did you do about that?" He said:
"Oh, I forgot
to tell you!
I told them they were getting zero."
Unfortunately he
is a Frenchman, not an American. I don't know how typical that is.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
He didn't want to [unintelligible].
I was shocked the other day when the head of one of the big insurance
companies was in for lunch and said his company is giving wage
increases that average about 10 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Did you give him a lecture?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I did.
I gave him a much stronger
lecture than probably was politic.
He apologized but gave me the
argument that it's a catch-up because their workers' wages had fallen
behind.
I don't know how true that is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Catch-up for the executives right now.

MR. PARTEE. Well, if they're not doing it in Boston, the
insurance business will shift to Boston from New York.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe the new form of a viable
incomes policy. Chuck, is to try to put constraints only on the
of] top executives.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think that's right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
nobody else-MS. TEETERS.

[pay

If you do that, they'll see that

Like the Federal Reserve.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's something to that. Maybe
we'll add that to our directive today.
[Unintelligible] salary
surveys.

10/5/82

-28

MR. BOEHNE.
I had a similar group in to our Bank--people
from Philadelphia or nearby--and their figure wasn't 10 percent but
percent.

8

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm surprised it's so common in the
financial world; they give the same kind of argument.
Well, what
other general comments are there?
MR. CORRIGAN.
With all this understandable talk about Mexico
and all the rest, you didn't say a word about small banks at the other
end of the spectrum.
But I think it's relevant to this general
conversation.
We started about four or five months ago carefully
monitoring the small banks in the Ninth District.
The monitoring
takes several forms, including literally getting an instant picture of
an examination the minute it is completed, and we are compiling lists
of one-bank holding companies [in difficulty].
The criteria that we
used was that if a one-bank holding company will consume at least 75
percent of the bank's 1981 earnings to meet its debt service
requirements in 1982, it is on the list.
It's really striking, to put
it mildly, to see the number of institutions that fall into that
category in the case of the one-bank holding companies.
The number is
substantial, and that of course assumes that they have the equivalent
of 1981 earnings to work with in the future to meet these debt service
requirements at the holding company level.
With the problem loans and
the loan losses and this new instrument and all the rest, one could at
least question the proposition that they're going to be able to retain
those earnings.
Similarly, in the case of small banks, at least the
ones that seem to be scattered around the Ninth District, it's not
uncommon to see that the classified loans in the recent examination
versus the last one are up anywhere from 200 to 500 percent.
As of
yet most of that increase is in the commercial sector and the Main
Street retailers.
There is not yet a major increase in the problem
loans reflecting the agricultural sector itself.
But one has to
wonder how long that can last, given what is going on right now.
The other thing that I would observe in terms of these small
and medium size banks that I think is directly relevant to what was
said earlier is that it is rather astonishing to me to see the extent
to which these regional and small institutions have money placed in
the London market.
There are very logical and natural reasons why
they should do that, and certainly we don't want to chase that money
out of there right now.
Nevertheless, it is a form of exposure even
in these banking organizations that ties in with this international
situation and goes in many cases well beyond our general perceptions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
This situation is exposing, in my view,
the structural weaknesses in the banking world of which these
motherless banks are one example.
But this kind of thing is another
that gets these small banks in that kind of a market.
The problems in
the Eurodollar market to which I alluded are not confined to American
banks by any means.
North of the border, they have had problems in
spades domestically and that has not gone unnoticed in international
markets, and one can make the same comments about some banks in other
areas.
If we are ready, I think we ought to return to the policy
discussion.
The staff can distribute this draft text that I have for
discussion purposes anyway.
I have not read [the directive] probably

-29-

10/5/82

literally for years; I don't know whether I've read it since I've been
here.
But for some reason I got this boilerplate part in front of me,
which goes in front of the [operative part of the] directive, and it
seems to me singularly inappropriate.
It probably always is, but it
is more so now. I think this could use a judicious sentence or two,
making some allusion to the strains or pressures or whatever in the
banking sector these days and to the problems of foreign lending in
particular--it needs to be expressed very judiciously--just to
indicate that we are someplace in the real world.
And I would suggest
that it might possibly be left to the Chairman to figure out a
sentence or two to stick in there at an appropriate point.
MR. FORD.
I beg your pardon?
you're going to add a sentence or two.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't understand where

Well, I'm not quite sure where I would put

it.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. PARTEE.
in the directive.

What are you looking at?
He's talking about the first several paragraphs

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
general paragraphs.
MR. PARTEE.

I'm talking about something called the

It's probably on the calm side; it's bland.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

It's the first paragraph he's talking

about.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm talking about the first two
paragraphs.
I think [the additional sentences] would go appropriately
either at the bottom of the first page or in the top paragraph on the
second page.
I'd add just a sentence or two saying that the markets
were influenced during this period by concern over international
lending--something expressed very calmly, but not ignored entirely.
MR. ROOS.

This would mean that we would set no targets for

M1?
[Secretary's note:
The draft directive wording circulated at
Chairman Volcker's request did not include a target for M1.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are ahead of us.
I'm just referring
to this general boilerplate now, which I will cease talking about with
the understanding that you may see a new sentence or two in there, if
that's acceptable.
MR. MARTIN.

I think it's necessary.

MR. PARTEE. Well, even in terms of the facts, there is no
reference here to the deterioration in employment, to the rise in
insurance claims, or to any of the indicators of weakness. It is
covered by "The unemployment rate was unchanged at 9.8 percent."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes,

I think-

10/5/82

MR. PARTEE.
hundred thousand.

Nonfarm payroll employment dropped a couple

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
number until Friday.
MR. PARTEE.

We don't get the new [unemployment]

And it's not going to be 9.8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but we can put in something like:
"The unemployment rate in August was unchanged at 9.8 percent but
there were some indications of a deteriorating labor market
situation."
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, something like that.

MR. MARTIN.

We have the initial claims.

MR. PARTEE.

We know that employment went down in the nonfarm

series.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do a little editing of the whole
thing. Everybody has a copy of this now, except for me I guess.
I
will open this for a general discussion when you're ready.
MR. FORD.
I'd like to start with a technical question.
If
we put in this 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent [range for M2 and M3], where
does that put the broader aggregates by the end of the year?
I didn't
see that projected.
MR. AXILROD.
If M2 were 9-1/2 percent, for the year growth
would be about 9-3/4 percent; if it were 8-1/2 percent, growth for the
year would be about 9-1/2 percent.
M3 looks as if it's going to be
around-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
fourth quarter?

That's for the fourth quarter to the

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's for the fourth quarter to the
fourth quarter.
I don't have the year-over-year figure.
MR. BOEHNE.
Does the Humphrey-Hawkins Act require any
notification to congressional committees on such a change or do you
simply have to explain it when you testify in February?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know what the Act particularly
requires, but if we change the annual target rather specifically, then
I would not interpret this that way. We
I think we would report it.
said we would run around the top or were willing to run above for a
while, and this is willing to run above for a while.
MR. PARTEE.
It does, however, involve the question of market
interpretation of numbers that are going to be running quite high.
MR. BOEHNE.
Well, aside from whether this is a good idea or
a bad idea, when this directive is made public I think it is going to
be viewed as a substantial change in the way monetary policy is being
directed.

10/5/82

MR. MARTIN.

A substantial temporary change

or a substantial

change?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

A change to reverse.

MR. BOEHNE.
No, I wouldn't say it's a reverse, but it is a
substantial change.
And the time horizon on the financial markets is
such that whether it's a change for three months or two or three years
at this point-MR. PARTEE.
It won't be until Christmas time when it
revealed to the public.
MR. BOEHNE.

No, it will be revealed

is

at the end of November.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I assume there will be some occasion,
probably fairly soon, for describing in general terms what we are
doing.
MR. FORD.

Before

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

it's

published?

Certainly before it's published.

The market will start to see the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Long before it's

results of this.

published.

MR. ROOS.
Mr. Chairman, why would this be preferable to
continuing to specify the target for M1 but putting in a disclaimer or
at least the warning that M1 might behave in an unusual manner and if
that occurs, we would reserve the privilege of adjusting it
accordingly?
I'd prefer that for the sake of continuity.
If we
ignore M1 totally, despite the explanations that are given, I think
people could read sinister purposes in it; it would make base drift
pale in comparison to dropping one of our important targets totally.
I'd rather see us say that we're doing this but it is somewhat
tentative due to what might happen on these new instruments.
To
ignore M1 would really run the flag up that in some people's
perception we are making a basic change.
There is still a significant
amount of debate between Frank and me and others; some of us think
that M1 is not as unreliable as others do.
I just think to drop it
would look as though we've really retreated in that regard.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Oh, I don't think there should be any
implication here of more than a one-quarter problem.
It may be more
than that, but this isn't meant to carry any implication of that.
But
I would like to separate the substance from the presentation.
In
substance what I feel very strongly about is that it would be a
mistake to have any kind of directive that would drive us deliberately
or otherwise to higher interest rates.
I think it was a mistake to
have that kind of directive last time.
I think it would be more than
a mistake this time, and it's not going to be acceptable to me.
Beyond that it is desirable to get some easing in this situation.
MR. ROOS.
Well, doesn't alternative B for M1 as shown in the
Bluebook imply roughly that the fed funds rate would remain in the 8
to 12 percent range?
In other words, how would this avoid--

10/5/82

federal

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Let me clarify my comment.
A 12
funds rate currently is totally unacceptable to me.
MR. MARTIN.

That's the top of the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

range

for

percent

"B."

I thought you were going to

say 11.

Eleven percent is also unacceptable to me.

MR. PARTEE.
But even so, I think you have to recognize,
Larry, that the staff hasn't factored in the possibility-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
The central point is that whatever the
[monetary variable] is that we are operating on, it is a staff guess,
which may or may not be right.
I'm saying that I am not willing to
stake my life, so to speak, on that guess being right.
The risks are
too great.
MR. ROOS.
How would this give you greater assurance, Mr.
Chairman, that rates could not [rise]?
For example, if some people
felt through some complicated thinking that ignoring M1 was an
expansionary or inflationary act, how would this wording assure that
the fed funds rate would not increase just as substantially as setting
a "B" target for M1, for example, and saying it might be right or
wrong depending on how people respond to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't want to respond to the particular
wording at this point.
Obviously, we have to get into that.
But what
this is meant to convey is an operational approach that modestly moves
the federal funds rate down.
Whether it involves a discount rate
change or not is something the Board is going to have to decide.
But
that is the tenor meant to be given here, rather straightforwardly, I
might say.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, this indicates your dissatisfaction
with the way we handled it last time--that is, to have a target that
was sensitive to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Yes, I am totally dissatisfied.
What we
did last time was unacceptable to me.
I just want to make that plain.
I think we made a mistake last time.
I think we would not have so
difficult a problem psychologically this time if we had not done what
we did last time.
It wasn't that big a mistake in some sense.
But
it's unfortunate that we ended up at this meeting with the federal
funds rate and private rates about 1 percentage point higher than they
were at the time of the last meeting because we had a high M1 figure
in September.
That was the only reason it happened.
MR. WALLICH.
There was still some hope then that we could
get within the target ranges for the year.
This time it looks very
doubtful that without a self-defeating effort we would get M1 within
its target range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm not going to cry over last month's
decision.
All I'm saying is, looking ahead, that I don't want to end
up a month from now with a 12 percent federal funds rate.
I don't
even want to end up with an 11 percent federal funds rate, based upon

10/5/82

everything I know about the market situation, the national situation,
and the world situation.
MR. FORD. What you are saying quite plainly, if I hear you
correctly, is that you think rates are too high now and you don't want
even a tiny increase from the present rate of 10-1/4 percent on the
fed funds rate.
You don't want it averaging 11 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I surely do not.

MR. FORD. You want literally to cap interest rates where
they are now, or better yet, to drive them down.
MR. PARTEE.

To a 10 percent top?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Drive them down?
I'd like to see them a
little easier, yes, if we can get by with that.
MR. FORD.
I want to say, respectfully, that I'm flatly
opposed to this. If we were to do this, especially now, I think it
will consolidate any adverse opinions against us that are already out
there about our motives for doing this at this particular time. At a
breakfast meeting with the leading bankers in Atlanta 72 hours or so
ago, at which Mayor Young was the guest of honor speaking to us, he
volunteered in front of all the bankers in the room a comment--we were
discussing the city's problems--that he was instructing his staff to
issue some municipal bonds immediately in order to do a certain
project in the city of Atlanta.
I said:
"What's the rush about this,
Andy?"
And he said:
"You guys are going to change policy right after
election day and now is the time to do it."
This was Andrew Young.
I've heard from more people than I care to describe to you comments
questioning our integrity and our motives in the context of an
election campaign.
MR. MORRIS. Yes, but Bill, we've got to do what we think is
best for the economy and let those comments go.
MR. FORD. First of all, I'm not convinced that pegging
interest rates at today's level or trying to push them down is best
for the economy. Secondly, changing policy now in this context and
saying overtly, as you said it, that we should hold interest rates
where they are and try to push them down is going to make us extremely
vulnerable to charges--unfounded I feel, because I don't question the
motives of the people here who would vote for this.
I think the
repercussions of this are going to be terrible.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

That's an enormous concession.

People are going to come down all over us.

MR. PARTEE. You know, Bill, I would put the emphasis a
little differently here. Maybe the wording needs to be changed some;
I wouldn't put it in terms of moving interest rates down.
I think the
problem is that M1 could do almost anything in the period to come.
In
fact, it already has done almost anything. In August and September we
had a 35 percent rate of increase in NOW accounts. And that's not
associated with the--

10/5/82

MR. FORD.

I'm not trying to defend M1.

MR. PARTEE. Our problem, though, is not just that the number
might be 1/2 percent too high; it might be way too high.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may have a $10 billion increase in M1
in the first week in October.
So, I support the idea of getting off M1 at this
MR. PARTEE.
Perhaps there is more emphasis on it than there
particular time.
It really doesn't come through as strongly when one
ought to be here.
reads this [draft directive language] that we're trying to move
interest rates down as when the Chairman talks.
I'm reacting to what the Chairman is telling us,
MR. FORD.
which is I think commendably honest, in that he is saying he really
doesn't want to see interest rates raised. That's what I'm reacting
to regardless of what it says here. And I think that will be apparent
in the marketplace well before this is published and our integrity
will be brought into question if we proceed along that line.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORD.

Your vision of our integrity.

My vision, yes.

Even if this were done, people will still measure
MR. ROOS.
M1 in their closets and under their beds and so forth in order to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the number, Larry.

We haven't

suggested that we won't publish

MR. ROOS.
If, in order to keep interest rates artificially
down or otherwise down, we have to inflate M1, the minute that becomes
apparent we've lost the ballgame and we will have just as high-I think you
We're not inflating it.
MR. PARTEE.
misunderstand.
These are structural shifts that are occurring that
possibly are going to produce a much higher M1 for a time. And the
question is:
Should we resist it, which inevitably would mean higher
rates, or should we recognize that there has been a structural shift?
Would we be better off not looking at it so much for a little while?
MR. ROOS. Well, how does this differ, Chuck, from our
experience with NOW accounts?
I remember when everybody got all jumpy
about NOW accounts.
Well, I think NOW accounts are causing us an
MR. PARTEE.
awful lot of trouble.
I think we probably have
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
not adjusted for NOW accounts correctly. The total growth in M1,
almost, has been in NOW accounts this year. To what extent does that
reflect real money?
Who knows?
MR. WALLICH. I think we have to detach temporarily from M1
because it has become so uncertain both because of the all savers
Even if that
certificates bulge and the new instrument coming along.
bulge were not to occur, we would have the new instrument and we

10/5/82

-35-

simply don't know [its likely effect]; all we know is that it could be
We can put more stress on the evidence of rising
very major.
liquidity preference, and that gives us the opportunity to target on
M2 with a proviso that if it exceeds [our expectations], we'll take
this as evidence of an increase in liquidity preference and not follow
up with interest rates.
That seems to me perfectly defensible
substantively and still within the formal framework of our policy.
MR. MARTIN. I'd like to turn the integrity argument around
and argue for the second thoughts of the commentators and the analysts
of our policy.
If we move in this direction of minimizing or
eliminating M1 temporarily--and I'm not ready to throw it overboard-and we pursue a policy that deliberately brings down interest rates,
the first thoughts will be that we caved in, the election is coming,
and here they go again. The second thoughts, I think, will be
different.
The second thoughts--which may be based on some analysis
rather than on a knee-jerk reaction to what we do--would be that the
integrity of the Federal Reserve is that they pursued policies with an
eye to the growth of the economy, to the liquidity of the domestic and
international system, and indeed, they did this despite the political
consequences that occurred in the short run. They maintained their
integrity as a central bank. I think that's a very different
conclusion from the second thoughts on the other side which might be
that the Federal Reserve should have brought interest rates down but
the politics of the situation were such that they couldn't.
MR. ROOS.
Well, who has been able to demonstrate any
reliable relationship between the growth of the broader aggregates and
economic activity?
M2 was growing way above its range last year, I
think, or the year before and the economy was sick.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Milton Friedman wrote a big book on the

subject.
MR. ROOS.

I can't read, but--

MR. PARTEE.
It is certainly true that velocity has been
increasing for M2 but not as much as for M1.
MR. ROOS.
a predictor as Ml?

Do you think the evidence shows that M2 is as good

MR. PARTEE.

No, as M1 used to be.

MR. MARTIN.

But this is short run.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It depends upon which analyst looks at it.

MR. WALLICH. We have made that switch, though not quite as
explicitly; nevertheless, we've made it from time to time.
We have
placed more weight on M2 at times.
MS. HORN.
It seems to me that the [appropriate] timing might
be the next meeting.
In terms of setting quarterly targets, we might
look at an M1 target and tolerate above target performance [now], with
all saver certificates and so forth coming due. And then at the next
meeting if we are looking at an instrument that is very unpredictable
in terms of what it's going to do to M1--having set the quarterly

10/5/82

targets at this meeting--we could say that for some weeks during this
part of the quarter we're going to have to look more heavily at M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Let me first of all say that I agree with the
proposal that rates shouldn't go higher, that they should be in some
Indeed,
way capped from this point forward for some period of time.
they should be urged to come down, not precipitously but in a modest
But having said that, I look at the language
way, over the quarter.
that you have put before us and am trying to equate that with what the
staff has in the Bluebook. It seems to me that the 8-1/2 to 9-1/2
percent range for M2--or at least the "A" proposal [of 9-1/2 percent]
--and then the caveat in the last sentence would suggest that we will
tolerate growth above that given some perception of liquidity needs or
I'm suggesting that in my view at least--and I will ask a
otherwise.
question of Steve in a moment--that probably will result in rates
coming down immediately following this meeting, depending upon how we
build the path. And I would hesitate to associate myself with those
If that's not a correct
who would want a fast drop in rates.
How would you build your path
assessment, I would like to ask Steve:
And what
for the reserve objective based upon this kind of language?
That is rather
would you expect to happen within the next two weeks?
a critical period for us.
MR. AXILROD. Well, with this kind of language, I would take
M2 growth at somewhere around 9 or 9-1/2 percent or whatever the
Committee sets and project the M1 that is roughly consistent with
that, which by the Bluebook [estimates] would be on the order of 5
So, if we assume
percent, forgetting these special circumstances.
substantial increases in the first week of October and take the
borrowing that the Committee says to take-MR. GUFFEY. Well, it is important where we're going to set
the initial borrowing level; that is critical to what happens to
interest rates in the next two weeks.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that would be the Committee's decision.
But consistent with some easing, one would assume that the initial
borrowing assumption would be down [to] about $200 million, moving
back toward where it was at the last meeting and probably a little
lower because that initial borrowing assumption is really pushing to
So, in part
move the funds rate back above the discount rate.
depending on the sense of what the Committee wants, it may be below
that level.
I'm
MR. GUFFEY. I guess that sort of makes my point.
interested in the rates coming down and not going up, but I would
object to seeing a precipitous drop built upon this kind of path.
occurs to me that we may have fed funds trading in the 8-1/2 to 9
percent range rather quickly if we're going to set that kind of
initial borrowing level and these kinds of targets.

It

MR. AXILROD. Well, at the 10 percent discount rate, if you
had a borrowing of $200 million, just to take an example--I'm not
saying it should be at that level--I would not expect the funds rate
It would be more like 10 percent or a shade
to get as low as that.
Peter may have another view.
under.

10/5/82

-37-

MR. STERNLIGHT.

I would agree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I might remind you of the probable setting
in the next few days.
Indications are that we will have a very sharp
decline in the money supply for the last figure that means anything.
And we probably will have an unemployment rate well over 10 percent
published this week.
MR. ROOS.

You said a decline in the money supply?

SPEAKER(?).
MR. GUFFEY.
for the one week?

In the week.
Those money numbers are not

going to last except

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
No, but that is the last number
have no distortion from all savers certificates in it.

that will

MR. PARTEE.
Steve, in setting the path now, wouldn't you
regard a change or a shift in the relationship between M1 and M2 that
you could identify as coming in a week or two or three sort of as a
multiplier adjustment?
MR. AXILROD.
Yes, if the Committee were adopting this sort
of directive, those variations in M1 would all tend to be allowed for
as multiplier adjustments.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.
That would be the

logic.

MR. PARTEE.
So, it would depend on the setting of the
initial borrowing level, but it might not in fact result in a big
decline in borrowing.
It would depend on their relationship as to how
many nonborrowed reserves you provide.
MR. GUFFEY.
$600 million.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. GUFFEY.

But we are

That's

at a borrowing level of about

$500 or

right.

And if you're

going to build the

path on $200

million-MR. AXILROD.

on.

No,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Black.

I was using that as an example.
We have to decide what to build the path

MR. BLACK.
Mr. Chairman, we are all in agreement on only one
thing, I think:
that we would like to see interest rates come down.
I would like to raise the question of whether it might not be
reasonable to suppose that a little resistance now to the strength
we've had in the aggregates might not save us from a bigger move later
on.
We have engineered a pretty sharp reduction, almost 400 basis
points, in the federal funds rate from its level back in July.
Historically when we've had that [kind of decline], we've had an
explosion of the aggregates.
And if that does happen--though, of

10/5/82

course, all of us hope it doesn't--we may find ourselves in a position
where we are going to have to move against that.
We have just
finished a discussion of countries that have delayed taking wise steps
and they have gotten to the point where they have to take very drastic
steps.
I have a whole collection of quotations from members of the
Board of Governors who have stated very eloquently that this is the
point at which we've lost it, usually, in the past.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You won't find that quotation from me.
There was a quotation to that effect cited at this meeting before,
which I must correct for the record.
I have said upon a number of
occasions that the way we have lost this game is by staying with an
expansionary policy too long during a recovery period. That statement
also says the mistakes were not made at the bottom of a recession.
MR. BLACK. Okay.
Well, it may be a delay of timing, but I'm
not going to quarrel with you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's rather significant.

MR. BLACK. My feeling is that we can't pay too much
attention to the aggregates right now but that we ought to nudge the
federal funds rate [up] a little as a way of showing that we're
concerned about that.
I don't expect that to have much effect. But I
think it could keep us from having to move [rates] a whole lot later
on, which really would worry me a great deal.
But maybe I am dead
wrong on this.
It may be that the aggregates will come into line very
beautifully and we will have no worries.
That would be the best of
all possible worlds.
But that's not what I think is the most likely
case.
So, I'm opposed to what you have suggested here, although I
understand full well how a reasonable person could be expected to-MR. RICE.

Do I understand that you want to nudge the funds

rate up?
MR. BLACK. A little.
meeting and this meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I wanted to do that between the last

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think the period ahead is one in which
we have ample reasons not to target on M1.
My own judgment, however,
is that the problem we face is much more fundamental than whether we
target on M1 now because of all savers certificates and the new DIDC
regulations that will come out as mandated by legislation. I think
the world economy is literally starved for liquidity. And I'd liken
this [situation] to the dietary analogy that suggests. Fat people
have good reasons to go on diets.
Diets are very good things unless
they get out of hand.
They sometimes do.
And when they get out of
hand, the patient becomes anorexic and that's often a fatal disease.
If it's not fatal, it's often a life-long disease.
I am worried that
we have gone on long enough starving the world economy for liquidity
and that we may be at a point of impending anorexia.
Larry Roos mentioned earlier that he thought real interest
rates were getting down toward normal levels.
I must say I don't know
how he reaches that conclusion. The three-month commercial paper rate
is 10 percent, and my perception is that the three-month expected

10/5/82

inflation rate would be somewhere in the neighborhood of 4 to 5
percent.
So that makes the cost of issuing commercial paper 4 to 6
percent in real terms.
Private corporate bond rates for AAA issues
are 13-1/2 percent and are much higher for lower-graded issues.
I
understand that most businesses now have a 5-to-10 year inflation
expectation of something like 6 to 7 percent .
So that makes 6 to 7
percent the long-term real interest rate. That simply isn't normal.
It is not even close to being normal.
There are all kinds of reasons
for that, and I think fiscal policy is one of them. But if you look
at what has been happening to the real money stock recently, I think
you will find the answer largely in a very, very tight monetary
policy. And it started before October 1979; it started earlier. In
1979, we had an increase in the nominal money stock of 7-1/2 percent;
prices went up above 12 percent.
In 1980, nominal money went up 7-1/2
percent; prices again went up around 11 to 12 percent.
In 1981, money
growth was 5 percent against a price increase of 10 percent.
This
year it will be a little closer probably. But we've had a very, very
substantial drop in the real money stock in this country. It has
forced the kinds of policies other countries are following. So, I
think we have to do what is necessary to provide the liquidity that
will permit this economy to grow and will permit the world economy to
grow. I think we're right in going in the direction we are at this
particular meeting of unhinging [policy] from what is likely to happen
to M1 in the months ahead.
I am wondering as I look at this directive
if the last two sentences are necessary. This leaves the directive
focused on expanding bank reserves as necessary for an orderly and
sustained flow of money and credit and that leads to an expectation
about M2 and M3, without these last two sentences about somewhat
slower and somewhat [more rapid]--I'm sorry, I think I'm losing my
voice.
MR. PARTEE.
questions.

I think the last sentence particularly raises

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I clearly would fall on the side
of the argument that says we don't want an increase in interest rates,
even by accident.
An increase in interest rates in the current
setting, even if it came about by accident, would border almost on
On the other side, I'd like to
being irresponsible at this point.
think that maybe we could orchestrate a moderate and temperate and
further gradual reduction in market interest rates.
In the current
circumstances that inevitably calls into question relationships about
the discount rate and our view about what frictional levels of
borrowing really are, much as they did back in July when the last
reduction of the discount rate took place.
But having said that, I
would be somewhat uneasy to find ourselves in a situation where we are
dealing with an unbridled attempt to force down interest rates as
opposed to trying to nudge or orchestrate them in that direction. So,
in general, I have no great problem with what is being suggested here.
I would just throw out the idea, and I'm not sure how to do it, that
one way we might dissipate some of the concern about the longer-run
implications of this--or stated the other way, reinforce the view that
it is a temporary thing--would be to put a sentence in the directive
someplace that makes at least oblique reference to a continuing
longer-run commitment to achieve moderate and declining monetary
growth, perhaps in the context of the '83 targets or something like

10/5/82

that.
It's not easy to do.
perception problem.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But it might help deal with this

Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. My views are well known, so I can be very
[brief].
I don't think we can get a recovery with interest rates
where they are, and I am very disappointed that they went back up
since the last meeting. I had hoped that they would go through the 9
to 9-1/2 percent level and maybe go down again.
Therefore, I would
support anything that is going to bring us a generally lower rate
structure and bring mortgage rates and other long-term rates down and
gin up the economy not only here but worldwide.
So, I'm in favor of
this.
I don't object to those two last sentences.
I think they give
the directive a very good flavor by saying that we're going to operate
in the interest of liquidity in the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN.
I would join with Governors Partee and Teeters
in the view that the impending recovery is probably not as projected,
given today's interest rates.
I would call your attention to the
rather heroic assumption, in current dollars, of the recovery in
residential structures quarter-by-quarter running between plus 24
percent and plus almost 40 percent.
Given today's interest rates and
today's lack of liquidity in the financial system, I simply don't feel
that those are obtainable growth numbers.
If that's part of the
consumer leading the recovery, it is not likely to occur.
Much more
important is the weakness in business fixed investment; it is too
strong as projected. The first thing corporations have to do is to
reliquify themselves; they're going to have to raise $20 billion or
$40 billion or $60 billion in a very short period of time.
And
they're not likely to be able to do that in an economy with the degree
of liquidity it has today. It appears that there are not
uncertainties anymore but fear out there in the capital markets.
Part
of it is derived from the international situation but a good deal of
it is the awareness of the precarious nature of our own private
corporate sector in this country. And I think the need for
reliquification extends very obviously to the thrift industry and to
the small banking industry as they face the changes that need to be
made there.
But to get back to business investment, which I think is
going to decline more than our projections show, corporations face
very low returns on investment after taxes despite the efforts of the
Congress to change the depreciation and the cost recovery situation.
As we know, the recently enacted tax revenue measure has taken back
half of the benefits, plus or minus, in that area. So, we face an
extended period of weakness in business investment.
I think the best thing we can do is to bring rates down and
help reliquify so that sometime out in 1983 or even 1984 we will have
a recovery in the private sector.
I would support a temporary moving
away from an M1 target.
I believe that is consonant with maintaining
our integrity as a central bank. We would be making a real mistake if
we become too mechanical in the application of a policy in a multitrillion dollar economy.
So, I would like to see this directive,
perhaps with the Corrigan codicil adding language pointing toward the
reduction in the growth of the money supply over time.
I would also
like to see a borrowing level of $200 to $300 million with a verbal

10/5/82

directive, if you will, that interest rates be brought down, but in a
gradual way, echoing a previous comment here.
[Unintelligible] that
we temporarily target interest rates and that we be overt and candid
in our specifications.
MR. ROOS.
During that temporary period, may I just inquire
whether we would continue to publish weekly M1 figures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Of course.

MR. MARTIN. Yes, indeed, unless we can get the four-week
numbers published one of these days in addition.
MR. ROOS.
Pres, what if those weekly figures over this
temporary period showed a rather unusual and alarming increase in M1?
They would be out there for everyone to see.
Do you anticipate that
if that were to happen we would be able to move interest rates down?
In other words, if the consequence of what we were doing
[unintelligible].
The traditional means of bringing short-term
interest rates down was to pump money into the economy, and if that
was reflected in the weekly figures and they showed a bulge, assuming
that everyone around this table wants to see lower interest rates-MR. MARTIN.

Larry, this is not the problem here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This isn't the problem, I'm afraid.
Those
figures may show a bulge and it may have nothing to do with pumping
money into the economy.
It may show a bulge because $22 billion of
all savers certificates are maturing, some of which are temporarily
being lodged in M1.
Now, what do you do with that figure?
MS. TEETERS.
public what happened.
MR. MARTIN.

We go out with an announcement telling the
We would explain it.

MR. ROOS. Well, I would suspect, and I'd be prepared to
place a small wager on it, that the all savers phenomenon will wash
itself out within 60 days at the most.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Oh, I agree with that.

MR. PARTEE.

Then in 60 days we will have a new instrument.

MR. MARTIN.

In the meantime, John Deere fails.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course it will wash itself out.
That
particular phenomenon will wash itself out in less than 60 days.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Less than 60 days?

But I don't know that for sure.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, since we're on this subject, if I
can jump in here for a minute, one proviso I would make in my general
support of your proposal is that we breach a second tradition here, if
we are going to drop the M1 target temporarily. Normally, is it not

10/5/82

true, Murray, that the minutes of this meeting would not be publicly
released until the December FOMC meeting?
MR. ALTMANN.
November meeting.
MR. BALLES.
can wait that long.

No, November 19th, three days after the

After the November meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.

No,

I don't think we

I agree with that.

I think we need to get out this information PDQ.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to say something if we get a big
figure in the first week of October.
We have to say that so far as we
know that figure is an all savers phenomenon and we're not going to
pay any attention to it or to the M1 figures in the immediate future.
MR. BALLES.
Okay, I agree completely.
I'm glad to hear that
because to do otherwise I think would be very, very risky.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I feel very much that we would be better
off if interest rates were lower.
The question is:
How do we get
The wisest thing, if we wanted to get there,
from here to there?
would be that we shouldn't start from here.
That option isn't open to
us.
We have to get there without sacrificing all that we've created
in the last year in terms of credibility and a framework for giving
people confidence.
So, I think we should still have a money supply
directive not, as this looks to me, a money market or interest rate
directive.
I think we should give up temporarily on M1, which is
beset by all the uncertainties of the all savers certificates and the
new instrument. That doesn't mean we wouldn't go back to it.
Logically, M1 is the best of the aggregates.
We should stress
liquidity preference more than the alternative directive does by
putting a reference to it at the beginning of the last sentence,
indicating that there is mounting evidence that exceptional liquidity
demands are upon us.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

At the beginning of what sentence?

MR. WALLICH. The last sentence.
Instead of starting with
"Somewhat more rapid," I would say "In the light of mounting evidence
that economic and financial uncertainties are continuing to lead to
exceptional liquidity demands, somewhat more rapid growth in the
broader aggregates would be tolerated."
So, we allow for an overshoot
of M2, which is the one thing I would suggest that we target.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Do we have evidence of that, Henry?

MR. WALLICH.

Well,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

I think there is.
It could be up.

Liquidity preference?

10/5/82

MR. WALLICH. It seems clear that velocity, instead of rising
as had been expected, is-MR. GRAMLEY.
I thought the staff said that the increase in
the quantity of M1 recently is pretty much in line with a movement
down the demand function, given the current interest rates, and not a
shift in the demand function.
MR. WALLICH. As you look at the behavior of velocity over
the year, it does not-MR. GRAMLEY.
not sure it is now.

That was a good argument last April, but I'm

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well--

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think it is a defensible argument.
I
would suggest that we drop the reference in the first sentence of the
second paragraph to the expansion of bank reserves and reduced
pressures but shape the M2 path in such a way that we would have a
We would have to formulate the
gradual decline in interest rates.
borrowing assumption to make that feasible.
I can't do it off the top
I would make the
of my head; I don't know just what that would be.
funds range narrow to reflect the fact that we are backing away from
money supply targets.
And we could cap it at 10 percent, if that were
really necessary. All it would mean is that we would consult, and at
That's
times like this we ought to consult more frequently anyway.
how I would structure the directive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think how one comes out on this depends
on whether one wants to take the risks on rules or on the side of
discretion.
It does seem to me that we have pushed the domestic
economy and the financial system and the world economy about as far as
I think we have
we can push them. And this is not business as usual.
to take our chances on the side of discretion, which tells me that at
a minimum we cannot have higher rates in these circumstances; and if
I must say, however, that
we can get lower rates, that's fine.
whenever one bets on discretion versus rules, it depends a good bit on
I believe this kind of
who is making the discretionary decisions.
directive puts much more than the usual amount of authority in the
hands of the Chairman. And with this particular Chairman, I don't
So, because of the
have any problems, given the circumstances.
situation and because of the person who is going to have to use a good
bit of this discretion, I'm supportive of the general approach as
proposed in the alternative directive language.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I have you on the list, but
you have already commented. Or do you have something more?
MR. BALLES.
I have one other question, Paul:
Did you intend
that this be the entire part of the operational paragraph--that is to
say that we would have no mention of a federal funds rate range?
I didn't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an open mind about that.
mean to infer one thing or the other; I don't know whether it's

10/5/82

necessary but I have no problem with it.
I do think it has to be a
bit lower than we had before if we put it in.
MR. BALLES.
Right. When you are ready to discuss that, I
think we ought to get that settled because if we create too many
revolutions in one directive, we're surely going to shake up the
marketplace.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
traditional sentence.

I don't have any problem with the

MR. BALLES.
I'm not sure what the better part of wisdom is;
but if we stay silent on the federal funds range, that would really be
a major break in tradition.

around

MR. BLACK. Then the issue is whether we're symmetrical
[the current level].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Given my sense of the general economic scenery, I
certainly am in the camp that thinks that we simply must bring rates
down.
I think we are at a point where we cannot go much longer in the
way the economy is currently performing or we're going to see some
very serious results emerging. Therefore, I think it's exceptionally
important that we move toward bringing rates down.
I certainly would
understand and agree that there is a risk to this in that the markets,
as we know, could see it adversely. But I would agree with Governor
Martin that mature and careful thinking is likely to [bring the
market] to the view that this seems to be a realistic change, given
the circumstances we're dealing with. And I think the result could be
positive as opposed to being negative.
So, I support the directive as
it has been laid out.
It seems to me that the last sentence is a very
important conclusion; [I'd leave it] rather than delete it.
It is our
view that this is a major change that we're making but one that is
appropriate and very important.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have very little to add to
your tour d'horizon. I think it covers admirably the situation that
we find ourselves in.
I would simply want to emphasize one thing and
that is the timing of the recovery; the recovery is very late indeed.
We've been expecting recovery for at least six months, possibly
longer.
And the longer the economy stays in the doldrums, the greater
the risk and the greater the dangers.
In your words, the developing
disarray feeds upon itself, and until we see some evidence of a
turnaround, I think we're in a very vulnerable situation. So, in this
environment, we should not do anything that risks rising interest
rates; on the contrary, we should do what we reasonably can to get
interest rates moving down. Therefore, I support this directive
language.
I also agree with those who would shift emphasis away from
M1 temporarily at this time.
I also would retain the last two
sentences of the directive; they give the sense that we have not
totally abandoned targeting of the aggregates and I think it's
important to maintain that impression at this time.
I don't know if
this is the time to discuss borrowing, but if it is, I would be
prepared to see borrowing in the range of $200 million or less.

10/5/82

MS. TEETERS.
That doesn't include those special liquidity
needs of particular banks?
MR. RICE.

No, it doesn't.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE.
I also would support a change in the directive
language this time.
I'm perhaps a little less enthusiastic than some
of you about specifying a desire for interest rates to move in a
particular way because I don't really think we know that much.
Every
indication that we have does seem to suggest that interest rates are
too high, but we just don't know that much about what determines
interest rates and what they need to be to equilibrate markets.
I
would remind you all that we are in a situation with a deficit running
at $160 billion or thereabouts. And that really substitutes a cash
flow financed by the government for a cash flow financed by the
private sector. And since the government is interest-insensitive, one
has to presume that higher interest rates will be needed in the
private sector than would otherwise occur.
That's just one of many,
many analytic comments made.
But I am convinced that M1 for several months looking ahead
is going to be a very poor and implausible indicator of what is going
on in terms of monetary expansion. As I've said, we did have a 38 or
39 percent rate of increase in NOW accounts in July and August and we
certainly are going to have an all savers certificate bulge in NOW
accounts in the period right ahead.
If I could think of some way to
keep the M1 range, I would; but it's so implausible that we would have
any idea what the number will be that I just don't know how to keep it
and retain our credibility. It may well be that when the new
instrument comes out we will get a low M1, depending on how we
classify the new instrument, as M1 or M2.
For the moment, though,
And
we're just in total disarray and we need to recognize that fact.
I would say that we need to recognize it publicly and soon because
otherwise the market will react in the way Larry says.
They will see
a high number and will say that the Federal Reserve is going to have
to screw down on their number and therefore rates will go higher, and
they will work them higher in anticipation of that event.
So, there
has to be some kind of communication, if we go ahead with this, soon.
I'm not a great supporter of M2, as you all know, because I
think it does have very important problems of interpretation in the
longer run.
But for this immediate period ahead I'm not so disturbed
about an M2 number of the kind suggested, 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
I
really can't imagine a liquidity change that is going to get us very
far off that as an upper limit of what is likely to occur.
The early
indications are that [M2 in] October is going to be pretty low, so I
think it's a fairly safe thing to go on.
And mainly because we're
contemplating so many things that will make our critics suspicious-and I agree that they will be very suspicious--I would drop the last
sentence of the proposed directive.
I understand that something could
happen that would lead us off [track], but if we say here [that M2 is]
expected to be in a range of around 8-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent for the
September-to-December period, with the expectation that October is
going to be fairly low, I think it gives us enough room without
raising this additional question in people's minds.

10/5/82

-46-

As I think about what is bothering a lot of you, in
particular this rate setting issue--and I think Bill Ford spoke out
most strongly on that--it may be this phrase at the beginning of the
second paragraph, "taking account of the desirability of somewhat
reduced pressures in private credit markets in the light of current
economic conditions."
That would seem to me to be a signal that the
Federal Reserve is following rates rather than a more objective
So, I think it may be desirable to drop that phrase and
measure.
substitute instead something like "consistent with the early
resumption of economic growth," which doesn't necessarily imply lower
rates and easier conditions but does imply the need for an orderly and
That might help a little with
sustained flow of money and credit.
that problem.
On the suggestion that Jerry Corrigan made that we
again repeat our insistence that we're going to be conservative over a
long period of time, I don't know. Jerry, there's a whole paragraph
that would be picked up from the past directive that talks about the
long-run plans of the Committee and so forth; to force it into this
paragraph seems to me so apologetic that it would backfire on us.
MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think anybody reads the boilerplate.
The kind of thing I'm talking about, since I gather the Chairman
intends to say something, could be dealt with in that way as well.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think the way to handle it is that
it would be quite easy for the Chairman to say that we expect the rate
of inflation to continue to decline next year and that over the long
run we will be following an anti-inflationary policy.
I wouldn't say
anything about the monetary aggregates next year but I'd say we expect
the rate of inflation to decline even with a-MR. PARTEE.
It's difficult to handle here just in a phrase
without sounding apologetic.
The notion that we want to be
constraining and that we are going to continue to run monetary policy
pretty carefully is good, but the yardsticks have changed.
We are
having trouble measuring in this period using the conventional
yardsticks.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The existing phrase I would remind you
says:
"The Committee also indicated it was tentatively planning"-this is enshrined in our decision--"to continue the current ranges for
1983 but it will review the decision carefully in the light of
developments over the remainder of 1982."
That's not exactly the most
ringing [endorsement].
MR. PARTEE.

Not really, no.

SPEAKER(?).

I agree.

MR. PARTEE.
On the other hand, I'm not sure I would be
prepared to support much more than that for the year to come.
One last comment. You spoke a little about the level of
borrowings.
I don't see any reason to reduce the initial borrowings
If I understand it, what we have
so much from where they have been.
done is to allow almost all of the expansion that occurred in the
monetary aggregates to show through in larger nonborrowed reserves.
So, borrowings really are where they are in good part because of the
need to deal with these special situation borrowings.
We might reduce

10/5/82

-47-

it to $400 to $500 million, but I wouldn't take it way down to the
kinds of numbers that people have mentioned, $200 million or less, as
a starting position.
That's all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, when I came to the meeting
this morning I was pretty much of the view that Bob Black and to some
extent Bill Ford expressed.
I must say that your review of the world
situation prior to the coffee break woke me up.
MR. BLACK.

I demand equal time!

MR. BOYKIN. I agree in that I don't believe rates should go
up.
As far as the shift in emphasis on M2, that seems to me a fairly
logical extension of what we did with the NOW account situation.
It
is a little bigger and maybe not quite as subtle, but I don't think it
would be that hard to explain, really, what we are doing. There is
some precedent for that aspect of it.
In terms of understandability
of what we are likely to be doing, [I was comforted by] the comment
you made that you would have an opportunity in the not too distant
future [to explain this].
That would be extremely important in terms
of how this is actually perceived, certainly in the short run, before
people have an opportunity to analyze the record in some detail.
So,
I would come out with those who certainly don't want rates to go up
and who want even some decline.
As far as the wording of the
directive, I don't think I could make very much of a contribution to
that. There are a number of subtleties being expressed and I'm not
sure I appreciate all of them. I couldn't improve on any of them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a couple
of observations.
One is that, clearly, all the discussion around the
table has been [consistent with] a money market conditions or interest
rate directive.
Secondly, I agree with the comments that Ed Boehne
expressed with respect to the discretion that is vested in the
Chairman in the intermeeting period with this kind of a directive.
As
a result, I'd like to ask the Chairman if he's prepared to make some
statement as to the appropriate interest rate level and the pattern of
getting there.
Clearly, it is in the down [direction].
But in order
to understand how the Chairman may exercise that discretion, it would
help me to understand what you're thinking.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I will respond to that shortly, after Mr.
Roos and Mr. Morris get finished with their comments.
MR. ROOS.

In that order?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Either order; I have Mr. Roos first on my

list.
MR. ROOS.

All right, I'd be pleased to.

MR. CORRIGAN.
guys being last!

There's a certain appropriateness to these two

-48-

10/5/82

MR. ROOS.
Let me say, Mr. Chairman, that I was both
impressed and depressed with your review of the world situation, and I
don't minimize that in any way. Let me also say that no one at this
table would prefer lower interest rates more than I. I do take
exception to any implication that recent Federal Reserve policy has
wrung out the economy of this country or has been detrimental to the
international economy.
I think what has occurred is more a result of
ten or fifteen years of irresponsible monetary policies throughout the
world--as well as a well-meant effort on the part of the Federal Open
Market Committee as long as I've been on it and until October 1979--to
try to do just what we're doing today, and that is to lean against
interest rate movements.
I think that contributed in a major way to
inflation, which really led to this high interest rate pattern that we
have.
I believe that what we're about to do today will unquestionably
be viewed by those who watch what we do as a major change.
I don't
think it will be possible to explain away the fact that, albeit
temporarily, we are moving away from [targeting] a narrow aggregate
that has predicted prices and output better than other variables.
It
will be apparent, in spite of any disclaimers we may or may not make,
that we are moving toward placing greater emphasis on controlling the
fed funds rate. And I think it will be misconstrued by the markets.
It will be associated with the forthcoming election; I think it will
give comfort to those who, rightly or wrongly, have sat on the
sidelines and implied that somewhere along the line we would cave in
on our present policy posture.
Mr. Chairman, there's no question that under your leadership
we have made enormous strides toward wringing out the inflationary
problem and restoring the economy to at least a semblance of
stability.
I think our credibility and your credibility are
unbelievably and deservably affirmed at present.
If we fail to
specify in this directive at least some M1 range, with all the
disclaimers that these things that are going to happen could distort
it and cause us to change, I think there will be a gross
misinterpretation and misconception of what we are doing. And it
could conceivably destroy much of the progress that we've made.
So,
although I don't have a vote, I feel it's a gross mistake to do what
apparently we're about to do.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, it just so happens that we have
opposite extremes finishing up this discussion.
I look upon it as a
great step forward that we have gotten M1 out of the directive. And I
don't view it as a temporary phenomenon because I think our ability to
interpret M1 is going to continue to be highly questionable for some
time to come.
This is not a two- or three-month phenomenon as far as
I can see.
But that remains to be seen.
Nonetheless, I support the
move at this point in time and I would hope that borrowing is set at a
level that would get the funds rate down to the 9 to 9-1/2 percent
area as a start.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

I have a late starter, Mr. Solomon.

He hasn't said a word!

I think this is a rather momentous
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
FOMC meeting.
I had thought that we had until maybe 1986 before the

10/5/82

But
pace of deregulation and innovation would bring us to this point.
the Garn Bill and legislation that was [unintelligible] today--what's
the name of that act?
MR. RICE.

The Garn-St Germain--

MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. MORRIS.

I can think of several names!
Depository surprise.
The destruction of M1 bill.

It has moved us very quickly most of
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think we have
the way to the deregulation that we expected by 1986.
a real dilemma here today. On substance, I feel that we absolutely
I believe there is a real
have to have some modest decline in rates.
danger of a major cracking and then we would have to go even farther;
whereas with a modest decline now that stays in place for a while
there is a better chance of working ourselves out of this both
I recognize that there will be a good
internationally and at home.
deal of questioning, not only in monetarist circles but more
generally. I don't think there will be an avalanche of criticism,
given our credibility, but there will be major questioning as to what
this means in terms of longer-run anti-inflationary policy. And it
seems to me that there ought to be some words [to convey] our longerrun commitment and our expectations that inflation will continue to
come down--and possibly they should be just in the Chairman's
statements and other statements, not in the directive. I don't know
how to do it in the directive without sounding defensive, but there
ought to be some words about that.
I do feel that if one reads this
So, I would support this.
We are targeting basically
carefully, we are really not targeting M2.
money market conditions and we are saying that we expect this will
involve growth of M2 in the range of 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
The
Therefore, I'm not sure that we really need the last sentence.
last sentence simply makes more explicit what is there quite carefully
I don't see that the way this is written, with the
[unintelligible].
expectation of M2 growth of 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, is a constraint on
doing what is necessary to get the operative sentence. And if I am
correct in my interpretation, I don't see why we need that last
sentence. In that sense, I would agree with Chuck.
MR. PARTEE.

But

I also would drop the operative sentence.

Well, I wouldn't drop the operative
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
sentence because then people don't know where we are.
MR. PARTEE.

We're targeting on 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent on M2.

The presentation is critical. And
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
judging from past history, the presentation is probably going to be
more dependent on the Chairman's statements than it will be on the
directive, particularly given the [publication] lag and the fact that
we are expecting such a large bulge in the first week of October and
Now, since the Chairman has a mind of his
something has to be said.
own, I would assume that if he gets a majority vote on the substance
of this directive that it may not be worth spending a lot of time

10/5/82

interpreting and arguing about the more marginal sentences. We are
making a major substantive decision here.
And the presentation of
that in a way that does not undermine our credibility is absolutely
essential.
But we do have a lot going for us in terms of credibility
on the longer-run anti-inflationary policy.
Turning to the specifics, even with an initial borrowing
assumption of $200 million, I don't think the funds rate would get
down even to 9 percent unless this action is followed by a discount
rate cut.
And I urge that, in the Board's infinite wisdom, that be
confined to 1/2 point rather than a point.
It is my reading--and I
could be wrong--that if the discount rate is cut 1/2 point, the
markets will expect another half point later on, almost immediately.
If we do a full point, many people in the market may say that after
the election there will be another full point.
This election thing
is a damn shame because we are not being influenced by the election.
But the timing is very awkward for us.
Anyway, that's another area.
I would recommend that the initial borrowing be $200 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a few not so random
comments.
Tony Solomon and others have referred to the role of the
Chairman.
Let me just say in that connection that the Chairman is
unable to explain and defend a policy he doesn't understand or agree
with.
Larry Roos referred to the concern about the interpretation of
recent policy and made a short but impassioned statement that we are
seeing the results of ten to fifteen years of irresponsible monetary
policies around the world.
I think there's a lot of substance to
that.
I wouldn't narrow it to monetary policies.
I don't want to be
associated particularly with that part, but I think what we are seeing
is the culmination of ten or fifteen years or more of a set of
attitudes and behavior that had to be changed. And that is difficult,
but we've seen some progress.
I think we're also in a very critical period right now for
all the reasons I suggested.
I don't myself perceive that the risks
of misinterpretation are as great as some people think.
Obviously,
they are there.
But I don't think many people, if you take this out
of the election atmosphere, are going to interpret this as a cave-in,
in and of itself.
Most people in the financial markets at least, to
put it bluntly, think we've overstayed the course now.
It gets into
this great question of credibility that I suppose we're taking rather
personally. At the risk of being misunderstood, following a
mechanical operation because we think that's vital to credibility and
driving the economy into the ground isn't exactly my version of how to
maintain credibility over time. Credibility in some sense is there to
be spent when we think it's necessary to spend it and we can carry
through a change in approach.
I don't think this is all as extreme as
some have painted it.
But I don't think we're just dealing with the
theory here.
We are dealing with a real world and assessing where the
risks are.
It's quite clear in my mind where the risks are.
I think
I made it quite clear in terms of economic developments around the
world.
But if one wants to put it in terms of risk to the
institution:
If we get this one wrong, we are going to have
legislation next year without a doubt.
We may get it anyway.
It's a
matter of judgment as to how that might come out and where the risks
are, but I think I know where the risks are.
I'm not sure how it
looks just in strict electoral terms, since that question has been
raised, to sit here in some sense artificially doing nothing and then

10/5/82

I'm not sure that
have to make a big move right after the election.
would wash very well in terms of anybody's opinion of our professional
competence as an institution, if one were convinced that this [change
was appropriate].
Obviously, that depends upon the substance and how
strong the case is for making a change at the moment.
I'd prefer that
this problem didn't arise now.
If business conditions looked a little
better and interest rates were a little lower--and I wouldn't care
where the interest rates were if the economic situation looked a
little better--and if we weren't going to have to deal with a
succession of sick foreign countries in this time period, if the
dollar were not rising into the wild blue yonder right now, and if I
thought that all these accumulating problems that we face could wait
for a while, we'd have a much easier decision. Under present
conditions, four weeks looks like one hell of a long time to me.
I
don't know what is going to happen in a number of directions over the
next four weeks.
In terms of what specifically this means operationally, all I
can give you is an opinion of what I had in mind in looking at this
kind of language and putting a gloss on it.
The first paragraph is
meant to say nothing more than that we don't know what M1 means over
the next quarter for two reasons, period. Therefore, since we don't
know what it means, it seems a little fatuous to put down a number
It is no special
pretending we know what it means when we don't.
prejudice against M1.
If we had some experience to measure what it
meant during this kind of period, we would, but we don't.
The first sentence in the second paragraph is basically meant
to be the operational sentence. I think that is fair.
It is meant to
convey the impression that we seek some expansion, however measured,
in the monetary aggregates and in reserves and it is meant to reflect
and note some concern about what is going on in the private credit
I think that
markets and that that will have a bearing on what we do.
is understood or assumed by sophisticated people in the market, at the
They have assumed that we moved as alertly--if
present time anyway.
that's the right word--as we did during the summer because we were
operating against the background of Penn Square and Drysdale and
This is in a sense a confession,
accumulating international problems.
good for the soul, in making that a little more explicit. And it has
some connotation without saying it directly that we certainly are
concerned, among other indicators, about the pressures in those
markets and what is going on in interest rates.
The next sentence is meant to be a straightforward estimate
of what we think and is put in there to show continuity with the
present approach. This is consistent with what we have been saying,
anyway, about the measures that we think are the most reliable, not in
any theoretical or long-term sense but during this particular quarter.
That is where we get the sense of continuity with the past and that is
I might point out in that
meant to illustrate or to make that point.
That in the near
connection what somebody has already mentioned:
term, in fact, my guess is that M2 growth is going to be very low and
My interest in that phenomenon is that
that of M3 might be low, too.
We had a very high rate of growth
I don't know what is causing it.
for a couple of months and it may just be a statistical thing. It
went up rapidly for a couple of months and now it is leveling off for
a couple of months.
To the extent that it reflects some sense of
tightness that we don't know we have--incomes going down or banks

10/5/82

can't finance themselves so readily--it's an indication that we are
But
Now, I'm not adopting that theory.
tighter than we think we are.
I just point out that in the very short run, before we meet next time,
my guess would be that M2 and M3 are going to be low rather than high
relative to these numbers.
And I don't think the numbers we put in
there are terribly sensitive for that reason.
As for the last two sentences, I'm inclined to think they're
The flavor is this:
If they're helpful, put them in; if
optional.
And I think it is somewhat
they're not helpful, take them out.
optional whether we put in a range for the federal funds rate.
If we
do, I'd make it, say, 7 to 10 percent. As for what we would do
operationally, and of course we'd have to discuss this a little more,
I would propose that we drop the borrowing level.
To precisely what
level, I'm not sure; $200 million seems to me the lower limit of what
we would do; $300 million may be an appropriate number; one could
The borrowing figures
argue for something slightly higher than that.
are confused to the extent there is so-called special borrowing in any
event.
And I don't know quite how to assess that.
It's like M1;
there is no right answer on how to assess it precisely.
We can't
escape that problem. I don't have any particular interest rate in
I've expressed the
mind in setting forth this kind of directive.
opinion that I don't think we should create an atmosphere or the
reality of rising interest rates, insofar as we can reasonably avoid
that.
I'm not talking about every conceivable contingency that may
arise in the real world.
But based upon what I know now, the
implication of the borrowing level is that we would get a somewhat
easier tendency in the federal funds rate in any event.
Where it
really is would rest upon a discount rate decision and not this
decision, I suspect, except within a very narrow range.
I do not mean
to imply any feeling as to where interest rates should be a month from
now. Beyond what is implicit in what I've already said, if things
look the way they do now, I wouldn't like to see an increase and I
would feel more comfortable with some decrease.
But I haven't any
particular target in mind.
The implication is that we would keep the
borrowing level more or less the same until something happened to
throw us off--in economic activity, in financial markets, or in the
We would have to reconsider that in the
actual growth of M2 and M3.
light of all these factors, and consultation from time to time would
probably be appropriate in those circumstances.
What else can I say
to be more specific?
MR. GUFFEY. In terms of the pattern that you might expect to
occur:
If I understood your most recent statement, you suggested
interest rates would be at or near their present levels for some
period of time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we would tend to have an easier
funds rate than we had just recently if [the Board] did nothing on the
discount rate.
If the discount rate were reduced, I think rates would
go down. Again, we have a setting here where these numbers, even when
we have them on a preliminary basis, are about as reliable as I don't
know what.
But over the course of the period that we're talking about
here--in the next couple of weeks up until the Friday when the figure
is published that will include a presumed distortion from all savers
certificates--we may have an M1 figure that is on target in the latest
weekly figure. We probably will have an unemployment rate that is up
significantly and an industrial production figure shortly--I don't

10/5/82

-53-

know when that comes out--that is down and, hopefully, a good price
I don't know what other critical
figure in there someplace, too.
numbers are coming out in the next ten days.
MR. BLACK.
look like now?

Mr. Chairman, what does the unemployment rate

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I don't have any
particular guess.
We can turn to the staff. We know that the
unemployment claims figures have shot up enormously.
I think the
general assumption is that it's going to be 10 percent plus, and I'm
not sure that anybody can be much more specific than that.
MR. FORD. Mr. Chairman, you did say you were planning to
make some kind of public statement about this rather than just waiting
a month [or so] until after the next meeting. When, roughly, were you
planning to say something about this?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a tentative date with the
Business Council at the end of this week where I have to appear at a
little press conference after I talk at any event.
So, that's the
easiest occasion just because it's already scheduled and comes in the
normal course of events and we don't have to make any big deal about
it.
What I might suggest, since it's 1:20 p.m., is that people go
There may be some desire to discuss this
out and get some sandwiches.
further in substance. And if there is going to be some effort to fool
around with the language or drop sentences or whatever, it gives us
fifteen minutes or so to think about it.
[Lunch recess]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This need not be taken as strikingly as
some people either fear or hope, depending upon which side of the
spectrum they are on.
I don't consider anything in here very
inconsistent with what we've been doing. We have said we are going to
interpret the aggregates somewhat loosely in effect--I'm now
interpolating--in the light of our judgment as to whether there are
unusual precautionary demands for money and liquidity. The market has
assumed we are operating that way quite comfortably and this is an
extension of that idea.
What it does is to take out M1 for a very
particular reason.
I raise the question because there is this talk
If we write a letter to the Congress,
about how to say it publicly.
for instance, and say we've changed the targets or we have some new
operating approach or some such thing, I think that makes it much more
I am reluctant to have a
grandiose than is intended in my mind.
specially called press conference or a speech or something for the
same reason. It just makes it sound as if we're off on some entirely
new course. I think we have to get the message over publicly that,
indeed, we're not going to be worried about the M1 figure in the short
run, if we're not.
We have in effect said--and we are repeating and
amplifying what we said--that we would tolerate for some period of
time growth somewhat above the target range should unusual
precautionary demands for money and liquidity be evident. Going back
to my testimony [in July], I know I had a lot of criteria--the
performance of the economy, interest rates I deliberately put in, the
availability of bank credit--all of which I said bear upon that

10/5/82

judgment.
That's what I said in the testimony. We think, yes, all
those things are operative now and we are willing to tolerate a bulge
in the targeted growth if that is necessary in this time period.
It
is precisely the circumstances that we foresaw as a possibility.
I
don't think it's that big a deal.
Other people put other
interpretations on it.
I just tell you that I don't think it has to
be read as too big a deal.
In any event, assuming that we are in this
general neighborhood, let us pin down the operations more
specifically, which comes down pretty much to the initial borrowing
level, I think. We've had proposals from $200 [to $300] million and
now we have proposals above $300 million, too.
MR. PARTEE.

$400 million, I thought.

What has it been

running?

path;

MR. STERNLIGHT. $500 million is what we've been using in the
it is actually $560 million.

million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's going to be $500 to 600
What was it yesterday?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

$300 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may not be up-to-date on it.
We have
more reserves in there than we should and deliberately haven't taken
them out, given the market conditions so far this week. We just leave
them, I guess; I don't know what borrowings will be.
They can't be
much below that, but the excess reserves may be very high.
MR. AXILROD. We allowed for about $500 million and so far
they are a little over $1 billion; that could come out on its own if
our projections are wrong.
MR. PARTEE.
$500 million?

But in drawing the path you allowed for about

MR. AXILROD.
We allowed for $500 million because the week
with the quarter-end statement date normally has well above normal
excess reserves.
MR. PARTEE.
And that was after having made the adjustment to
provide the nonborrowed reserves consistent with the observed
overshoot in M1?
MR. AXILROD.
That's right, and then to allow for the
[unintelligible] week statement date excess reserve averaging.
MS. TEETERS.
Did the $500 million have any special
borrowings built into it, Steve?
MR. AXILROD.
There is some.
The Midland Bank in Dallas
still is in for some; I've forgotten the exact number.
MR. BOYKIN.
MR. AXILROD.
month.

That's down to about $75 million now.
Yes, they haven't been in for a while--about a

10/5/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is any mechanical
I must say that is
relationship with these special borrowings.
difficult to handle; the bank in the weakest position gets hit and the
markets are a little tight.
If that bank didn't borrow, others would
have to borrow, in part.
MR. GRAMLEY. When the staff made out the alternatives in the
Bluebook, the difference in borrowing levels between "A" and "B" was
rather substantial, $150 million versus $450 million. The $450
million was associated with essentially no change in market interest
rates and "A" was associated with some easing, but I didn't get the
impression that it was that significant an amount of easing. If we
were to go, say, to a number like $400 million, it would imply hardly
any change in market interest rates.
MR. AXILROD.
think that's right.

At the present level of the discount rate, I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I think $400 million is too high

myself.
MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the range of proposals around the
table, I can easily live with borrowings of $300 or maybe $350
million; I would have a small preference for putting a 7 to 10 percent
federal funds range in the directive for no other reason than a desire
to reinforce continuity at the margin.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Let me get to the directive later.

7 to 10 percent is worse than nothing.

MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.

I would prefer a lower--

How
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many like $200 million?
How many like higher than $300 million?
many like $300 million?
obviously, take $300 million with--

MR. PARTEE.

Well,

SPEAKER(?).

From among the others.

MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
arithmetic average of--

I have determined that $300 million is the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
would be $293 million!

If he took a weighted average, it

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Assuming somebody is going to vote for the
directive, let's take that poll again.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, it really should only be the people who are
going to vote yes [on the directive] who are allowed to vote [on
this].
We've run into that problem with contemporaneous reserve
accounting.
MR. RICE.

We certainly have.

-56-

10/5/82

MS. TEETERS.

That ought to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are there other operational questions?

MR. BLACK. Would we take Midland Bank out of that $300
million, Steve, or would we leave it in there as we did on the $500
million?
MR. BOYKIN.
MR. BLACK.

They ought to be out by the end of the week.
Well, that will solve the issue then.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
But on occasion we'll get another borrower,
either them or somebody else, and that will raise the question of
whether borrowing is going to [include or exclude that bank].
MR. BLACK. Well, as nearly as possible it ought to be there
if it's interest-sensitive, it seems to me, if it's to give us any
guidance on federal funds rates.
That's all I was hoping we would do.
MR. PARTEE.
When you say other operational questions, are
you talking about the question of the federal funds range specified?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
directive.
MR. PARTEE.

No, let's get to that as part of the

Oh, I see.

But other operating considerations?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
In effect, we're in an area of
judgment depending upon that happens to the aggregates and the economy
and interest rates and so forth.
MR. BALLES.
I have an operational question, Paul.
For those
of us who are skeptical that M2 is going to grow as fast as 8-1/2 or
9-1/2 percent, given the way that the money market funds are slowing
down and so on:
How is the Desk going to operate under the directive
as it stands here?
Are they going to be targeting on 8-1/2 to 9-1/2
percent M2 growth?
I just want to make sure it's a workable directive
from the standpoint of Desk implementation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's an interesting question if in
fact [the M2 figures] run low for a month.
There are two
possibilities, I suppose.
Let's assume they are running low but the
evidence that we have currently is that it is a temporary phenomenon
and [the rate of growth] doesn't look unreasonable for the quarter.
It is stated as a [rate for the] quarter.
Then, I would think we
probably would not do too much. If they are running low and we
thought they were actually running below these figures, the
implication is that interest rates will come down.
We would ease the
position; that's what it says.
MR. GUFFEY.
situation.

Which drops interest

rates and worsens that very

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you mean by "worsens"--that we
would get really slower growth?
MR. BALLES.

Yes.

10/5/82

MR. GUFFEY.

Sure, when interest rates--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think the staff thinks so,
but I would raise a very interesting question as to whether we haven't
been too tight because higher interest rates bloomed-MR. PARTEE.

That next to last sentence I think has some

SPEAKER(?).

Right.

meaning.

It not only says would be "acceptable" but
MR. GRAMLEY.
would be "desirable" in the context of declining interest rates.
MR. PARTEE.
I presume that was put in, Paul, because we are
over the target ranges rather-Whether
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but we don't have to say it.
that is in or out, my interpretation would be that if [monetary
growth] is running low, we are not going to be pushing terribly to get
it up within a limited time but would go in the direction of easing.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But hopefully we wouldn't go so far
that then we would turn it around three weeks later and rates would
start back up.
Well, as I say, we judge this in the light
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
of what we think is going to happen in the future too.
MR. BALLES. But, Steve, haven't money market funds actually
been shrinking in the last few weeks?
MR. AXILROD.
the weekly data are--

Yes.

They are up on average in the month, but

MR. BALLES. That's the phenomenon I had in mind.
happens if that trend continues?

What

MR. AXILROD. Well, market rates have been rising and the
rates on the [money market] funds have been dropping with a lag, so
If market rates began going down and if
they've come back together.
[money market] funds rates tended to lag the drop in market rates,
We have only a modest
[flows into money] funds would tend to go up.
expansion projected at the moment.
MR. BALLES.
Because of all the uncertainties, I would just
suggest a possibility--I'm not sure it will solve anything--of an even
But
wider range than the 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent shown here [for M2].
if we did that, it would make it tougher for the Desk to construct a
reserve path, I would think.
This is a matter of judgment. I don't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
think we would ignore M1 either if we thought it was giving us some
evidence. A lot of things could happen with the all savers
certificates.
Suppose, after all this talk about all savers blowing
We have a big
M1 up, that there's a relatively modest increase.

10/5/82

decrease this week; suppose we get a relatively modest--say, an
offsetting--increase the following week and then it falls down again
the week after that.
I would say that's a pretty weak M1 and it would
influence my judgment as to what to do, even though we're not
following it in a mechanical way.
MR. PARTEE.
I think its composition matters.
Suppose we
have very strong NOW accounts and very weak demand deposits?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we would try to get some
evidence from that as well as we can.
MR. BLACK.
If that happens, Mr. Chairman, I would think you
all were doing the right thing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we can clarify
that any further.
Let me just look at the first paragraph as a whole,
which is meant just to be a straightforward-MR. BALLES.
Would you tolerate a little nit-picking-editorial, not substantive--on your first paragraph?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Sure.

It's not my paragraph.

MR. BALLES.
Following the dash in the first sentence, "in
the very near term by investment of funds in maturing all savers
certificates," one doesn't "invest in"-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, no.

MR. BALLES.
The word "in" is out of place there.
Maybe it
should be "reinvestment of funds now in" or "from" [all savers
certificates].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"Reinvestment of funds from."

MR. BALLES.
I have one other suggestion, which is just a
matter of reversing emphasis, I guess.
In the next full sentence
beginning
"The probable difficulties...suggest that substantial
weight not be placed on," I'd rather say "suggest little weight be
placed on."
Or we could say "little, if any."
I don't know how
strong we want to be on that since we have ended up not specifying
anything for [M] .
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know what the best phrase is

there.
MR. WALLICH.
weight be placed."

We might say, "suggest that no substantial

MR. BALLES.
I might drop "substantial."
In effect, what
we're doing is placing no weight, if we don't have [a target].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, I don't think we're quite doing that.

MR. BALLES.
We don't have a target.
I'm just trying to make
the words for the first paragraph consistent with the absence of an M1
target.

-59-

10/5/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I just gave you my interpretation.
I
would want to look at M1 for what information we can get from it.
What we are really saying here is that we don't want to pin a
I don't
mechanical target on it or have a mechanical path for it.
want to say much more than that really.

would say

MR. GRAMLEY.
If I may pick a nit in the second paragraph, I
"In these circumstances..."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'm just starting the first paragraph.

MR. PARTEE.
I think that "no substantial weight"
better than "substantial weight not."
MR. MARTIN.

is probably

Yes, "no substantial."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It

sounds to my ear

MR.

BALLES.

That would be good:

MR.

PARTEE.

It must be

like less,

but I--

"less weight."

"much less,"

though.

"Less" would be a good word in the sense of
MR. BALLES.
clearly implying less than we usually do.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"Much less than usual weight" is all

right

with me.
MR. BALLES.

"Less than usual."

MR. PARTEE.

That leaves it in as a factor to look at.

MS. TEETERS.
Now you have a problem with the
which says "much lesser."
MR. PARTEE.

"Much less"

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

but

and

"much lesser"!

You mean just an English problem.

MR. GRAMLEY.
The subject should not be
"these developments."
MS.

TEETERS.

Say

last sentence,

"to a small extent;"

"these uncertainties"

take out

"much lesser"

then.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"Much smaller extent."

MR. WALLICH.
It has to be small enough to justify not having
a target for it, which is really very small.
MR. PARTEE.
I think Lyle is right; it
developments" instead of "these uncertainties."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

should be

"these

"These developments."

MR. WALLICH.
Well, the last sentence of this paragraph leads
into M2 and what one expects in the following paragraph then is an M2
Now, if that's not what we're going to do, it seems to me we
target.

10/5/82

ought to modify the last sentence of the first paragraph. But I
really would urge you, if it isn't tampering too much, to put the
8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent M2 range early in the next sentence and then
after that to say "taking account of the desirability of somewhat
reduced pressures..."
MR. PARTEE.

"In these circumstances, therefore..."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, there's an interpretation of
them--of what all the circumstances means.
In my mind that means the
previous paragraph but more than that.
I assume that this mental
image includes the discussion of all the economic problems, the
international problems, and all of it.
This refers to everything.
But it's obviously not clear when it just sits there, and that raises
the question of whether it should be more explicit or not.
MS. TEETERS.
Why don't we be explicit and say, "In light of
domestic and international developments, the Committee seeks to
maintain..."?
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it seems to me if we're worried about
changing gears radically as opposed to small degrees, in terms of
public perception, we ought to leave it a little vaguer than that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Just leave something like this.

Yes.

MR. PARTEE. We have sometimes used a phrase like that, but
it goes back some years.
MR. GRAMLEY.

That's the problem; it goes back some years.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
what happened earlier.

This wouldn't be put in as any echo of

MR. BALLES.
In that second paragraph the first sentence ends
with a phrase "in the light of current economic conditions."
Wouldn't
there be some other part of the old directive that stresses how poorly
the economy is doing now?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where are you going back to?
just don't know where you are.

I'm sorry, I

MR. BALLES.
It's the second paragraph at the end of the
first sentence.
The last phrase is "in the light of current economic
conditions."
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, remember, Paul said that he was
going to expand what we call the boilerplate to make the worsening
economic situation clearer and the-MR. BALLES. My point, Tony, is that the phrase "in the light
of current economic conditions" as it stands there is a very neutral
one and, in my mind, too weak. I would like to see something like "in
light of the currently weak economy" or whatever, unless that is going
to be made clear somewhere else.

10/5/82

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
to be made clear earlier.

Well, that's what I thought was going

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there would be a little more
emphasis earlier. Obviously, that phrase is a term of art.
What it
is meant to refer to is the fact we have some pressures in private
markets that aren't necessarily apparent on the surface because of all
this disturbance in the financial system and we are aware of it and
concerned about it.
And we take that into account in the-MR. PARTEE. Then "in the light of" is not quite right, is
it? We mean "resulting from" or "flowing from" or something like
that.
I thought "in the light of" meant we were doing this because of
the poor economy.
MR. BALLES.
MR. PARTEE.
affected by--

That's what I thought.
But you are saying credit conditions are

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can interpret it either
way. The reason we're concerned about this is because of the economy.
But it also works in reverse. The economy, and the international
economy in particular, is giving rise to the pressures. But we're
concerned about the pressures because of economic conditions.
So, I
think it works both ways.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We could say "taking account of the
desirability of somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets
and current economic conditions..."
SPEAKER(?).

It's both.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we always want an orderly and
sustained flow of money and credit.
MR. PARTEE.

Now we have more doubt about it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm not sure I like it terribly, but at
the risk of making the whole thing more cumbersome we can put "In all
the circumstances the Committee seeks to maintain expansion in bank
reserves needed for an orderly and sustained flow of money and
credit...consistent with growth of M2 and M3 in a range...and taking
account...."
If we want to blur it a bit, we could say "taking
account of the evidence of pressures in private credit markets in the
light of current economic conditions.
It combines the sentences.
MR. WALLICH. I think that's a great improvement.
mitigates the appearance of a shift in policy priorities.

That

MS. TEETERS.
I don't mind if we combine the sentences, but I
need the "expects that this would involve the growth of M2 and M3"
down to 8-1/2 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
with."

Well, he likes the term "consistent

10/5/82

MR. PARTEE.
Well, I agree with Henry. I think it's less
clearly a move to a money market conditions target.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think there is something to be
said for it in that it becomes a kind of quasi-target rather than
I don't think it puts any substance in here.
simply expectations.

rate?

MS. TEETERS.
What if M2 went above a 9-1/2 percent growth
Does that mean we expect the staff to pull it down?
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Well--

MR. WALLICH. With the sentences at the end it can run over
or it can run under; nothing makes any difference.
MR. BLACK.
sentences.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. MARTIN.
MR. PARTEE.
that much.

But there is some sentiment for eliminating those

How would we get a great big increase in M2?
When we get the new DIDC instrument.
We'd define it so that-That's not going to affect the

[fourth]

quarter

MR. FORD. Well, if a portion of the money market funds
currently in M3 were to shift into M2-MR. PARTEE.

Yes, but those are institutional accounts.

MR. FORD. Who says they won't like some of these new
instruments the DIDC is going to invent?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They could.

MR. PARTEE.

That's right.

SPEAKER(?).

That's a possibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, there could be some transfer out of
Treasury bills or other highly liquid instruments, particularly if
they pay a higher rate than Treasury bills.
MR. PARTEE.
relative to income.

We could have a sudden drop in consumption

SPEAKER(?).

That's possible.

MR. PARTEE.

It would seem about as low as it can be.

MR. BLACK.

Demand is a lot lower.

MR. PARTEE. Relatively, yes.
destroying income [unintelligible].

[Unintelligible] without

-63-

10/5/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one way to do it is just to say "in
all the uncertainty" and leave the other wording as it is.
Save that "maintain the expansion of bank
MR. GRAMLEY.
reserves" and leave the rest of the phrase as it is.
Just leave the first phrase as it is
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
through money and credit comma, then "consistent with growth of M2 and
M3 in a range of around 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent at an annual rate from
September to December and taking account of the desirability of
somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets in the light of
current economic conditions."
MR. GRAMLEY. Then we need to change something else in the
sentence; maybe we don't. The reference to those aggregates is pretty
far back. To then say "Somewhat slower growth..."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in the next sentence. Well,
Then there are all
tentatively that first sentence is all right.
sorts of suggestions about these last two sentences and whether to
I don't think it's too critical one
leave them in or take them out.
way or the other if we understand the thrust of what it's all about.
I would prefer to leave them in.
MR. WALLICH.
each other and they justify an overrun or an underrun.
MR. RICE.

They balance

I agree with that.

MR. BALLES.
MS. TEETERS.

I do too.
I agree with Henry.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You had a suggested rewording in that last
sentence which I didn't think changed it much substantively but made
it read better.
MS. TEETERS.

Just switch one of the clauses.

I would have put the second part of the last
MR. WALLICH.
sentence first so that the sentence would read, beginning with the
middle of the second line, "In the light of evidence that economic and
financial uncertainties are continuing to lead to exceptional
liquidity demands."
MR. PARTEE.

If there should be evidence of something.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, that's what I was looking for.

MR. WALLICH.

Well, I meant to say that there is evidence and

MR. GRAMLEY.

That, I think, is questionable, Henry; I really

that is--

do.
MR. PARTEE. Well, if there is, we should have taken that
into account in setting our M2 target.

-64-

10/5/82

I think it's all right the way it
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.
is, if I understand this correctly. "In the light of evidence that
We leave that
economic and financial uncertainties are continuing..."
open as to whether it is continuing. That does say they have happened
in the past, which I have said.
[Relative to] the
MR. GRAMLEY. M2 is again very, very low.
targeted M2 now, the last number we have is very low. And it's just
awfully hard to see why-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GRAMLEY.

The last month's number?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But not the previous two months.

MR. GRAMLEY.
I know, but the previous two months presumably
were affected by the fact that interest rates came down. We have to
ask ourselves whether we're talking about a movement along the demand
function or a shift in the demand function. And as far as I know, the
recent evidence does not strongly point toward an upward shift in
And that's the way I interpret the staff's comments
demand for money.
in the briefing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
velocity is rising.
MS. TEETERS.

Well, I'm not sure that's right.

Their

Well, the NOW accounts are--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Falling, I'm sorry.

Changing, anyway!

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, velocity of M2 does have some cyclical
movements to it.
We sort of expect that when interest rates fall,
velocity is going to go down some; now, whether it's off the function,
I don't know. But I thought the staff said yesterday that the
evidence of recent money behavior is consistent with movement along
the function and not a shift.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I wasn't there but if they said anything,
I don't think we can say very
the M1 behavior might suggest that.
On M1, if you look at the models--depending upon which
much about M2.
quarter you start with--you can interpret M1 as being roughly on the
If you start in the first quarter, it
quarterly money demand model.
might be an upward shift instead of a downward shift; if you start in
the third quarter, it's about on.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure this is any big
deal,
I'm not quite sure what you had, Henry, but let's change it.
"In the light of evidence that economic and financial uncertainties
are leading to..."
That puts it in the future.
MR. WALLICH.
I don't want to press this very hard.
There is
a parallelism between the two sentences.
The first says "somewhat
And
slower growth" and the other says "somewhat more rapid growth."
I would like to see something
that makes it look more understandable.
about rising liquidity demands.
Granted, there are some questions
about that. But that seems to me to give us a better argument for
being flexible about the targets.

-65-

10/5/82

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though both sentences have a
parallelism, the bottom line of both sentences is lower interest
rates.
Right?
It doesn't say lower;
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not the second one.
it just says they wouldn't be as high as they otherwise would be.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, okay.
easier in terms of interest rates.
MS. TEETERS.

But

[conditions are]

Why?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's the thrust of both sentences,
given the fact that we are making-I think that's unclear yet,
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no.
The first
[though they are] easier than they otherwise would be.
sentence says interest rates would be going down and the second
sentence presumably says they wouldn't be.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The second sentence says we would
tolerate more rapid growth, which means we would have lower interest
rates than we would otherwise have.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Than we would otherwise have, but higher

than--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. The thrust of both sentences
is for easier conditions in the markets, right?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the thrust of the second sentence is
not for easier conditions in the market.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, you are interpreting--

We won't let it tighten the

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

[market] up.

I'm talking relatively.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is nothing in the second
sentence that says the more rapid the growth the lower the interest
rate will be.
MS. TEETERS.
continuing to"?
MR. BALLES.

Why don't you just take out the words "are
And put in instead "are leading to."

MR. CORRIGAN and MS. TEETERS.

Yes, say "lead to."

MR. PARTEE. Well, I really think "in the light of" also is
It ought to be "if, in the presence of evidence" or
very ambiguous.
that kind of thing. We used "in the light of" up above in a way that
I didn't quite understand and we're using it again here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It [needs] something a little less awkward
but "in the presence of" sounds like the presence of a--

10/5/82

MS. TEETERS. Take out that whole thing "in light of the
evidence that" and just put "if."
That would work.
MR. PARTEE. Or "should economic and financial uncertainties
lead to exceptional liquidity demands."
MR. AXILROD.
"are leading to..."

There's the language of the last directive--

MR. PARTEE. I guess nobody else shares my preference that
this sentence be dropped.
None of those who plan to vote for the
directive shares my preference.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe everybody is going to vote for it!
"Should economic and financial uncertainties lead to exceptional
liquidity demands, somewhat more rapid..."
Is that what we're saying?
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.
somewhat more rapid.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, I think so.
I don't think it really matters whether it's
And that,

of course, has to be interpreted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, that previous sentence almost
goes without saying and I don't know whether that's necessary.
MS. TEETERS.
It puzzles--

Well, it gives us a little

[unintelligible].

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it says that if we could do it
without a lot of effort, we'd prefer to meet our targets.
MR. CORRIGAN.
very helpful.

I think that second to the last sentence is

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think we have to leave in something
more or less like the last two sentences since we have now said
"consistent with M2."
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, we have a target.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Earlier, I didn't think it was
necessary to leave in those sentences.
sentence?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
In or out?

Okay.

What about the federal funds rate

MR. PARTEE.
I'd prefer not to have it.
It's enough of a
change that it's difficult to know what the funds range should be.
Our tradition on the funds range has been to make it above and below
the present rate; apparently that's not acceptable. And the range
that was suggested was a 3-point spread; we dropped it from 5 points
to 4 points last time and to go on to 3 points seems to me would
destroy more than it would accomplish.
MS. TEETERS.
But it also gives us the trigger for a
conference call, which I think is useful.

10/5/82

call.

-67-

MR. PARTEE.
We don't need to have a trigger for a conference
There could be another understanding.

MS. TEETERS. The understanding could be when the federal
funds rate is below 7 percent or above 10 percent.
We may not have to
put it in the directive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As we're meeting here, the federal funds
rate is roughly 10-1/2 percent. I guess I don't have any problem with
leaving in the sentence if you want to and saying 7 to 10-1/2 percent.
MR. PARTEE.

Well,

I'm against it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
important.

It certainly seems a lot less

MR. WALLICH.
If we drop it, that would convey less of an
interest-rate-oriented directive. And I think it's desirable to avoid
being very specific about our interest rate [objective] here.
MR. CORRIGAN. Who knows how the market will interpret it?
That the absence of it
think the other argument is just as likely:
would lead to the view that we really have zeroed in on a specific
I don't know.
number.

I

MR. FORD.
How about just saying that the fed funds rate will
Isn't that what we mean?
Why not say
not rise above 10-1/2 percent?
I don't mean to be facetious,
what we mean if that's what we mean.
but if we wanted to convey the true feeling of the group, I think
that's what we mean, so why not say it?
That would be conveying
accurate information to the market as to what our objective is.
MR. MARTIN. Of course, if we say 7 to 10-1/2 percent, we're
conveying a little more information, which is that we might really
That 7 percent might get their attention.
tolerate a low rate.
MR. MORRIS and MS. TEETERS.
SPEAKER(?).

MS. TEETERS.

But

It was in there last month.

of course, that's--

They haven't seen it yet, though, Frank.

MR. GUFFEY. I would opt to have a funds rate range of 7 to
10 percent; I would hope that it will be at 10 percent tomorrow and
that that would be the maximum we'd tolerate on the up side.
I had a
similar question.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Or lower.

We'll be there
MR. GUFFEY. Well, that's all right.
tomorrow. But the point is that the 7 percent is also an important
I would hate to see interest rates drop quickly if, for
figure to me.
example, we get very slow growth in M2--if that's what we are
targeting on or trying to use as the target. But 7 percent is equally
important.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Following up on what Roger is
implying, I think the chief advantage of having a sentence on the

10/5/82

-68-

range is that if--and I say if--the market reacts to this with great
uncertainty, this gives some sense of reassurance that we are not
thinking of simply an all-out drop.
I don't see that it's important
otherwise; I don't think it's much of a guide. But there is some
advantage of having it in, if we get an unfortunate interpretation.
I
don't think, though, that we'd want to have 7 to 10-1/2 percent; I
think we'd want 7 to 10 percent.
I don't see what the problem is.
MR. PARTEE.
I still fail to follow the logic.
In the past
we've said to the Manager, in effect, if in following the reserve path
consistent with these aggregates, the funds rate moves enough so that
it gets to the ends of these bounds, then the Chairman will decide
whether to have a conference.
Now you are suggesting that we set
everything so that it won't get beyond those bounds.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.
It has no substantive
function whatsoever now, under this [approach].
It's only a question
of whether it reassures or limits somewhat the degree of uncertainty
in some quarters.
MR. WALLICH. I think that might mislead the market.
Following our past practice, we aimed at the middle of the range and,
therefore, if we said 7 to 10-1/2 percent, we really meant 8-3/4
percent as the starting point.
MS. TEETERS.
But the Chairman is going to be asked to
release some of this when he meets with the Business Council, and I
bet somebody asks him what the interest rate-SPEAKER(?).

You wouldn't answer.

SPEAKER(?).

You won't tell them?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, I really--

MR. PARTEE.
It says now "somewhat reduced pressures in
private markets."
It seems to me that "somewhat reduced pressures"
could convey [our meaning] just as well as a range would.
Indeed, 7
percent might seem surprisingly low.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't think we're going to fool anybody
one way or another; when this press conference occurs, they are going
to know what we did.
They will just look at money market conditions
and it will be abundantly evident by what happens in the interval
between now and the time the directive is released.
MR. MARTIN.

There may be a confetti parade.

SPEAKER(?).

I don't know about confetti!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are arguments on both sides.
I don't feel strongly at all.
Leave it out?
SPEAKER(?).

Put it in.

SPEAKER(?).

Leave it out.

MR. BALLES.

Put it in.

-69-

10/5/82

MS. TEETERS.

Which is more useful to the Desk?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
Operationally, I don't see it as having a
function during the period. When it is published and people look at
it, seeing that there was a range would give them more of a sense of
continuity with past procedures.
If the Committee values that, I
think there's an argument for keeping it in.
Frankly, to leave it out
I think gives more weight to the view that a change is being made.
MR. WALLICH. We are at a time when we are softening the
money supply aspect of the directive; it would be a fair balance if we
also soften the interest rate aspect of it.
MS. TEETERS.
But on the other hand, it seems to me that we
don't want to upset the market totally. The main question would be
why it isn't in.
MR. CORRIGAN.

I think the continuity argument has some real

weight.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There may be some people in the
market who, if they see interest rates declining, would wonder if we
are going to let them decline, or push them down even, by a very large
[amount].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They won't know. By the time this comes
out, we may have the same level or a different level.
MR. PARTEE. They will look at the way the Manager operates,
as they always have, and try to conclude where the limits are.
hands?

out?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, why don't you take a show of
I don't think it's that important.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want it in?
A lot of people are indifferent.
MR. BLACK.

Ask how many are indifferent.

How many want it

You might get a

majority!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How many are indifferent?

MR. MARTIN.

The indifferents have it.

SPEAKER(?).

Flip a coin.

MR. GRAMLEY.

We've left it up to you, Mr. Chairman.

Do what

you want.

in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I'd prefer slightly to leave it
No big deal.
Okay, I guess that's it.
Any other comments?

MR. FORD.
to 10-1/2 percent?

Just out of curiosity, what are you leaving in--7

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's what I guess is in.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

With the half on the 10?

-70-

10/5/82

MR. RICE.
do for us?

I would go for 7 to 10.

MR. PARTEE.

What does the half point

That's where the rate is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It's where it is; that's all.
We will
have a consultation if it goes above where it is now. That is what we
are saying.
MR. WALLICH. It would mean that we would be on the phone
tomorrow if we say 10 percent.
MR. BLACK. It just says that the Chairman may call for a
consultation; it doesn't say he has to.
MR. RICE.

We have a month to get down to 10 percent.

MR. WALLICH.
SPEAKER(?).

Well, I hope there's a strong presumption-That's too long.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Balles
President Black
President Ford
Governor Gramley
President Horn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ALTMANN.
knows, is November 16.

Let's vote.

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Okay, is that the end of our business?

The date of the next meeting, which everyone

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

November 16 is the next meeting date.
END OF MEETING

