Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 29-30, 1982

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., beginning on Monday, March 29, 1982, at 4:00 p.m. and
continuing on Tuesday, March 30, 1982, at 9:45 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, 1/ Vice Chairman
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Ford
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mrs. Teeters

Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn
Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, and Roos, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Martin, 2/ Vice Chairman designate, Board of Governors
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary

Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, 3/ Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
1/ Entered the meeting following the approval of the minutes of actions taken
at the meeting on February 1-2, 1982.
2/

Entered the meeting on Tuesday prior to the action to adopt the domestic
policy directive.

3/ Attended Tuesday session only.

- 2 -

3/29-30/82

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, Ettin, Keran, Koch,
Parthemos, Prell, Siegman, Truman, and Ziesel,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr.

Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn, Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors
Mr.

MacDonald, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Mullineaux,
Scheld, and Stern, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, Kansas City,
Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Messrs. Sandberg, and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 29-30, 1982
March 29,

1982--Afternoon Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have some items to take care of at the
beginning of this meeting. First, the election of officers. We need
to nominate a Chairman and a Vice Chairman in case you-MR. WALLICH. Well, I shall undertake this heavy
responsibility. I propose and nominate Paul A. Volcker.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Is there a second?

I'll second that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other nominations?
If not,
we assume we have a Chairman and I'm the Chairman. We need a Vice
Chairman.
MR. WALLICH.
Anthony M. Solomon.

Well, I propose and nominate in his absence

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Apparently, Anthony M. Solomon missed the
shuttle.
I don't know whether that's appropriate for a Vice Chairman!
Do we have a second?
MR. PARTEE.

I'll second that.

MR. BOEHNE.

Is this a rigged election?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I hear no objection, we will proceed.
I have a list of a good many staff members as proposed officers that I
would ask the Secretary to read, including Mr. Altmann as Secretary.
MR. ALTMANN.
Staff Director, Stephen Axilrod
Secretary, Murray Altmann
Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy Steele
General Counsel, Michael Bradfield
Deputy General Counsel, James Oltman
Assistant General Counsel, Robert Mannion
Economist, James Kichline
Associate Economists from the Board's staff:
Edward Ettin;
Michael Prell;
Charles Sigmann;
Edwin Truman; and
Joseph Zeisel.
Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:
John Davis, Cleveland;
Richard Davis, New York;
Michael Keran, San Francisco;
Donald Koch, Atlanta; and
James Parthemos, Richmond.

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. TEETERS.

Would someone like to move those?

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections, we will have
the officers duly installed as of this moment.
We need a Reserve Bank
to operate the System Account.
MR. WALLICH.

I propose the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Do we have a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With no objection. We need a Manager for
Domestic Operations and a Manager for Foreign Operations; perhaps
someone would like to nominate both at the same time.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. PARTEE.

I nominate Peter Sternlight and Sam Cross.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Objections?
In the absence of any
objections, it's unanimous.
I'm skipping now to the end of the agenda
you have--we might as well get this all out of the way--to the review
of the domestic authorization and the foreign currency instruments.
Nobody has proposed any changes in those.
Does anybody have any
objections or questions on that second, or third part?
If not,
hearing no objections, they are approved.
As for the authority for
lending securities from the System Open Market Account, we've been
renewing this for some years. Any comments?
I take it there was some
suggestion earlier to make this permanent. Does anybody want to talk
to that point?
MR. PARTEE.

To make what permanent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The lending
to be approved every [year].

[authorization]

that now has

MR. PARTEE.
I thought we had to make a determination on
this, Mr. Chairman, as to whether it is necessary [for the effective
functioning of] the market.
Isn't that right, Peter?
MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right.
I think the judgment could be
made [that it's necessary] on a continuing basis.
I don't know that
there is anything in the legal basis on which it was set up that
required an annual determination of that kind and, therefore, I have
suggested in my memorandum to the Committee, which Mr. Bradfield
supported, that it could be incorporated in the continuing
authorization for operations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And we approve that every year anyway,

don't we?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

That's right, yes.

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As nearly as I can see, no major policy
I guess it's
It gets approved every year anyway.
issue is involved.
just a question of which document we put it in.
MR. BLACK.
next year!

We might have to bring up only one agenda item

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think that's
here.
I have no strong conviction on this
any conviction?
MR. BLACK.

I don't

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.
MR. MORRIS.

the net difference involved
point.
Does anybody have

see any reason for not doing it.
Do you want

to propose it?

I so propose.
Second it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If we have

no objection,--

MR. PARTEE.
I take it anyone who wanted
put it on the agenda?

to question it could

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My understanding is that it would be
approved every year anyway.
It's just a question of what document
we're putting it in.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
It's also the question of whether it is
looked at separately by the Committee or considered as part of this
entire authorization for domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Henceforth it will be part of the
That is
authorization.
And we look at it separately anyway.
approved.
The final item is a review of the agreement with Treasury
I have had no comments on that
to warehouse foreign currencies.
I hear no objections to the warehousing agreement.
reported to me.
I guess I skipped over the foreign currency
That will be approved.
authorization, the foreign currency directive, and the procedural
On the review of those, again, I have heard no
instructions.
If there is no objection at this time, they will be
comments.
We can now be very,
So, all this is unanimously approved.
approved.
Do I have a motion on the
very approving of the minutes, I guess.
minutes?
MR. PARTEE.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes are
With that out of the way, we will have a report on foreign
approved.
currency operations.
Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Comments or questions?

MR. WINN. What is the status of the Polish financing?
Doesn't that come up at the end of this month again?

3/29-30/82

MR. CROSS.
I must confess I've been away for a few days, but
I believe the Polish financing was to be signed as it affected the
1981 maturities. And I assume that it has been signed.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. CROSS.

No, next week.
Oh, is it next week?

MR. TRUMAN.
They were supposed to have paid it off as of
Friday but there's a newspaper report, which I think is correct, that
there never has been complete agreement among the banks about exactly
what has to be paid.
The reports I have seen suggested that there was
some scope for double-counting, which seems to have been reduced.
Interestingly enough, most of the reports of leaders of the banking
consortium on the other side of the Atlantic have suggested that it
would be signed on April 6, which is next Tuesday. And then the
question is:
What happens next?
MS. TEETERS.

That concerns only the interest payments for

1981?
MR. TRUMAN. That just completes the rescheduling of the
private debt for 1981.
The problem had been to bring the 1981
interest payments current.
Now, of course, we are 3 months into 1982,
so it might lead to some questions as to whether this is an artificial
gain.
MR. CROSS. As of about a week ago they still were not
current as far as we could tell from the banks. They had paid off
large amounts of it, but most of the banks indicated that they hadn't
quite settled everything. The assumption seems to be that they will
meet those payments and be ready for the April 6 payment to cover
1981.
MR. WALLICH. Sam, could you expand a little on your
statement that other countries felt that when they sold the dollar it
had little effect, but that if the United States engaged in the same
operation, it would have a major effect on market psychology?
MR. CROSS.
Well, they seem to feel that if there is a
coordinated effort, it will have considerably more effect in modifying
the market psychology and in indicating that there will be a sustained
effort to keep the rates from moving too strongly in the direction
they're now moving. One certainly gets the impression that among the
major European countries, Germany does not seem to be intervening very
much at present and Switzerland has intervened relatively modestly.
Japan, as I say, has done
dollars of intervention;
still, that's not massive. And they do indicate to us in their
discussions a feeling that if there is to be any sustained and
successful effort to affect these rates, it does require U.S.
participation as well.
MR. WALLICH.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
to why the yen is so weak.

I'm not sure I follow your explanation as
Would you--

3/29-30/82

The yen is weak. I'm not sure I have an
MR. CROSS.
extremely compelling explanation. One factor has been that, while
we're all expecting the Japanese to have a very large current account
surplus this year, the recent figures have not been that rosy. They
have not shown a very strong current account position in the past
couple of months. Another factor, I think, is that people are
concerned that the rest of the world is going to take steps to reduce
access to Japanese goods.
The EC has talked about bringing this
matter up under GATT and they have brought it up under GATT. There
is, of course, legislation in our Congress which would apply a
bilateral reciprocity rule to it.
Now, whether these are the factors
that have resulted in this effect, I can't say.
The yen has been
very, very weak and I'm not sure those explanations would be
completely convincing. But they are factors in it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a lot of things to worry about and
that's one that I worry about a bit.
MR. WINN. Could I raise one more question, Mr. Chairman?
What's the status of Mexico, with the devaluation?
MR. CROSS. Well, the devaluation by Mexico was certainly
regarded initially as very useful--a successful move in that there
were reflows of capital back into Mexico and a reversal of the
dollarization that Mexico experienced.
So, during the first few weeks
there was a very rosy and successful view about it.
But there has
been a notable lack of a supporting program and increasing concern
about the lack of such a program. At the present time there has been
a decree to increase wages by really very, very large amounts-amounts which almost nobody thinks can be justified by the
devaluation. Mexico had a very large increase in the minimum wage in
January of 33 percent.
Another 30 percent has been proposed; the
employers haven't yet agreed to all of this.
So, that adds up to a
[cumulative] 73 percent wage increase in the first 2 or 3 months of
the year.
And everybody is beginning to wonder how long the peso can
remain at the level it now is with these kinds of wage increases and
the expectation that inflation will run at 50 percent or so this year
at a time when U.S. inflation is 7-1/2 percent or so.
So, it appears
that the initial reaction, which was so favorable, is now giving way
to second thoughts. The reflows are perhaps tailing off and there is
some concern about what is going to happen in the months ahead.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What has the recent inflation rate been in

Mexico?
MR. CROSS.
In Mexico?
The numbers that I received were 5
percent for the month of January, 4 percent for the month of February,
and an expectation of 8 percent for the month of March. That's [over]
17 percent in the first 3 months, so most of the people who are making
estimates have estimates for the year of between 45 and 65 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. TRUMAN.
devaluation.

What was it last year?

The first 2 months of the year were before the

MR. CROSS. Yes.
The 8 percent reflected the devaluation.
Last year it was about 30 percent.

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments?
we'll go to the domestic open market operations.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

If not,

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is so much talk in the market about
this April [M1] issue, why don't you tell us what you know about
April, Mr. Axilrod?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I was going to include a bit of it in my
statement, Mr. Chairman, but our underlying estimate for April is
somewhere between 8 and 10 percent, as you can see from the Bluebook.
In our seasonal adjustment methodology, we have followed strictures
given to us by the various academic groups who looked at our seasonal
methodology--the last one being a group headed by Jeffrey Moore and
including such people as the former Presidents of the American
Statistical Association, and the august Mr. Box of Box-Jenkins. And
they say avoid judgment. They also asked that it be reproducible
outside and that we take into account a technique called an Arima
method, which projects the unadjusted data for the year ahead on the
basis of the past performance of the data to eliminate the revisions
So, this
in the seasonal factor by getting a better sense of '82.
year we adopted the X-11 Arima method.
MR. ROOS.

Wait

'til that gets out!

[Laughter]

MR. AXILROD.
If we had not adopted that method but had
continued with our old X-11 without the Arima method, we would be
allowing for about 7 percentage points more growth in April than we
are now. If we had instead used the present method but unleashed our
judgmental man, Mr. Fry, we would have allowed for 2 percentage points
more growth. So, that presents a range perhaps of where we might be
erring on predicting too low a growth. There are some odds, Mr.
Chairman, that what we have done is correct, however.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They're infinitesimal!

MR. AXILROD.
I would point out that in that case one would
look more at what we have judged to be the intrinsic error in the
seasonal adjustment process. And at the 95 percent level, that's plus
or minus 6 percentage points in any month, at an annual rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'm beginning to think.

Mr. Axilrod can only talk in annual rates,

MR. AXILROD. So, in assessing the forthcoming situation for
the Committee, we have tilted toward thinking that the seasonal might
be understating the actual seasonal increase because of the
difficulties of '80 and '81, and thus we are projecting 8 to 10
percent growth rates.
If you think that we have understated by 5
percentage points, that would mean we're projecting 3 to 5 percent
growth in some real sense. Now, if we are understating, it's probably
the case that May and June will be a lot lower.
It looks as if May
and June would be mostly the times when, whatever error in the
seasonal in this period, the curves would be taken out.
April is a
particularly difficult time.

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why would it be May and June?
wouldn't it be March and February?

Why

MR. AXILROD. Just looking at the data judgmentally, it
looked as if that's when it would be. April is a difficult month
because we had the credit control program in 1980 and we had a very
sharp decrease; and in 1981 we had a very sharp increase, part of
which probably can be attributed to the preceding easing of monetary
The machines have a very
policy when interest rates went down some.
difficult time with these extreme variations and we have done some
[judgmental] intervention to smooth it in 1980, and these results
Also, the machine throws out 1981, by
reflect those interventions.
the way.
MR. MORRIS.

Very good machine!

MR. PARTEE.

[Unintelligible]

markets seem to be right.

MR. AXILROD. Well, I feel rather agnostic about it.
I am
not all that certain.
If we follow the advice of a group of academic
experts, at times we may be right. And we don't want to discount that
[possibility].
MR. PARTEE.
It's interesting. Are they aware of the fact
that we've made these adjustments to our procedure?
It seems these
adjustments to procedure would lead one to expect a larger rise in
April because of what has happened [in the] seasonal.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we have indicated how we make our
seasonal adjustments to this.
We explained the X-11 Arima.
But, of
course, the market has the same suspicions most of you and many on the
staff have:
That this still isn't sufficient allowance for the April
seasonal.
If
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it makes us a little suspicious.
I remember what you told me correctly, April in every year since 1975
has been higher, seasonally adjusted.
MR. AXILROD.

That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Except for 1980, which we threw out.
then 1981 gets thrown out by the machines.
MR. AXILROD.

And

Well, we didn't throw 1980 out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
it looks as if--

The last two years aren't in there.

And

MR. AXILROD. We didn't throw out 1980, Mr. Chairman. And
there is really a technical problem. We intervened through a model to
smooth through and-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible]

at the moment now.

In effect, it put in a
MR. AXILROD. No, it lowered it.
modest growth rate, which made the machine doubt the accelerated trend
in '76 to '79.

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're worse off than if you hadn't.
just would have thrown it out if you had left it alone.

It

MR. GRAMLEY.
Is this specific seasonal for April in the
public domain?
Is that published?
MR. AXILROD.
MR. GRAMLEY.
number is?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.
So the people in the market know what that

Oh, yes; that's right.

MR. GRAMLEY. Are you not saying that, although we expect
something in the 8 to 9 percent range, we should relax until it's 12
to 14 percent or something like that?
MR. AXILROD. Well, I would relax myself if it were between 8
and 10 percent.
I think you're getting on to strong policy judgments
beyond that.
I would not really want to give any technical advice on
that particular point.
MR. BLACK.

What kind of figures would it take for the market

to relax?
MR. AXILROD. Again, it's hard to psychoanalyze people.
But
I would assume that they would understand that 8 to 10 percent might
be the peculiarities of April and the difficulties of seasonally
adjusting in the face of tax payments, refunds, and all that.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't know if it's so much a particular
level.
They might feel relaxed about 8 to 10 percent, but it's more
whether they get some sense of how we're reacting to it that would
make them feel easy or uneasy about it.
I think even 8 to 10 percent
could bother them if they felt it was causing us to keep reserve
supplies more restricted.
MR. BLACK.
projections is now?

Peter, what do you think the range of their

MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't be surprised if it were around
this 8 to 10 percent range, but I haven't really heard enough to give
a good accurate answer.
MR. BOEHNE. With the expectation so widespread that April is
going to be a month with a bulge, wouldn't there be some discounting
taking place at this point?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, there is; it has been in the process of
taking place these last couple of weeks or maybe even earlier.
But
it's partly this concern that there will be a big bulge that is
leading some participants to have an expectation now of higher rates
in the next few weeks.
MR. BOEHNE. Do you think the market is as M1 oriented as it
always has been or are there increasing doubts, at least among some
people, about M1?
Are there doubts in the marketplace, too,
[unintelligible]?

3/29-30/82

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they were impressed by the
They say that
evidence of how the January situation was handled.
there was a bulge but that to some degree it was accommodated. They
feel it was reacted to in the sense that rates did rise, but they
feel, too, that it wasn't such a strong reaction--that we were [not]
just determined that virtually at all cost we had to push money growth
back to path. And some of the comments that the Chairman made at the
congressional hearing, I think, supported that interpretation. I
think they would expect a similar scenario if there were a bulge in
April.
They would be looking to see whether we would accommodate the
bulge to some degree in the expectation of having it unwind pretty
soon afterward.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to look alert but relaxed.
When we get these bulges [unintelligible], affects the market reaction
as to how they-MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, you mentioned this 8 to 10 percent
figure. What is the dollar increase in the not seasonally adjusted M1
number in [unintelligible]?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, I don't think I have that with me.
I
have the seasonally unadjusted weekly pattern on another paper but I
don't have that with me.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I think it's about 30 percent, isn't it,

Steve?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes, it's 40 percent.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. CORRIGAN.
MR. AXILROD.
SPEAKER(?).
coming up again.

Oh, 40!

I thought I saw 30 percent.

I don't have that;

I can get it by tomorrow.

That's a very big number now.
Oh, yes.
Well, there's a huge social security thing

MR. GUFFEY.
If you were using the old method, Steve, what
would April have come out to--17 18, 20 percent, or something larger
than that?
MR. AXILROD. No, if we keep the same unadjusted increases we
now have and use the old X-11 method untampered by Arima, it would be
something like 7 percentage points less than this 8 to 10 at an annual
rate.
SPEAKER(?).
be 1 or 2 percent?

If my understanding of that is right, it would

MR. AXILROD. Well, that's a large number and we wouldn't
But that's what it would be if we didn't change our
have used it.
unadjusted number.
It allows for 7 percent at an annual rate more
Instead
increase in money supply [for] the seasonal purposes alone.
of the money supply increase unadjusted being 40 percent at an annual

3/29-30/82

-10-

rate in April it would have allowed for 47 percent.
what it has been.

That's well above

MR. GRAMLEY. The old method put that out?
understood you to say the opposite at first.

I thought I had

MR. AXILROD.

No.

MR. GRAMLEY. I thought you said the X-11 Arima method
assumes a larger seasonal bulge in April.
MR. AXILROD.

No,

smaller.

MR. PARTEE.
That's the reason I asked if the market knew we
were doing all this.
[If] not, they might conclude there's going to
be a large seasonally adjusted rise in April.
I don't think the market knows it for that
MR. STERNLIGHT.
reason. I think they believe it just [on the basis of] a more
simplistic assumption along the lines of:
Well, it had gone up in 5
or 6 of the last 7 years, so there's likely to be a big rise this year
too.
MR. AXILROD.
At present for demand deposits plus OCDs in
1982 we're allowing for, in annual rates again, a 41.6 percent
seasonal increase.
In 1976 this was 35.9 percent; in 1977, it was
39.8; in 1978, it was 43.0; in 1979, it was 43.7; we forget about
1980; in 1981, it was 42.6;
and in 1982, we have 41.6.
Under these
various methods we could add to that 41.6 this 7 percentage points.
As I say, our judgmental fellow would have added 2 points to that to
make it 43.6, or the same as in 1979, which is only 2 percent at an
annual rate.
If we took the extreme, it would be 7 percent.
SPEAKER(?).

And the one in the Bluebook forecast is which

now?
MR. AXILROD.

Well, it's what we've been using--the published

figure.
MR. CORRIGAN.
So, roughly what you're saying here, in the
context of the first two weeks in January, is that we have a situation
where on a not seasonally adjusted basis we have 4 weeks out of the 52
in the year that account for a multiple of what the money supply is
supposed to grow in a year.
Is that right?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

Well, January took care of a good part of

that.
MR. CORRIGAN.

That's absolutely crazy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN.
Steve, does your Arima [seasonal] adjustment allow
for the change in the tax structure this year--that because of the
change in the tax laws we shouldn't have the borrowing that formerly
accompanied the corporate tax bills and so forth?
MR. AXILROD.

I doubt it;

it's really a time series analysis.

3/29-30/82

MR. WINN.
way it affects--

That is going to be a big change, I think, in the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
on NOW accounts either.

It doesn't allow for crediting of interest

MR. FORD. Yes, as I understand it, this Arima statistical
adaptation method makes no effort whatsoever to consider an
institutional change, like a fundamental change in the tax law, that
impacts during this particular period we're talking about.
They're
just attempting to take the knowledge from past cycles and apply that
based on-MR. AXILROD. Well, if there were a very large fundamental
change in the tax laws or tax structure that we could see would change
things, despite all our academic experts, we would do something
judgmentally [to adjust it].
But so far as we can tell from the
refund estimates and the tax payment estimates, we're not confronted
with that.
MR. FORD. In that connection, Peter, we now have five months
worth of data on the deficit and so far it is running about $2 billion
behind last year's deficit, is that right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I think that's right.

MR. FORD. And yet all of the revisions to the forecast
suggest that this fiscal year's deficits will be higher and higher
while [actual results are] running behind. Obviously, with almost
half the [fiscal] year gone, somebody is programming either a colossal
explosion of spending or a colossal reduction of tax receipts or some
combination of the two.
What is your technique?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm sort of a victim of the experts
But, in fact, the fiscal expert at our
who give us those views, too.
Bank just went through an analysis of this and, even though the
deficit is running close to or slightly behind the previous year's
deficit, he's still looking for a deficit of somewhat over $100
billion for this year.
SPEAKER(?).

Over $100 billion?

MR. STERNLIGHT. For this fiscal year it's about $108
billion, I think. More of the tax reduction impact comes along late
And
in the fiscal year--certainly in the after-July portion of it.
the defense build-up is a slow train to get moving, but once that
spending gets on its way-MR. FORD. If he says $108 billion and so far we're running
$2 billion behind a $58 billion annual rate, that would mean a $50
It
billion swing in the deficit in the last 7 months of the year.
would add approximately $7 to $8 billion per month of extra deficit
from now on to average that, is that right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I'm not sure of that.

-12-

3/29-30/82

MR. FORD. Well, if you go from $58 billion to $108 billion,
that's $50 billion and there are only 7 months left to create the
extra deficit, right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Well, I did just get his estimates of the
quarterly financing needs of the Treasury, which include not only the
unified budget deficit but the off-budget estimates.
That was going
to be something like $13 billion in the April-June quarter and about
$40 billion in the July-September quarter.
MR. FORD.
just blows--

$40 billion?

SPEAKER(?).

The end of [the year]

is when it

Well, it's partly seasonal, though.

MR. PARTEE. What about that June 30th reduction?
That's
worth about $35 billion, at an annual rate, which would be $9 billion
a [quarter], or close to that.
That would be a good deal of it right
there.
MR. AXILROD. Thus far in the first two quarters of the
fiscal year, we have $70 billion out of our projected deficit of $111
billion. That leaves a mere $41 billion to go and they're not going
to have a seasonal surplus.
They're going to have a very small
deficit in the second and third quarters of the year.
And then in the
fourth quarter of the fiscal year, the third quarter of the calendar
year, we get the tax decrease.
It's not very difficult to get up over
$100 billion.
MR. KICHLINE. The second quarter is virtually zero.
small negative in contrast to the usual surplus.
MR. FORD.

It's a

Surplus?

MR. KICHLINE. And from a zero in the second quarter it goes
to a $39 or $40 billion deficit in the final quarter of the fiscal
year, which is when the tax cut comes along. So it's a huge swing
going from the spring into the summer months.
I would note also that
there's a bit of confusion among many analysts on why the deficit
early this year was not as large as anticipated.
It is thought that
part of it may be associated with the change in the tax law--namely
the increase in the [penalty] interest rate, inducing people to pony
up the money in January--because receipts in fact were running a good
deal higher.
So, apparently, it's in part associated with the change
in the penalty rate for late [payments].
SPEAKER(?).
MR. KICHLINE.

It's 20 percent.
Right.

MR. GRAMLEY. And part of the answer may lie in the trend of
the deficit in the next two years.
If you look at page I-8 in the
Greenbook, [your projection of] the NIA account deficit started out at
$74 billion, then $68 billion, then $46 billion, then $47 billion.
It
was on the way down. This time it's starting to go the other way.
And that can make a big difference between where we are now relative
to where we were a year ago and how the annual totals add up.

3/29-30/82

-13-

I was just looking for something to be hopeful
MR. FORD.
about, but you're making me feel depressed.
I have had the same hope, but--

MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Could I raise a question?
Thinking about Peter's
recitation of the policy actions taken over the past months, and then
looking back a bit over history, how do you answer the question:
Has
the policy caused or prevented short-run variability in monetary
growth?
MR. FORD. Yes, this question came up, not just from the
usual monetarists but from a variety of sources when we had a huge
group of people at our Atlanta conference. A number of them, like
Larry Klein, were very sympathetic to us.
But it was remarkable how
many--not just the standard old line monetarists--had questions about
this. The way it came out from some of them was this:
If you say
there will be wider variations in interest rates, should you try to
control the [monetary growth] path in some way to take some of the
fluctuation out?
Implicit in that statement is the hidden assumption
that we're now successfully operating counter-cyclically in finetuning the economy, and they question whether that can be so.
I guess
the question is:
Do you really feel that you're working against the
swings in rates so that if we somehow had smoothed the [monetary
growth] path it would have produced more violent fluctuations in
interest rates than we've seen?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
That would be my expectation.
If we tried
to hold very rigidly to a path in weekly periods, let's say, we would
get even more rate fluctuation.
I find it very hard to answer
President Winn's question about whether our actions contribute to
I think it probably
greater or lesser variability in money growth.
depends some on the time periods chosen. My feeling about it is that
looking at periods of a couple of quarters at a time, let's say, what
we're doing works in the direction of achieving the desired growth
rates. Now, there could be things in our response mechanism itself
that lead to some fluctuations of one or two months in character, just
because we see a bulge and respond to it and that depresses growth a
month or two later.
There could be that kind of cycling, but that
might be a minor variation around the more underlying trend we're
trying to achieve.
MR. AXILROD. We do have a number of people starting to work
--they have been at it for about three weeks--on very detailed
analyses of the variability we've had since October '79.
They are
trying to isolate what we can attribute to special credit controls and
NOW accounts and are trying to relate the method of operations to any
elasticities in response to interest rate changes, with the aim of
seeing if the method involves greater fluctuations in both necessarily
I hope we will have some results to
or if it's an accidental product.
report.
MS. TEETERS.

When do we expect to hit the debt limit now?

MR. STERNLIGHT.

In June or July maybe.

3/29-30/82

SPEAKER(?).

-14-

June.

MR. STERNLIGHT. June.
The expectation a month or two ago
had been that we might hit it in May. But they were doing a little
better for a while, so I guess it has been pushed back to June.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions?
expose you all to Mr. Kichline's forecast.
MR. ALTMANN.

We have to ratify the actions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes, we have to ratify the actions.

SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, we will

Without objection.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's take a little time to discuss
the forecast or raise any questions about it or put forward any
dissenting or agreeing views.
MR. MORRIS.
I noted that the data available for March-commodity prices, initial claims for unemployment compensation, and
the stock market, all of which are leading indicators--showed an
increased weakness in March.
That at least raises a question in my
mind about whether the second quarter could be negative.
MR. KICHLINE.
Oh, I think it's possible. You're quite
correct that those indicators--and we have really nothing else--point
to further weakness in the second quarter. The staff's forecast has
about flat final sales, which is risky. All of the positive numbers
we see result from a slower runoff of inventories, and forecasting
inventories is currently messier than M1.
So, I think there's a good
deal of risk in the forecast and I would say it's primarily on the
down side. The one encouraging thing is that when you add up the
various sectors, we're clearly not getting the major declines in
spending that we saw earlier. But at this point it seems to me it's
very risky and we could have further to go before the economy, in
fact, turns up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Well, Mr. Chairman, my question was going to be
much the same as Frank's.
Maybe I'll still ask it.
Jim, in view of
the concluding statement in your presentation about the rather grim
outlook for the federal deficit and what that implies for the level of
interest rates, to what extent does your forecasting model-judgmentally adjusted or not--take into account how the high level of
real interest rates, from which nobody can really see any near-term
relief, might inhibit or even abort the recovery that we would
otherwise expect to have?
That's my number one worry these days.
MR. KICHLINE. Well, the one formal approach to this is using
the econometric model, and for 1983 that model provides high levels of

3/29-30/82

nominal and implied real rates as well. Actually, for 1983 the model
I
would provide a bit more real growth than we have in the forecast.
think one of the real issues is the whole time pattern of this and the
maintenance of what by 1983 would be implied real rates of interest in
the area of 10 percent or so, given our interest rate expectations.
That situation is unlikely to persist; it will change at some point.
The question is when. We don't have it changing in 1983, but I do
think you're quite correct in asking:
How does [economic growth]
It seems that in a short-run
continue on this particular course?
sense what we have is a classic crowding-out situation with a good
deal of stimulus provided by the federal government in terms of
generating additional incomes in the private sector through the tax
cuts as well as the federal purchases in the defense area.
But we
have very sick housing markets and durable goods markets, which are
squeezed out in this process.
So, it's a real structural problem.
And, obviously, it's also true that forecasting interest rates is very
difficult. And one can see the change there.
MR. BALLES.

All right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Thank you.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
If I'm reading the numbers right, you
are estimating a GNP implicit deflator for the first quarter of 5.0
percent; but for the second quarter it jumps up to 6.6 percent and
then comes down again substantially in the third quarter and fourth
quarter to about 5-1/2 percent. What explains such an abrupt shift in
the deflator from the first to the second quarter?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it has to do with changing weights on
these things and in part it reflects developments in energy prices.
In part it's also the auto sector, where we had more auto sales in the
first quarter when rebates were on and we have assumed, rightly or
wrongly, that the rebates go off in the second quarter, so there's a
bit of a price kick from that.
It's mainly the changing weights and
the break in world oil prices and gasoline prices and how that feeds
in.
I guess I'd try and cut through all of that and say that we now
very clearly seem to be on a lower inflation path, too low in terms of
the underlying rate.
Nevertheless, a lot of things have come along in
a very positive way recently, rather than these negative shocks that
we had been getting before.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE.
Jim, as I understand it, essentially what you
have in the forecast is a generalized shot of purchasing power coming
from the tax cut being offset by continued very stringent conditions
in financial markets and, therefore, in credit-using sectors of the
economy, such as housing and plant and equipment and, to a lesser
extent, consumer durable goods.
I can't fault the arithmetic of that
because it is a big shot that comes from the tax cut.
But the effect
of this is to extend, and maybe even further aggravate, the extreme
frequency distribution of situations that industries find themselves
in.
[We have] what is generally a flat economy, with housing
remaining very low, with automobile sales really still quite low, and
with a considerable threat of a decline in capital spending and [that
would have] an effect on those industries.
It's awfully difficult to
state this, but I'm wondering what the psychological impact could be

3/29-30/82

-16-

of seeing these industries and these parts of the country continue to
deteriorate or at least not improve, looking on through the year.
Could it have a psychological effect or something like that on capital
spending or consumption that would make this forecast not work out?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, these things, as you well know, are very
difficult to try to take into account.
I think the inherent
structural problems in the economy grow over time as we live in a
world in which markets on average have been weak now since 1979.
It's
really a three-year sort of problem. And by the third year of high
interest rates, many firms obviously have been weakened in that
Should a surprise come along in the sense of the failure of
process.
a firm--especially a firm not on the list generally talked about but
truly a surprise and a major firm--it could have severe consequences.
And we have not allowed for that, obviously. There's also a question
of what it means in terms of fiscal policy.
I think that's rather
important. There are lots of programs being talked about in terms of
But they also feed into
housing subsidies, which could alter this.
the budget problem, and I would think the more severe the implied
recession in various parts of the country, the more difficult it would
So, the
be to follow through on spending cuts and tax increases.
fiscal side it seems to me is one that's at risk in terms of trying to
get a larger deficit reduction program in place.
MR. BOEHNE.
I might just add to that, Chuck. As I talk to
people, I get the feeling that the mood has spread from pessimistic to
uncertain. And uncertain is kind of the best shape one could be in.
If an order comes in, they're
People are very short-term oriented.
happy, but they're not at all sure they're going to see an order come
along in two or three months. And it seems to me that in this kind of
environment people are much more susceptible to bad news than they are
to good news.
There can be five pieces of good news and one piece of
bad news and they tend to zero in on that bad news.
And with the high
real interest rates that we have and the pressures on the balance
sheets, we almost inevitably are going to get some kind of a shock-some bad news--that is going to have a pretty bearish effect on the
economy.
I just sense that people are skating on very thin ice.
MR. PARTEE. Well, that's along the lines of what I'm
thinking. We have had a tremendous increase in business bankruptcies
and they could go tremendously higher in the period to come.
There
are people in towns in the Midwest who have run through almost every
avenue of income maintenance available to them and they're about to be
dropped off, with no income to speak of, in a situation where they
still have to maintain somehow those communities and families.
All
that gets reported very, very actively in the media, so that it can
have a psychological effect on the whole country even though it might
be happening mainly in Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio, and a few places
like that.
And I am concerned about what the-MR. BOEHNE.
If I were putting together a forecast, I'd
probably be about where Jim is.
Although I think there is a bottoming
out, I haven't seen a lot of evidence that a recovery is occurring.
But it's this thing that one can't measure--the sense of vulnerability
to the economy because of the psychology--that really gives me more
concern than anything.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

3/29-30/82

MR. BLACK. I think Chuck has raised an excellent point, Mr.
Chairman, and this could change the whole situation around, but when I
get at the bottom line I believe it's a question more than anything
else of whether or not we can sustain and extend this recent progress
I think the staff is about
that we've made on the inflation front.
right on the [cyclical] trough; I believe we're either there or very
near it and that we have in place some key elements of good recovery
But
in the form of the July tax cut and stepped up defense outlays.
we're going to have to have some kind of rebounding bond market and
more generally an increased optimism on the part of businesses to
spend on capital outlays before we're going to have any real kind of
And it would deliver a lethal blow if inflation does
improvement.
pick up.
It would be bad news for the bond markets and for the
mortgage markets and in addition I think it would dilute some of the
pickup that we would get from the impending tax cut.
And if that's
the case, then the recovery is not going to be as robust as the
projection. But if we succeed in getting the kind of inflation that
the staff is projecting, then I believe the recovery may be even more
robust, particularly in the first part of 1983, than they are
projecting. And I believe they're about right on the inflation
figures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I note that we have had a relatively rare
event:
namely, that the March projection seems to show an improvement
both in progress on inflation and in growth. Now, that by itself is
almost implausible. One would think that inflation is wound down by
more slack in the economy. And here it looks as though inflation is
coming down more than previously expected, while growth is a little
better than previously expected; it may be the effect of oil prices,
which is an exogenous element.
I would certainly agree that there's a great deal of
uncertainty about any estimate now. But other than that, it seems to
me that there's a considerable degree of consensus about the most
namely, a bottoming out in the second or third
likely pattern:
quarter and then a rise. There's some disagreement about the strength
of the rise, but our projection now is coming closer to that of the
So, in terms of the most probable
Administration than it used to be.
course of events, there is a high degree of consensus. The dispersion
There is a high degree of
around that consensus is something else.
uncertainty, but that is part of the process of winding down the
If everybody were completely sure of what he expected,
inflation.
there would not be a great deal of pressure on wages, prices, and
financial behavior; and I think we have to accept this as part of the
cost of the process and part of the cost of making progress [on
inflation], which really has been quite remarkable to date.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree with the
comments that have been made suggesting that while the economy may be
bottoming out, it's pretty hard to find any evidence that much more
than that is happening. Indeed, even that could be transitory.
Several points have been made about financial strains or credit
quality, call it what you will. My own sense of that phenomenon is
that the degree of uneasiness associated with that certainly has

3/29-30/82

-18-

increased and perhaps sharply so, even in the framework of the last 6
or 8 weeks.
For example, bankers in the Ninth Federal Reserve
District, who aren't used to those kinds of things, all of a sudden
are speaking very openly and candidly and with some real concern in
terms of how they are now looking at the situation. At least in our
area, the clear deterioration in the farm sector has something to do
with that.
It's always hard to make a judgment as to the underlying
situation in the farm sector because farmers tend to make it sound bad
even when it's good.
But, certainly, both the anecdotal and the hard
information that one can pull together would suggest that we are
perhaps on the threshold of a very troubling situation in the
agricultural sector.
I'm not sure what can be done about it, perhaps
nothing. The thought crossed my mind that perhaps we should dust off
the seasonal borrowing program and talk about it a little as a way of
maybe trying to provide a little help there. But it clearly is
troublesome.
On the inflation side, I think the evidence of a slowing or
moderation is getting more and more pervasive. About the only place I
can't see any hard evidence of it is in some of the white collar
service areas, including banking and finance.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought for a moment you were going to
say in the Federal Reserve Bank experience.
MR. CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I left that to you.
What is that smile on Steve's face?

MR. CORRIGAN. The other thing that is taking on a slightly
different tone is what I guess I would call a level of frustration
that is associated with the interest rate situation itself. Many
people look at the obvious inflation [improvement] and they look at
interest rates and they see these enormous premiums. Regardless of
what those premiums precisely reflect, in a sense there seems to be
nothing that is going to get rid of that problem.
I don't think it's
something that people--at least in a major way--are blaming the
Federal Reserve for.
Indeed, one gets some feeling that people do
recognize that at this point at least the Federal Reserve is locked in
to some extent, and I think that's right.
At least as I would look at
it, when you question what could be done by the Federal Reserve to try
to deal with that problem, the hard fact of the matter is that we have
very little room to maneuver.
I personally can't see how we're going
to get much relief from that when we're looking at, in Mr. Kichline's
case, $160 billion deficits.
Nor can I see, without taking exception
with your forecast, Jim, any real possibility for any kind of
sustainable growth in the economy with this fiscal situation the way
it is.
I'd like to think that political and other forces would be
brought to bear to do something there, but I don't see that happening
either.
So, I come out with the sense that we are indeed between a
rock and a hard place at this point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I ought to add to what Mr. Corrigan has
just said and report that with regard to the Chicago District, the
situation continues to be very, very serious.
There is the common
perception that the economy's decline may have ended, but I'd

3/29-30/82

-19-

Every article one reads leads one
emphasize the words "may have."
toward this consensus view that the economy is near the bottom and
But in our area there is absolutely no tangible
heading back up.
evidence that that has in fact occurred. Mr. Kichline has gone over
the major sectors, but I must say that the automotive area is very
weak, capital goods are just terrible, and in railroad equipment, for
example, there have been absolutely no orders for railroad equipment
in months. Virtually all of the plants are now closed and they are
closed indefinitely. The heavy castings orders are down almost 70
percent in some areas.
Conditions in the agricultural sector, just to add a bit to
that, are looking much more serious. There has been something of an
improvement on the livestock front but on the grain side it's going to
be a very bleak year. Land values are continuing to decline.
Although there are not very many sales, those that do occur are at
very significantly lower prices and, as a result, there is a growing
Farm credit last year went
problem with regard to agricultural loans.
up about $20 billion or 11-1/2 percent, and it has almost doubled in
the last 5 years. Most of this increase has been taken by either the
PCAs or other government agencies, who are now by far the largest
lenders to the agricultural sector. And as these conditions in the
area continue to deteriorate, we think the collection problems are
going to mount. And that is going to raise some very interesting
questions with regard to how the government is going to deal with this
problem. There's likely to be very heavy pressure for a bail-out by
the agencies for these different credits.
So, as we look at it, there really are no tangible signs at
all that we have reached the turning point, and the mood of the
It's getting
general population out our way could not be grimmer.
The morale and the attitudes are at a very low
much more serious.
level and they are still going down; and there is a concern that any
recovery that we might see in the country will leave the Midwest
behind. There is a growing fear that although the historical evidence
would lead one to believe we are approaching the turnaround point,
this time it may be different in that we are in a fundamentally
different period and it is going to be much more difficult to get out
of this particular recession.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do you see those attitudes
reflected in wage bargaining, let's say--whether it's union bargaining
or otherwise?
MR. KEEHN. I think pretty considerably. There has been a
significant change in attitude on the part of organized labor, not
only regarding terms and conditions, but in their whole approach to
the situation. I'm told, for example, with regard to the automotive
industry, that Ford and GM renegotiations have been important
financially, but much more importantly the attitude of the UAW is
different now. They are much more realistic currently than they were;
even 4 or 5 months ago they took a very hard attitude on plant
Gee, isn't there a way that we
closings. Now they come in and say:
can work something out so that you don't have to close that plant?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you hear any gossip about the Harvester
negotiation? That's in process now, isn't it?

3/29-30/82

-20-

MR. KEEHN. I hear a lot of gossip.
Harvester, frankly can't
[mirror] the GM and Ford settlements.
They've got to get more
[concessions].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Quite a lot more, I would think.

MR. KEEHN. They have to get a lot more.
Whether they can or
not I don't know, because the attitude between management and the UAW,
as you know, is very poor there.
I don't know of any tangible
information about those discussions.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Talking about wage increases, I met
last week with representatives of about 20 leading universities in the
country and I was struck by the fact that every single one of them is
going to be paying salary increases this year of 10 to 12 percent.
And when I asked them why, they said it was catch-up--that the
university faculties and staff had suffered over the last few years.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
increases.
MR. PARTEE.
size, I would think.

They finally can get by with great big

Yes, they're going to have volume declines in

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Their portfolios are doing so well in
many cases--at least those who didn't make the wrong decisions--and I
guess they're able to play a bit of catch-up.
MR. KEEHN. Well, most schools are now in the process of
approving their tuition for next year and a lot are going to be up 10,
12, 14 percent.
I think most schools also recognize that this is the
last shot at this particular process and that because of the change in
the demographics and changing inflation, they won't get away with it
again.
MR. CORRIGAN. There's an element of perversity.
Some
schools want to raise their tuition by a whole bunch just because they
think it makes them an attractive school.
It's perverse but true.
That is literally true.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to quit in a minute, but in your
survey of land prices in Chicago, you survey prices of actual
transactions, don't you?
MR. KEEHN. Yes. But what I'm commenting on is frankly
pretty anecdotal.
At our board meetings, two or three of the people
who are directly involved suggest that there aren't very many sales
but when there are, the prices are down very, very, substantially.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I was wondering how it
showed up in your statistics.
MR. KEEHN. We don't know what price people are referring to
in terms of the base from which it has come down--whether it's a
recent price or if it happens to be an individual transaction at a
very high level. But I don't think there's any question that when the

3/29-30/82

transactions do occur they are at lower levels; a figure of 10 to 25
percent is one that is commonly tossed out.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I hear those stories.
it didn't show up in your figures.

I just wondered why

MR. KEEHN. Well, I think it may be going on now and it's too
soon for it to be showing up.
MS. TEETERS.
Do you have an increase of the number of
foreclosures on farm land?
MR. KEEHN. Yes.
There are increases in delinquencies,
foreclosures, and bankruptcies. But, honestly, the increases are from
a very low base. So, it's not yet a broad, pervasive problem. But
the actual numbers are beginning to increase.
MR. GUFFEY. Just one other comment in that respect:
While
there are foreclosures and there are work-out situations, there are
very few sales.
There are offers of land sales in our area but very
few sales actually have taken place. That means that the lending
institution is taking over the land or their alternative is working
with the borrower one more year.
So, it's very difficult for us to
get a handle on how much land prices have actually dropped because
there are no sales to verify it.
MR. KEEHN. There are a lot of auctions, but then [the
property] is pulled back when the price comes in at a lower level than
is acceptable. Therefore, the banks are beginning to back into the
agricultural business.
MR. PARTEE.
the take-out.

The banks have the bottom bid in the auction--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The fact is that if the land price goes
down 10 or 20 percent, that means it's going back all the way to where
prices were 3 years ago, I guess.
That's the problem you have here?
MR. KEEHN. That's an important consideration. But having
said that, the banks--rightly or wrongly--lent money at 80 percent of
a higher level and, therefore, they have a problem.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well. Mr. Winn. Mr. Roos, and Mr. Ford,
are you going to be relatively brief?
MR. ROOS.

I'll be glad to wait until tomorrow if you want.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you are relatively brief, we can
just dispose of this tonight; otherwise we'll wait until the morning.
Are you going to be relatively brief, Mr. Winn?
MR. WINN.
and gloom here.

I'll be brief.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

One, I think there's too much doom

We may quit after that!

MR. WINN. If you look at the cyclical figures, they don't
look as bad to me as the early '70s cycle.
While unemployment is

3/29-30/82

-22-

high, it started from a much higher level, so the decline [in
employment] is really not that great. And if you look at the
possibility for inventory adjustment and an inventory cycle and then
factor in the tax cut at midyear, it seems to me that we have some
very positive forces there.
The second comment I'd make is that [I wonder if] we really
have adjusted our thinking for the changes taking place in fiscal
policy.
I must confess that [a deficit of] $160 billion blows my mind
as does the [potential for] crowding out.
But I think we have to
recognize that it's a quite different kind of deficit in the sense
that previously we had the tax rebate or whatever that was called and
then [the financial system] had to turn around and lend to
corporations to supply the goods to take care of the [unintelligible],
so there really was a double whammy in the finance market. Today we
have the problem that--what was the tax savings for IBM, $100 million?
And while that shows up in the deficit, IBM is out of the market by
that amount. If you look at the savings certificates and IRAs and
other accounts, again there is a different impact on the market from
this deficit in terms of financial demands than we had previously.
It's not in the sense of $160 billion to zero by any manner of means,
but I wonder if we don't overplay the size of the problem just a bit.
I'm not saying that I'm happy with the $160 billion deficit, but in
terms of its impact on markets we may not get the crowding out because
we may get a change in demand. And the deficit is really financing a
lot of the savings and corporate needs that otherwise would show up in
the open market.
MR. FORD.

I pass.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's perhaps appropriate that
Willis Winn close this evening's affair.
He's more reassuring about
the economy, even more reassuring about the deficit, and then he plans
to go off and leave us!
MR. BOEHNE. He has changed now that he's retiring. When he
was in Philadelphia, he was the most pessimistic director we had in a
quarter of a century!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will be saying goodbye to Willis
tomorrow. I'd like to have an executive meeting at 9:15 a.m.
tomorrow, if that's okay.
[Meeting recessed]

3/29-30/82

-23-

March 30,

1996--Morning Session

If I recall correctly, and I'm sure I do,
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Kichline had given us
we were discussing the business picture.
what by some lights is a fairly optimistic picture suggesting that the
risk may be on the down side, and a number of people had commented on
that.
And Mr. Ford and Mr. Roos were about to say something.
I
gather for purposes of secretarial summaries that there wasn't a lot
That's the
of disagreement with the staff outlook but a lot of worry.
way I would summarize what I learned yesterday, anyway.
MR. FORD.
Well, in terms of our view of the staff outlook,
we always compare the staff's forecast to a variety of external
forecasts, including DRI, Townsend Greenspan, Chase Econometrics,
Citibank, and so forth.
I am impressed by the fact that the staff
forecast for the next 2 or 3 quarters is by far the most pessimistic
of any of the forecasting services.
That doesn't necessarily say our
staff is wrong, since the record of the forecasting services isn't
that great either in terms of the ability to project where the economy
is going or what inflation is going to do.
But looking at our
District, given work we've done with local groups, we do share some of
the pessimism that has been voiced, particularly with regard to the
agricultural sector.
We're having a large problem in our agricultural
areas as well as in our forest-related industries; and in the carpet
area, we're having a near economic disaster since we produce a third
of the world's carpets and they are laying off people by the thousands
in that [industry] in northern Georgia.
So, we now have four of our
six states with more unemployment than the national average, even
though we're supposed to be the Sun Belt.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You produce a third of the world's

carpets?
MR. FORD.

Yes, that's what they say, in northern Georgia.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Does

that mean there's a big export

business?
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

MR. FORD.
And it's very depressed, just as a reflection of
the trends in housing.
And then we have the heavy industry over in
Alabama and in Tennessee, which we're discovering is more
industrialized than the rest of America.
I always thought of it as a
rural state until I started traveling around it.
We have numerous
counties throughout the States of Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi
that have unemployment rates of around 20 percent, which you don't
read about in the newspapers.
So, there is a lot of pessimism in
rural areas and in those specific industries, and certain aspects of
agriculture and the housing-related industries are in deep trouble.
On the other hand, our service industries and our high-tech industries
are doing very well in Florida in an emerging Technology Belt that we
have down there.
Overall, my view is that there's not a feeling of depression
in our area as some of you seem to be reporting.
We tend still to
have some guarded [optimism].
Or rather, I like the way Ed Boehne put
it.
In a range from uncertainty to pessimism, our business people are

3/29-30/82

-24-

more on the uncertainty end of it.
And except in the industries that
really are getting clobbered, including the thrifts, the home
builders, the forest industry, and farming, people are still
reasonably persuaded that the economy will turn around and pick up in
the next few months as this staff forecast has it.
People aren't
lining up to jump off buildings or bridges in our District.
That
would be my summary of it.
MR. ROOS.
We had two very interesting experiences last week.
On Wednesday, we had the chief executive officers of about fifteen of
our largest St. Louis-based firms in for lunch. These are large
companies which in many instances are multinational in scope.
The
following day we had eight of the chief labor leaders in our area in
for lunch. There was an interesting similarity in their attitudes.
There's no question that the industries and, of course labor in terms
of unemployment, are feeling very severe recessionary pressures.
On
the other hand--and I was especially interested in this reaction
coming from the labor side--these people recognize that this was part
of the process of bringing down inflation. They felt that whoever
made the monetary policy and fiscal policy decisions of a year or two
They see it as a
ago must have known that this downtrend would occur.
temporary phenomenon. As Bill said, they anticipate a recovery. And
even from the labor group there was a strong recognition, and hope
really, that we will continue to look to solving the long-term
fundamental problems rather than reacting to the pain of the moment.
Even though these people were very outspoken in their expression of
momentary pain, they were optimistic for the future. And they were
very strong in their support of monetary policy as in their view being
much more assured of hanging in there, if you will, than fiscal
[policy].
Well, I didn't come away from those two experiences nearly
as depressed as some of the others of you were yesterday.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What kind of wage settlements did you feel
the labor union leaders were looking toward?
MR. ROOS.
I think reasonable, in terms of less-than-mightbe-expected settlements. They realize that they have to be flexible
under these circumstances and I think this will bode well for the
effort to continue to hold down inflation. These guys at least were
not bitter in their reactions, and they said that even though their
rank and file membership are experiencing things that they haven't
experienced for some years, they're not reacting as they might have in
the '30s.
They're not just saying the world is going to the dogs.
I
felt more of an upbeat reaction in terms of the long pull than some of
the others of you who expressed yourselves yesterday. And in my own
short experience on this Committee, I think we've tended to get
carried away emotionally on the down side when things are gloomy.
Si mentioned yesterday, when you questioned him, what is
happening to farm prices in Illinois.
I remember just a few years ago
we were all extremely appalled at the inflationary upward movement in
farm prices.
So, I think it's important that we not get carried away
and over-react to what hopefully will be a temporary situation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, you expressed my feelings almost
exactly when you said there was general support of and agreement with

3/29-30/82

-25-

I'd like first to
the staff forecast and some worry, all the same.
elaborate on something that President Ford said about the staff
What he said is correct
forecast in relation to outside forecasts.
with respect to the outside forecasts we look at here, but only some
The Board forecast for the second and third quarters is
distance out.
by and large more optimistic than the outside forecasts.
MR. FORD.

Yes, it's in the fourth quarter.

MR. RICE. From the point of real growth in the third
quarter, it is the most optimistic, as compared with Data Resources,
In the third quarter only Merrill Lynch is more
Wharton, and Chase.
optimistic than the Board's forecast.
It's farther out, in
MR. FORD. Yes, I'd agree with that.
the fourth quarter, that they have the lowest GNP, fairly high
unemployment, and low inflation. For the year they are a little more
pessimistic.
MR. RICE. That's right. I'm encouraged, of course, by that
aspect of our staff's forecast, which projects the recovery to begin
in the second quarter with GNP increasing at a 2 percent annual rate
in real terms. But I'm worried and concerned that this recovery
depends pretty much on what happens to inventories. Without the
anticipated reduced rate of inventory liquidation, the recovery I take
In the meantime, there's
it will be delayed until the third quarter.
a good deal of stress and distress out there in the economy with many
sectors in the economy feeling a good deal of financial pressure;
As President Winn says,
pessimism was widely reported yesterday.
there really may be too much doom and gloom out there, but it is
nevertheless there.
Financial conditions have deteriorated markedly
for nonfinancial corporations. As you know, the interest coverage
ratios for these firms have fallen to record low levels, downgradings
of debt ratings have been occurring in large numbers, the business
failure rate is running at a record postwar pace, mortgage
delinquencies are up, and the housing sales situation didn't look as
We heard
good in February as we thought it did up until yesterday.
In
yesterday about the farming sector and the problems it was having.
these circumstances, it seems to me that it is important that the
recovery not be delayed until the third quarter. While there is every
reason for hoping that it will occur as projected in the staff
forecast, I think everything should be done to try to encourage an
early recovery. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have to add my name to
I don't know that I would develop a
the list of the worriers today.
forecast, if I had to make one, that looked any different in
But it seems to me that as the
significant ways than the staff's.
information comes in, increasingly it's calling into question whether
or not we're at the end of recession and about to see a rather
significant recovery. Obviously, the staff's forecast is not a
recovery of the dimensions that we've seen typically in the postwar
period after a recession; but it indicates pretty good growth in the
And as
last three quarters of the year, a 3-3/4 percent annual rate.
Frank Morris mentioned yesterday, the price figures have been quite
weak. Maybe we're looking at something different now but

-26-

3/29-30/82

historically, at least, prices of industrial raw materials turn up
before the rest of the economy.
Initial claims are still very high.
Yesterday we learned that consumer confidence in March, on the basis
of the Conference Board survey, was down again.
The machine tool
orders figures continue to be very weak.
There's just no sign of
abatement at all in that area, but it's a very small part of the total
economy. I would say that there's at least a 60-40 chance that we
won't see growth of more than, say, one percent in the last three
quarters of the year; that we'll get a bump because of a turnaround in
inventory investment from deep negative to small negative or zero or
small positive; that final sales will continue to erode, at least in
areas like business fixed investment and maybe housing; and that we
will see very, very little upturn at all.
I think we have seen a very, very substantial weakening of
attitudes around the country. I just sense a different kind of
attitude than I can ever recall during my period as a professional
economist.
Part of the reason is the concern about the budget but I
think to a larger extent it is a consequence of the fact that
continued monetary restraint over a very prolonged period has put the
economy into a very, very weakened state.
I don't think we should
look at what we're seeing now as an unexpected development. We've had
as much growth in nominal GNP as we had any reason to expect, given
what we had provided by way of increases in the stock of money-indeed, more so because we've had downward shifts in money demand.
I
think we're making more progress on inflation than we had any right to
expect. We're making more progress than the traditional Phillips
curve type of analysis would have led us to expect.
So, we're looking
at a situation now which is essentially of our own making, though not
entirely. And now the question is what we do about it.
I think we
have a very narrow line to walk. I don't think we can afford to give
up the progress we've made or to endanger it.
But if there is a
danger now, it is that we have more restraint than we want rather than
less restraint than we want.
I'm very much worried about what is
going to happen in these next few months.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

When do the leading indicators come out?

Today, this afternoon.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They'll be a little on the down side.

Mr.

Solomon.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask Steve and Jim a
question. How do you reconcile this relatively reasonable increase in
real growth in the next three quarters compared with the previous
projections with the argument that the financial markets are going to
be under pressure, given such a large public sector borrowing
requirement?
How do you reconcile that with your interest rate
projections for the rest of the year in Appendix 2 in which you show
the fed funds rate declining?
MR. AXILROD.
Well, some
comments.
In a sense, it assumes
first quarter and late last year,
growth in M1 of around 10 percent
divested; it is used willingly by
in spending. If it is not and if

of that will be implicit in my
that the buildup in liquidity in the
reflected in first-quarter average
and also a large increase in M2, is
the public to finance an expansion
the public really wants to hold that

3/29-30/82

liquidity--it wasn't just a temporary reaction to uncertainty which is
going to be unwound--then our interest rate forecast of a very slight
decline might even seem a bit optimistic, which would make the GNP
Maybe
That's how I would respond to it.
forecast a bit optimistic.
Jim--

MR. KICHLINE.

No,

I wouldn't

[disagree].

But, Steve, doesn't that prove that the
MS. TEETERS.
congestion that we're anticipating is not in this calendar year but
next year?
MR. AXILROD. Well, as I mentioned to the Board yesterday, I
refused to put the 1983 interest rate forecast in the Bluebook this
time because that's such a long way off. Attitudes might change and
we could have a wholly different outlook. But our basic interest rate
forecast is for high interest rates in '83 of about this dimension.
And with the deficit being even larger, one might want to question
again the possibility of that being associated with the type of real
GNP growth we have. But the quarterly model, which is of course often
This is
wrong, would suggest growth at these interest rates also.
somewhat different from President Solomon's question of how can we
reconcile this and not have interest rates higher. But even at this
higher level, the quarterly model would suggest that real growth will
indeed appear to be something like what we have projected.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
budgetary deficit?
MR. AXILROD.
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, what are you assuming about the

Well, Jim may-For 1983?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

I assume all these, yes.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's an environment in which we have
tremendous government borrowing, and the amount of funds raised in the
That picks up in the second
first half of this year is fairly low.
half and, given this forecast, would be substantially higher in '83.
Much of that is government-related. The private sector borrowing, in
terms of the consumer sector and mortgage borrowing, is very low; it
Durable goods expenditures are not doing
continues to be constrained.
very well either and that's a reflection of the high interest rate
environment. So, we get all of this financing but in a fairly tense
situation. Steve didn't put the interest rates in the Bluebook but we
actually have a sheet with the numbers written down that I look at on
So they
occasion, and we have short-term rates drifting up in 1983.
do rise in this forecast.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. FORD.
quarter of 1982.

No,

Not in Appendix 2, though.

in 1983.

The Bluebook only shows it through the fourth

But this forecast we think would be
MR. KICHLINE. Right.
consistent with some further rise--an upward drift in short-term

3/29-30/82

-28-

rates--throughout the year 1983.
In long rates, who knows what would
happen?
We do think that persistence of lower rates of inflation such
as in this forecast over an extended period of time ought to bring
long rates down somewhat.
So, we have a small downward tilt in long
rates, but higher short rates.
I wouldn't want to be questioned on a
specific number for rates, but it seems to me that this is a mix that
produces very high nominal short-term rates of interest. And we would
have that in there, with rates rising from the levels in the Bluebook.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The bottom line, then, is that you
believe, even with real GNP rising close to 5 percent in the second
half of the year on average and with this very large budgetary
deficit, that we still can have a slightly declining fed funds rate
for the second half of this year.
MR. AXILROD. But that assumes, with this strength in demand,
that the amount of money created in November, December, January, and
to a degree in February, which was just a minor drop, is used by the
public--just to use a word that comes easily to mind--willingly. That
is, they don't want to borrow additionally to hold that money; they
don't have to be cadged out of it by even higher interest rates.
That
money is used by the public willingly to finance spending.
And if it
isn't, then I don't think this forecast is consistent with declining
interest rates.
I don't think this forecast is consistent with your
monetary targets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If it isn't, we probably have the targets

too low.
MR. AXILROD.
implicitly.

Exactly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's going to be the burden of this

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, my thoughts are very much
along the lines of Lyle's.
I'm more pessimistic short-term than the
staff is, certainly.
I think the second quarter is going to be
negative.
I have not seen any basis yet for expecting an upturn.
Certainly, the numbers we have in March so far don't support the
proposition that the second quarter is going to show an upturn. And
it seems to me that we're going to have financial conditions that are
going to mean a sluggish recovery--perhaps more sluggish than even the
staff has estimated.
But there is one cushioning factor in the
economy that no one has talked about thus far, and that is the
tremendous upsurge in defense procurement, which is really beginning
to develop a momentum.
That will impact the economy very unevenly.
Fortunately, in New England we get about three times our proportionate
share of defense contracts, so it is cushioning most of our major
corporations--like Raytheon and United Technologies and so on--that
are in both the defense industry and domestic industry.
I asked them
how they're doing and they said that their domestic business is lousy;
their export business, which tends to be quite large, has been hit
hard by the rise in the dollar. But the defense business is booming
and their only problem in defense is getting the production out.
So,
that will cushion New England, California, Texas, the leading [defense
contractors are in those areas].
It's not going to do much for Si's
Middle West, though.

-29-

3/29-30/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Returning to this question of credit flows,
which goes a little with your question, Tony:
I was interested in
that, too, because here we have rising interest rates and we're
talking about crowding out.
So, I wondered what the figures would
show on credit raised by the economy. I find that in the last three
quarters--that is, since [the start of] the period of downturn--the
total funds raised in the third quarter, fourth quarter, and the first
quarter this year as estimated amount to only 11.8 percent of the GNP.
To give you an idea, that's almost exactly the same as in the 1974-75
recession in relation to the GNP. And that compares with 16 percent
in 1979, 18-1/2 percent in 1978, and 17-1/2 percent in 1977.
So, it's
a very much smaller flow of funds to credit users than is typical.
It's typical of a deep recession and continues to be typical of a deep
recession in the first quarter even though interest rates turned up.
And by the way, those figures include the government.
If it weren't
for the government, indeed, the figures would be close to recent
historical lows of only 7 percent of GNP being now represented by
credit to private sectors.
If you look ahead, the interesting thing
is that the staff's flow of funds forecast--they have a flow of funds
forecast that's consistent with their Greenbook forecast--doesn't show
any improvement at all in private credit flows compared with the GNP.
What happens is that the government credit flows go up because of the
deficit, but the private credit flows stay around the very low 7
percent area in relation to GNP.
That says to me, really, that what
is being forecast is whatever interest rate is necessary to keep
private credit from getting going again. And that's the crowding out
hypothesis, I think. But we should not say that there's a tremendous
flow of credit in these markets.
As a matter of fact the flow of
credit is unusually small and it will remain unusually small relative
to recent years even with these large government deficits.
MR. WINN.

Interesting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
to make--.
Mr. Boykin.

If that concludes the comments people want

MR. BOYKIN. Given the conditions in the Eleventh District, I
guess it'd be fair to say that the level of concern is considerably
In a way, one has to take this in perspective given where we
greater.
were and where it looks as if we might be going. The pessimism seems
to be centered primarily in the energy business where the decrease in
oil prices has produced quite a bit of concern.
Drilling activity has
slowed.
I mean by that a slowdown in the rate of increase as opposed
to an absolute slowdown.
Part of it-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I thought it actually had turned down.

MR. BOYKIN. Not from the information we have.
Part of this
is attributable to what those in the industry call seasonal factors.
They look for a little pickup in a couple of months, but not anything
like we have had.
The closing of refineries is causing quite a bit of
concern. As one person in the industry said, most of those are the
"tea kettle" type of operations that probably should have been closed
anyway. But even some of the major refineries are cutting back on
their production. There is growing concern in the commercial real
estate development area.
It now appears that some projects that were

-30-

3/29-30/82

announced are going to be deferred. The petrochemical industry seems
to be under some pressure. The media, of course, are picking this up
in our area with headlines saying that the recession has come to the
Sun Belt.
Layoffs that are occurring, while not significant, are
receiving quite a bit of publicity and obviously are affecting
opinions and attitudes.
In the electronics and the semi-conductor
business there have been some layoffs.
Of course, we have the Braniff
problem that stays in the headlines down our way. And I might also
mention that with the decrease in the price of oil, the bank stocks,
particularly those of our larger bank holding companies, have incurred
about a one-third decrease in their price over the last six weeks,
which concerns them.
They think the concern of the analysts who are
looking at the [exposure in] energy loans is unjustified.
On the other side, though, we've had just a little
improvement in the housing area, but nothing really significant, and a
I was talking on Thursday to the
little improvement in autos.
and
individual who oversees
he said the economy turned ten days ago and that the recession-MR. BLACK.
SPEAKER(?).

What time?
What day of the week was that, Bob?

MR. BOYKIN. The recession ended ten days ago. He said that
up until then the markets were very poor.
But the markets have
improved substantially and there's a lot of buying activity and lot of
orders being written in the markets now. Again, I don't know whether
people down our way are over-reacting in one sense because we are now
finally seeing some of the effects of the slowdown. And we are more
or less seeing that for the first time, which might cause a bit of an
over-reaction.
I think the fundamentals down our way really don't
look that bad. Agriculture has already been mentioned, and we have
basically the same situation in agriculture.
MS. TEETERS.

Are you getting a lot of in-migration?

MR. BOYKIN.
Yes, we've had a lot.
We're also now beginning
to get stories--the press are making a lot of it, or at least are
writing about it a lot--about people who have come down to the land of
milk and honey and are unable to find jobs and they are living in
campers, are out of money, and don't have enough money to go back
home.
That's pretty isolated.
But yes, we've had a lot of inmigration.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Basically, in the Twelfth District, without
going into a lot of detail and more doom and gloom, we figure the
economy slipped further into a recession this month. It's not just
the forest products industry. Unfortunately, it's almost all the
other major industries we have, including aerospace, where commercial
orders are down more than defense orders are up, electronics,
nonferrous metals, etc.
But, really, what I'd like to do is to come
back to a question I raised with the staff yesterday and ask it once
more, hoping that they are wiser than I am.
I raise this in view of
the fact that I have a couple of speeches scheduled this week up in
the Pacific Northwest for audiences likely not to be terribly friendly

3/29-30/82

given that the unemployment rates are as high as 25 percent in some
counties in Washington and Oregon mostly, but not entirely, because of
the forest products industry. The $64 dollar question, of course, is:
What in the heck is keeping those interest rates up in spite of the
fact that we've had great success in bringing the inflation rate down?
For a couple of years now I have been more or less promising these
same people that if we got the inflation rate down--bit the bullet and
persisted in tight money policy--the interest rates would come down
So,
sooner or later. Well, they certainly haven't come down as yet.
while I have my own explanation, I don't consider it terribly
I'd like to hear how the staff would
convincing even to myself.
answer that question. What is keeping those real interest rates up
there despite the fact that we've had very marked success, with more
If you
success on the horizon, in getting the inflation rate down?
can help me, I'd be grateful.
MR. AXILROD. Well, on short-term interest rates, I think it
is simply that the Committee's targets are low relative to the demand
I think short-term interest
for money in the current situation.
rates, except for minor variations, are pretty much determined by the
demand and supply for money in the very short run. On the longer-term
rates, I would say that probably the world isn't yet convinced that
the rate of inflation isn't going to get worse when we get out of this
It may not be as bad as it has been, but it
rather deep recession.
may become worse certainly than it is now. Secondly, the policy of
attempting to control the money supply month-by-month, which can't be
done, has led to fluctuations in short-term rates because of the way
[It is] out of sync with fluctuations in
the money supply behaves.
the business cycle and people are not convinced when rates go down
And, therefore, there is not a
that they're not going to go back up.
great incentive, once short rates go down, to move immediately into
the long-term market and capture a higher yield because one could stay
short--and who knows?--the short-term rate may be back up later and
one doesn't have to worry immediately about getting into long-term
securities.
So, I think that's another factor, which is sometimes
called the liquidity premium, or risk premium. Those are my essential
The thought that the rate of inflation will continue to
explanations.
decelerate over the long run is not firmly in the minds of investors.
And they believe there's no real penalty for staying short because
they're not convinced that when short rates come down they won't go
back up, as has been happening cyclically, because we've been trying
to control the money supply independently, in a sense, of the business
cycle. And I believe the short-term rates are determined by money
demand and supply under the current conditions.
MR. ROOS.
MR. BALLES.
something!
MR. PARTEE.

Explain that to those lumberjacks!
It's like a hit over the head with a 2x4 or

I think he said that you were responsible!

MS. TEETERS. What I interpret Steve as saying in a very
polite way is that monetary policy is too tight for the degree of
liquidity that the public demands at the present time.
MR. BALLES.

And that budget policy is too loose.

3/29-30/82

-32-

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
But it's highly possible that if we
ease the monetary targets, we would bring down short rates but there
would be a perverse reaction in the long end of the market.
MR. AXILROD. Yes, I should have mentioned that the way I
think the budget outlook enters into this is that it keeps the public
convinced that inflation is not going to get better.
That's how I
think the budget enters into people's thinking.
It's not just merely
that there will be more securities to absorb, although that's a factor
in the government securities market as such, but that the odds are
that when we get on the up side of the cycle inflation will get worse.
So, it is a strong factor.
MR. BALLES.
Well, I'm sure you realize that this is one part
of the country where they're just really screaming, pleading, and
begging for relief on the interest rates before they have all gone
down the tubes, with 40 percent of Oregon's lumber mills being closed
and probably closed permanently.
It's the kind of thing that led
AuCoin, the Democratic congressman from Oregon on the banking
committee, who is not always hostile and is sometimes friendly towards
the Fed, to get behind one of the resolutions to force the Fed to do
something. He is getting tremendous pressure from his constituents,
and it's that kind of thing, Paul, that may lie behind-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
VICE CHAIRMAN
question, too, as well
If a perfectly indexed
real interest would it
market?

It undoubtedly is.

SOLOMON.
I'd like to ask Henry Wallich this
as Steve and anyone else who wants to answer:
Treasury bond were put out today, what level of
have to bear in a competitive auction in the

MR. WALLICH. I would say it would be a good deal higher than
I would have said a year or two ago.
I would have said a year or two
ago, 1 or 2 percent.
Conceivably on a small issue it might even be
negative because some portfolio managers would like it to diversify.
But today I think there is a realization that real rates, before taxes
anyway, are pretty high.
So, I would say 3, 4, 5 percent, maybe.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But real rates are technically
the difference between nominal rates and inflation expectations, not
the actual rate of inflation.
So, if the problem that we're running
into, as Steve answered John Balles--and it's something we all know-is that long-run inflationary expectations have not come down, then in
the technical sense of the term real interest rates aren't as high as
they look. Yes, it may very well be that a perfectly indexed bond,
which automatically takes care of inflationary expectations, still
would carry only a 2 to 3 percent real interest rate because, if
inflationary expectations are taken care of automatically, then why
would one assume that a higher interest rate is needed today than a
year ago?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do you suggest they sell one to find out?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

No.

MR. BOEHNE.
Well, one reason is that there's a rather large
transfer of resources from the private sector to the public sector via

3/29-30/82

-33-

the credit markets instead of through taxation. And I think it takes
a higher real interest rate to bring about that transfer.
There also may be built into the so-called real
MS. TEETERS.
rate now a risk premium to compensate for the extreme volatility of
interest rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we're going to resolve
this question, so we will go to Mr. Axilrod.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if the Committee will bear with
[Statement
me, I have a a body of anti-climatic comments, I'm afraid.
--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know where that all [leaves
us].
The big question is with respect to M1 and we live in a kind of
In
morass that leads one to put a certain amount of weight on M2.
looking at what has been happening in the first quarter, you said M2
is running a little high. Well, it is, I guess, compared to the base
of the whole [fourth] quarter, but if you look at the last three
months its behavior has been pretty orderly from what we know now.
And I don't think it would require a slowdown in the growth--I haven't
done the arithmetic--in its nontransactions component if you look at
the last three months as compared to the quarter-to-quarter [growth].
So, we have had a big M1 growth and the
I don't see how it could.
If M2 were
monthly figures have been more or less in line for M2.
weak and M1 were high, which has not particularly, if ever, been the
case, I'd say we might have an argument for looking at the long-range
target at this meeting. But I don't think we have that argument and I
would not propose to do so. Anybody can have their own opinion. But
if things grow a certain way, it's going to have to continue to be on
our agenda for the next meeting in May or the following meeting I
suspect. We do have a situation, to put it bluntly, where NOW
accounts are way up and the rest of demand deposits are at least being
They're fairly level or down depending upon what
slightly squeezed.
And I continue to have a very large suspicion that
week one looks at.
there is some liquidity preference shift, at least temporarily, that
has been going on. The whole question, when you look at the M1 figure
Who has
is how long [its rapid growth] will last, as Steve suggested.
a comment?
I have a question, and I apologize because I will
MR. ROOS.
confess to an inability, Steve, to understand every word in your
But let me just ask a couple
presentation and the significance of it.
of fundamental questions that I think have a bearing on which of these
Let's assume that our primary long-run
alternatives we choose.
concern is inflation and our primary shorter-run concern is the effect
of whatever we do on the economy. How would alternative A,
alternative B, or alternative C impact output over the remainder of
this year and how would they impact the longer-range inflationary
How would you describe the three alternatives in terms of
situation?
Could you express that?
their impact on these two results?
[A policy stance] somewhere
MR. AXILROD. Well, I'll try.
between alternative A and alternative B is consistent in the short
run, we believe, with the staff economic projection. One can't be
very specific there, but if the choice is somewhere between
alternatives A and B, that essentially says that interest rates ought

3/29-30/82

to track down a little in the very short run.
Over the long run, as
you know, a recovery is projected, fueled by defense spending and the
impact on consumer spending of the tax cut at midyear. At the moment,
we think that could be done without any further rise in interest rates
into late next year because of people having accumulated liquidity.
Alternative C says that interest rates might go up, and
probably will go up, substantially; and even "B" says some rates may
have a little back-tracking in them. I believe "C" is quite
inconsistent with anything like the pattern of recovery [forecast]
because whatever initiative might be coming in terms of housing being
vaguely sustained and inventories not being a drag, I think the rise
in interest rates entailed by alternative C would turn those factors
less positive if not absolutely negative. Thus, we would not get an
environment consistent with economic recovery not to mention the
psychological impact of the greater doubts cast upon the safety and
soundness of thrift institutions under the circumstances.
That would
be my answer.
In a long-run sense, one might argue then that
alternative C is most consistent with getting inflation under control.
MR. ROOS.
Would "A" or "B" imply that we're going to seek to
get back within our [M1] range?
Would that imply relatively slow M1
growth for the last 6 months [of the year]?
Let me put it
differently:
Would that imply M1 growth that could be so slow as to
have a recessionary effect in the latter part of this year or an
abortive effect on the recovery early next year?
Or do you not
believe that there is a relationship between--?.
MR. AXILROD.
Oh, yes.
It depends on where [in the range]
the Committee wants to hit for the year.
As we tried to show in the
table toward the back of the Bluebook, adoption of alternative B, for
example, would be consistent with [M1] growth in the second half of
the year, on a June-to-December basis, of 3-1/2 to 5 percent,
depending on whether the Committee aims at the middle or the upper
part of the present range, letting alone any base shifting that might
be considered. Alternative A would be consistent with growth in the
2-3/4 to 4 percent range. Our assumption is that inflation rates will
be down and that there will be some cyclical expansion in velocity and
those growth rates might be generally consistent with a reasonable
rebound.
It may not be as large as we have there, but somewhere in
that magnitude.
MR. ROOS.
I guess I view this somewhat differently than some
of you. What disturbs me, Mr. Chairman, is that it is apparent from
past experience that when we have had a significant reduction in the
rate of money growth--let's say, growth for 6 months below the trend
rate prior to that 6-month period--inevitably it almost always
resulted in a negative growth situation. That is true if you look
back at [the trends in money growth that] preceded previous
recessions.
When we consider whether or not we would act quickly--to
use the expression we've used--to "pinch off" another bulge, I think
we have to look ahead and recognize that if any accommodation in
policy today were to necessitate an abrupt reduction in the rate of
money growth over the last half of this year in order to achieve our
targets, the probability is that this would bring us back into a
somewhat recessionary situation in the last quarter of this year or
the first quarter of next year. And I think that is an issue that

3/29-30/82

should be considered in whatever policy decisions this Committee makes
today.
MR. BLACK. Larry, are you suggesting that we pinch the April
bulge off so we can let it grow faster after that?
Well, if I had to opt for something, I would say
MR. ROOS.
that if there is an April bulge, it should be brought down almost as
quickly as possible in order to permit money to grow gradually over
the last part of the year. On the other hand, that could cause a
2- or 3-week--if one can define it [that closely]--upward movement of
the fed funds rate and other short-term interest rates and that does
It's a matter, though, of whether we bite the
frighten some people.
bullet now in order to position ourselves for growth in the aggregates
in the second half of the year or if we tolerate that, as we sometimes
have in the past, and then are forced to keep money growing at a very
In our analysis, that
low rate, as occurred for six months last year.
is what we did from May to October of last year, and it was a
contributing factor to our present weak economy. Now, this may be
And some
seeing it from a monetarist point of view; I assume it is.
of you may not share that view. But it worries us, looking into the
future, that we may be setting the stage for problems at the end of
this year and going into next year.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I just might clarify one
comment you made.
The nontransactions component of M2 was growing
very moderately in December, January, and February, after having grown
The latest data we have for the weeks of March
rapidly in November.
suggest a very rapid growth--something like 12 percent at an annual
rate in that month--and that is what brings the growth in the first
three months of this year up to around 9-1/2 percent. And we believe
you have to get it lower than that--not a lot lower, but maybe down to
But it's really [due to] the
the high 8 or low 9 percent area.
behavior in March.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.

That's not M2 but its nontransactions component?
Yes, but I was just clarifying the point.

MR. BLACK. Steve, do you feel pretty comfortable about your
projection of the aggregates for March at this point?
MR. AXILROD.
No. We have the preliminary data [only].
That
has a sharp drop of almost $3 billion in the week of March 24, as you
know. And we have assumed a rise of $1 billion in the next week,
which is a very reasonable assumption.
So, in that sense, I wouldn't
I think we're in
expect a large variation, but there will be some.
the right order of magnitude.
MR. BLACK.

You think you're as close as you usually are?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think fairly close.
3 percentage points at an annual rate.

It could vary 2 or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm somewhat uncomfortable with too
precise projections of what any of these numbers may mean and of the
The difference between "A"
interest rates that really may come up.
and "C" is $3 billion on M1 in June.
That's one week's fluctuation.

-36-

3/29-30/82

MR. AXILROD.

Well, the fluctuations average out, we hope.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm still having a little
trouble reconciling the assumption that the adjustment to nationwide
NOW accounts was completed in December with the fact that NOW accounts
have been growing at about a 50 percent annual rate in the first
quarter.
Somehow, those two things don't come together very well for
me. And the fact that most of this money bulge was in NOW accounts
raised a question in my mind about whether this bulge means the same
thing that a bulge in the old M1 would have meant.
This leads me to a
question for Steve.
It's a hypothetical question, but I'll ask it
anyway.
If you assume that we did not move to nationwide NOW accounts
last year and that the NOW accounts were still confined to New England
and New York, would you have expected, on the basis of what has
happened, a 10 percent rate of growth in old M1 in the first quarter?
Or is that too hypothetical to even--?
MR. AXILROD. First, we don't think the shift has been
completed; we think it has come down to modest proportions.
Second, I
assume--I guess contrary to your view, President Morris--that the
increase in NOW accounts that we had is part of or the same as the
related increase in savings accounts that occurred at the same time.
But in the absence of nationwide NOW accounts,
MR. MORRIS.
these deposits would have been in M2 but not in M1.
MR. AXILROD. That's right. And that makes the problem for
the interpretation of M1.
I'm not interpreting that growth of 50
percent as representing a shift from demand accounts to NOWs or a
shift from old savings to NOWs but an aspect of allocating more of
one's savings and possibly more of one's income to highly liquid
instruments, some of which are now in M1 where they didn't used to be
and others of which are in M2.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could have shifted into M1 if we didn't
have NOW accounts.
We never will know that it wouldn't have.
It
wouldn't have been a nice figure.
MR. AXILROD. There might have been some more in demand
deposits, that is for sure.
MS. TEETERS.
Didn't a survey of the banks indicate that
there was no major increase in the number of accounts?
MR. AXILROD. Well, the increase in accounts--I don't have
the number here--has been at the same rate since the beginning of the
year as it was from August to November, or something like that. And
that probably is a more rapid rate of the birth of accounts.
It's
much less than it was at the beginning of [last] year, but possibly
more rapid than you would expect if there had been no shifts. I think
there has probably been a residual shifting. But there would have
been no acceleration in this recent period, [based on] the figures we
get from the commercial banks on births of accounts.

3/29-30/82

-37-

But it does raise a fundamental question as to
MR. MORRIS.
whether transactions balances as we used to think of them actually
bulged in the first quarter or not.
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. As the Chairman says,
transactions accounts as we used to think of them probably would have
bulged somewhat because if you get an increase in liquidity
preference, some of it would have fallen into demand deposits. Also,
to the extent that reflects the fact that interest rates were going
down and one is going to wait until they go back up--the conventional
Keynesian sort of speculative motive--that would have fallen into
demand deposits.
So, I think demand deposits would have been a little
higher. But of course we have the old savings account vehicle in
there as well, which is probably distorted.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what all this demonstrates is that
these movements preoccupy us and they preoccupy the market. But we
know very little about them except that we generally accept it as a
change in liquidity preference. But we certainly can't identify that
very closely.
I hope some work is going on that.
MR. AXILROD.

Oh, it is.

Absolutely.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may be in better shape--I hope we are-by the time of the next meeting from various directions whether
through surveys or otherwise to maybe find out nothing. But if we
have satisfied ourselves that we tried a little harder to find out,
maybe we will find out something. Mr. Guffey.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My view of what we
should do in the period ahead is influenced in some measure by a point
that Larry Roos made with respect to what we do in the second half of
1982.
Let me start my comments by saying that from my perspective all
the doom and gloom that was presented around the table shouldn't be
unexpected. A year and a half or two years ago, we set upon a course
through monetary policy that would bring economic growth to zero or a
negative rate for some period of time and then to a very slow rate of
growth thereafter. And I think we've achieved that.
In a sense, we
ought to be pleased with what has been accomplished up to now.
The question then arises, for me at least:
What do we do in
the period ahead in view of economic activity that is zero or maybe
even negative for another quarter?
In looking ahead, there seems to
be a lot of potential for stimulus beyond what we would do at this
table, with the deficit and the government spending that is in train
for the third quarter of the calendar year, the last quarter of the
fiscal year. That's somewhere between $40 and $50 billion that has to
be raised in the market and will be spent. Together with the tax cut
that comes on July 1, it would seem to me that there is a good deal of
stimulus that will hit the economy starting in July or thereabouts and
continuing on through the last of the year. So, I'm not so concerned
about getting money growth at some higher level to be sure that we
don't kill the goose that has laid the golden egg. Therefore, I would
like to propose that we look at alternative B or something a bit less
than alternative B, which is designed primarily to ensure that as we
get into the last half when we get the stimulus that we will have some
growth, in the 4 to 5 percent range. And with the projection for the
deficit and the amount of money that must be raised by the government

3/29-30/82

-38-

in the markets, if we don't have some latitude for growth in the 4 or
5 or 6 percent range, we're going to have interest rates at very high
levels.
And I would hope that that would not occur.
Thus, someplace
between "B" and "C" for the second-quarter period would seem to be an
appropriate policy response.
With regard to all the talk about the April bulge, I don't
know what all that means, Steve, other than that it means uncertainty.
And as a result, I am attracted by your proposal--I believe it was a
proposal--that we use M2 as a direct informational variable to guide
policy during the upcoming period.
So, I would take a policy stance
someplace between "B" and "C" for the second quarter, but give some
weight to M2 as an informational guide as to what is happening in M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I want to come back to NOW accounts.
I
have basically the same concern that you expressed, Paul.
If you look
at the behavior of the narrow aggregate as it used to be defined, it
looks as if there's some squeeze on it.
If you look at it with NOW
accounts in it, it looks rather substantial. As a matter of fact, to
put an exact point on it, if you use the old definition of M1-currency and demand deposits--you will find that in the seven months
since the cyclical peak it has increased at an annual rate
of only
1-1/2 percent, which is the lowest growth rate of the last four
recessions.
On the other hand, if you include NOW accounts, you will find
that it has increased 7 percent at an annual rate in the seven months
since the cyclical peak, which is the fastest rate of the last four
recessions.
So the way one looks at this NOW account surge makes all
the difference in the world.
It may be that Frank is right.
I think
we probably don't have a very good handle on how many NOW accounts are
being opened.
And I rather despair, this far into the exercise, of
finding out much really useful information on the number of new
accounts.
If he is right, it's not going to come out again because
those are new accounts and the funds won't come out.
Or it may be
that Steve is right that [the bulge reflects] precautionary balances
but we don't know whether those precautionary balances are going to
come out or not.
But the fact of the matter is that over the last
several months we've had very large growth rates in the NOW account
component.
What they call OCDs now was still 20 percent or
thereabouts in March, Steve.
I think that ought to affect the way
that we look at this target rate simply because we don't know what is
going to happen to that component. We can't continue to squeeze what
amounts to corporate balances in order to accommodate the rise of NOW
accounts if they continue to rise at a very rapid rate in the period
ahead.
As I look at those paths, there's nothing at all exceptional
about "A."
It has 4-1/2 percent growth [in M1] in the 3 months from
March to June.
That 4-1/2 percent growth doesn't sound like a large
growth rate to me for M1 and that includes whatever disproportionate
increase was occurring in NOW accounts over that time.
It didn't seem
large in March; it was about 2 percent. February was, of course,
minus but that was an unwinding of the demand deposit explosion in
January which did in fact, as you expected, totally unwind in the
month of February.
Therefore, my view is that we ought to be prepared

3/29-30/82

to accept modest continuing growth in M1, and 4-1/2 percent in my view
is modest. And if, in fact, these NOW accounts don't come out--that
is, if we don't get some correction of this very large increase that
we had over the fall and winter--I don't think that will impact on the
second half of the year because my view of the matter is that we ought
to change our targets. We ought to accept a higher growth rate for
the year as a whole, which would have been entirely because of the
increase early in the year associated with this explosion in NOW
If they do come
accounts. That's if those balances don't come out.
I must say I see no reason to
out, then we can make room for it.
squeeze the economy harder and harder at this point in time, given the
conditions that we've been talking about and given the fact that we
are looking at something that has the cosmetic oddity of an explosion
in NOW accounts accounting for virtually all of the strength that we
have seen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would favor something very close to
"B."
It seems to me that it positions us reasonably well, given
uncertainties about the reversal of velocity in circulation. I would
recommend a slightly lower initial borrowing target. Instead of
$1-1/4 billion, I'd opt for something like $1.1 billion, first of all
because that's more likely to prevent the funds rate from going beyond
14 percent. And secondly, if there is a bulge in April--if M1 growth
is somewhat larger than the 9 percent--we can accommodate it more
easily. That would demonstrate a consistency in policy but at the
same time I think it's really better to try to keep rates from
So, I
exceeding 14 percent in the next couple of months if possible.
would not think the answer should be between "B" and "C," but pretty
much "B" or in that area, with a slightly easier initial borrowing
objective.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH.
I'm starting from the premise that we're not
going to get inflation down much more unless we can sustain some
So, I think some degree of pressure is consistent
degree of pressure.
I doubt that it's consistent with the
with a moderate rate of growth.
4.5 percent rate of growth of the GNP, not money supply, that the
staff has forecast for the second half. That is really quite a good
growth rate, and in that environment I think concerns about excessive
wage payments will yield very quickly to a feeling that now is the
time to catch up--that people have made sacrifices and they need to be
rewarded by compensatory higher increases. Now, a policy of about 3
percent [real GNP growth] should allow for possibly some reduction in
I think it carries some
It depends on productivity.
[un]employment.
But as we look at the
risks that a financial crisis might hit.
interest rate projections of the staff, they don't seem to indicate
that the problem of the thrifts will be greatly alleviated no matter
There's the danger also that the dollar may go higher.
what we do.
If we do damage to our exports, we may do damage to other countries
I think that danger is less because they
that reflects back on us.
are now beginning to realize that a high dollar is not so much of a
risk for them and that they can afford to reduce their interest rates.
Now if one accepts, as I do, aiming at something like 3 percent real
It lacks
growth, then I think alternative A really lacks credibility.
credibility, anyway, in terms of our [long-run] targets because it

3/29-30/82

-40-

means that we're going to be above our targets for the rest of the
year. And we're going to have that held against us continually.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Targets?

It doesn't say [that]

about M2.

MR. WALLICH. Target.
[M1] would nevertheless be the key
target that people will look at.
We will look at the M2 increasingly;
I agree that we want to put greater weight on M2 partly because of the
uncertainty surrounding M1.
If one thinks that the growth of M1 is
very low, one might conceptually add some of the money market mutual
funds to it--10 percent or 20 percent of which surely are transactions
balances--and that would produce a much better growth rate in M1.
Now, there is a danger of making the same mistake Mrs. Thatcher did:
that is, chasing an aggregate that is actually positively interest
rate sensitive. The harder you lean, the harder it blows; as sterling
M3 grows, the more they tighten. There is some danger, I think, in
our situation of falling for that with M1.
So, I would put somewhat
less emphasis on M1, but I wouldn't ignore it.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.
MR. PARTEE.

Do you mean M1 or M2?
M1, because M1 contains a saving component.
But M2 contains all these things.

MR. WALLICH. Well, it may have the same defect.
Either way,
it would lead me to somewhere between "B" and "C."
And I would not
like to see interest rates go up at this point, so I would hesitate to
go with a rise in borrowing. But something like the present level of
borrowing would seem to me appropriate and would move us toward
getting back into our target ranges over the year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. My concern is the reported understatement of M1 in
terms of our money funds, the sweep accounts, and all these other
phenomena.
If that were constant, I wouldn't be so concerned; but I
think it's a growing proportion, so we may be getting more growth
there than we recognize. With that in mind, I'm a little sympathetic
to the problem of getting beyond April and what we do from there.
I
would associate myself with the comments being made with respect to
"B" leaning a little toward "C."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have breakfast.

Well, we'll have Mr. Ford, and then we'll

MR. FORD.
I come out for the "B" solution that a number of
people have expressed. We also have gone through this exercise that
was just mentioned of making some allowance for a small fraction of
the money market funds being transaction oriented and other
adjustments like that. And it seems to indicate, if you give any
credence at all to that, that we are pumping in enough money to keep
the economy going. I hope the staff is right with all the Arima stuff
that if and when we see this pop in the numbers early in April it will
be corrected before we get back here at the end of May.
Well, I don't
know if you said May and June. Did I hear you right that you would
anticipate if we did get a big problem in early April that it would be
[unwound]?

3/29-30/82

It looks as if under all the alternatives that
MR. AXILROD.
6/10ths of it comes out in May and, depending on which of the
alternatives you pick, either all [the rest] comes out in June or
takes a little longer.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unfortunately, when we get back here in
May, I think we'll just have the April figures, basically.
MR. FORD. That's right; so we won't know. The timing is
In
bad.
I certainly hope you guys are right about that coming down.
the meantime, I would be willing to take the risk of going as high as
"B" or just a little below "B" in the hope that you're right even
though we are going to be in a very uneasy position the next time we
meet since we may have seen the high numbers you are worried about
I think
without having time to have seen whether or not it tails off.
some caution is in order and, therefore, I'd avoid going toward "A" so
that, with this neat little table you've cooked up on the bottom of
page 10 [of the Bluebook], we leave ourselves some room to breathe in
That's why I'd say "B" would be a good
case you're wrong about that.
place to be, with a borrowing assumption somewhere near where we are
now, around $1.4 or maybe $1.3 billion; you suggested $1-1/4 billion.
In sum, I believe alternative B and somewhere in the $1-1/4 to $1.4
billion area [on the borrowing assumption] would be reasonable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What was that last comment you made?

MR. FORD.
I'd go with the borrowing assumption associated
with "B" rather than lightening up on it as Tony suggested. The staff
suggested $1-1/4 billion, as I read the Bluebook, and currently I'm
told it is at $1.4 billion. Is that right?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
this week's objective.

Borrowing of $1.4 billion is implicit in

MR. FORD. The objective, yes.
So, I'd stay somewhere around
what is in alternative B rather than lightening up on the borrowing.
That's because, if we're worried about a big explosion in early April
and if that were accompanied by an explosion of borrowing, I'd say we
ought to hustle back toward the path.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't have a coffee break. Preston
Martin has been confirmed by the Senate this morning, and may even
have a signed commission. We'll go out and see where he is.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[We're in] a delicate stage here.
Preston
Martin, whom I introduced to all of you who have not known him--you
can talk to him after the meeting--has been confirmed by the Senate.
He has a commission signed. He is not sworn in, so he doesn't have to
vote but we thought he could observe this strange [unintelligible].
I told him we are in midstream. I guess we will swear him in
tomorrow. We are halfway through people expressing their opinions in
varying degrees of precision about what we should do in a very
imprecise art.
Mr. Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, given the market fears that the
deficit and the recession might push us off the target paths, I think

3/29-30/82

-42-

it would be a mistake to let M1 stay above the upper limit for any
extended period of time.
If such a result were to occur, I think it
would reignite inflationary expectations and maybe even more
importantly it would weaken long-term markets, which I believe would
be a pretty disastrous thing to have happen at this particular point.
So, I think it's very important that we react promptly to any outsized bulge in the money supply in April. January's bulge hasn't
washed out completely, and if we are not perceived as reacting pretty
promptly to a bulge in April, then doubts about our anti-inflationary
resolve will increase.
So, I would prefer "C;" I could go somewhat
toward "B" if there's an understanding that we're going to react
pretty promptly against any large sized bulge in April that is greater
than the short-term figures that we're looking at.
And I think it
would be desirable to widen the federal funds range; I would suggest
12 to 18 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I expressed earlier, in my
comments about where the economy is going, the doubts that I have in
mind as to the prospect for a recovery of the dimensions the staff is
forecasting.
I would say again that I think the state of the economy
is principally the consequence of monetary restraint--principally our
responsibility, not that of anybody else--although I would acknowledge
that fears of the deficit are contributing to the mood around the
country.
It's also our responsibility in the sense that we permitted
a rather substantial increase in interest rates right in the middle of
a very deep and deepening recession. I'm very much impressed with the
line of argument that Chuck has developed. We really have something
very, very unusual going on in the growth of M1 as it's currently
measured.
To put his point a different way:
It is true that one
could explain small or even moderate sized differences in growth rates
of the various elements of M1 on the basis of differences in income
and interest rate elasticities. But there's no way in the world that
one can explain the kind of divergences that we have seen between coin
and currency, demand deposits, and OCDs except by reference to
something very, very unusual happening to the demand for OCDs. And we
don't know what it is.
It may be a continuing shift into OCDs because
the process that began last year has not yet been completed.
It may
be a liquidity preference kind of development. We just don't know
what it is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject. There's just one
factor here that hasn't been mentioned, which I want to mention for
the sake of completeness.
I think it's probably largely liquidity
preference.
Part of it may just be a plain bad seasonal. We may not
know how to seasonally adjust the OCDs. And maybe the distribution is
really different than we think it is.
MR. GRAMLEY. I think the growth of M1 since last October
greatly overstated the extent to which monetary policy has been
stimulating the economy. Another factor that convinces me that this
is the case is looking at the prospective growth rates, fourth
quarter-to-first quarter, of the various monetary aggregates.
Although less disparate and less unusual than the fourth quarter-toFebruary numbers, they still show a progressive decline in the growth
rate as you get to the broader aggregates:
10.3 percent for M1, 9.6
percent for M2, and 8.6 percent for M3.

-43-

3/29-30/82

I don't think any alternative more restrictive than "A" is at
I think we ought to permit the economy to have the kind
all suitable.
of growth in narrow money balances and broader money balances that is
needed for some recovery in economic activity.
I'd remind you, in
looking at alternatives B and C, that the M2 figures in B and C are
And our experience in the
7-1/2 and 6-3/4 percent, [respectively].
past several years suggests as a first rough approximation that we are
going to get an increase in nominal GNP that is approximately in
proportion to the growth of M2.
The velocity of M2 has not been very
variable recently. And over the last three quarters of this year what
our staff is projecting is not a 7-1/2 or 6-3/4 percent increase in
nominal GNP, but a 9.4 percent increase, or somewhere around 9-1/2
percent.
So, I think alternative A is where we ought to go.
And I
think we ought to be very, very careful about trying to run too fast
to offset a bulge in April which may reflect nothing more than the
fact that we've changed our process of seasonal adjustment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What nominal GNP growth do you have for

the year?
MR. GRAMLEY.

Now, I was speaking of the last three quarters.

MR. KICHLINE. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter is about
7-1/4 percent.
The first quarter is zero.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

What is it on an annual average basis?

6-1/4 percent.

MR. ROOS.
Mr. Chairman, I'd just ask one question, because
I'm lost on this argument concerning the effect of NOW accounts. NOW
accounts are a part of M1, are they not?
And if they are, that money
is usable by the banks.
It's a different name for a different type of
transaction balance.
But why does that distort M1 growth if a certain
amount of M1 growth is a reflection of growing NOW accounts?
I lost
that.
If we are trying to figure total M1 as it is and are trying to
quantify it in terms of the effect of its growth on the economy, and
part of that M1 is reflective of NOW account growth, why does that
distort the usefulness of M1 as an aggregate?
MR. PARTEE.
It's a mixed account, Larry.
a savings account in it, too.
MR. ROOS.

It has elements of

Yes, but that money is there in the bank and--

MR. PARTEE.
Well, the money would have been there before but
it would have been in savings accounts.
MR. MORRIS.
Another answer to Larry's question is that the
present growth ranges for M1 are fundamentally based on the old M1.
That is, we wanted to show a progressively shrinking number. Now the
fact is that this new M1 is a different animal from the old M1.
We
are applying the old M1 yardstick to something that is different from
the old M1.
And that's the source of the problem.
MR. ROOS.
So, you are saying that our original targets were
set differently than they would have been had we known that M1 was

-44-

3/29-30/82

going to be expanded by the advent of these NOW accounts?
that's a-MR. MORRIS.

I think

Yes.

MR. WALLICH. M1 could also be influenced by other things
that change velocity.
We've been more often deceived by
underestimating velocity gains than overestimating them. And right
now we see ahead of us two sources of velocity gain. One is the
continued money fund expansion; the other is sweeps.
We can't be sure
we'll get that velocity, but I think it's less dangerous to bet on
that than to bet on the opposite.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as to the comments that
have been made, ranging from chasing aggregates to the NOW account
analysis, and did we have a bulge or didn't we:
What does it mean?
The comments about leaving some room in the second half of the year I
think are all relevant.
And in the context of this potential April
bulge problem, they take on a special significance.
But I think they
also relate in a fundamental way to an analytic problem that I don't
think we have quite dealt with yet. The manifestation of that
analytic problem is the simultaneous phenomenon of a lot of interest
rate variability and a lot of money supply variability. We sit here,
of course, and make judgments about reserve paths and we make
judgments about changing those reserve paths.
But implicit in both
setting the paths and changing the paths is this notion that it is
ultimately changes in interest rates that are the trigger variable
that sets in place the adjustments in portfolios that in turn
ultimately reflect themselves in altered rates of growth of the money
But I think we have to keep
supply. Now, that's all well and good.
some perspective on that.
The perspective that I think is important
is the recognition that those interest rate changes are only one of
the factors that determine the nature and pace of the portfolio
adjustments that ultimately do reflect themselves in the rate of
growth of the money supply.
In the context that we are operating now,
it seems to me almost self-evident that the nature of those
adjustments in response to any pattern of interest rate change has in
itself changed. Indeed to take the extreme--and this is relevant in
the context of this April bulge--if we are going to smooth out all
those bulges and all those short-run blips in the money supply, we
must be prepared to get to the point where the interest rate impact
that we can create by changing reserve paths is large enough to
outweigh all those other factors, ranging from seasonal adjustment
factors on up. Now, as it may impact on the observed behavior of the
money supply in the short run, we must be prepared at the extreme to
do that in a context in which, at least in my mind, the jury is out as
to what the nature of the interest elasticity of money demand is.
Indeed, I still find myself, at times at least, attracted to the
argument that in some sense we may be creating some of the variability
that we have seen in both money and interest rates by the nature of
our own activities.
I'm not persuaded of that, but at least I have to
leave my mind open to it.
In that analytical setting, I must say I would be a little
troubled with the prospect of aggressively chasing a bulge in the
money supply in April, even though that would prolong the amount of

3/29-30/82

-45-

time that we might be over the stated targets for the behavior of M1
for this year. Again, from an analytical point of view, I think Mr.
Axilrod's earlier comments are relevant here.
If that were to happen,
it does in some sense aggravate the problem. But at the same time, if
some of the speculation around the table about this NOW account
phenomenon is accurate, one could still reasonably expect that the NOW
account build-up would wind down later in the year and still would
leave plenty of room for the kind of expansion in the economy that is
implicit in the staff's forecast. The long and the short of it from
my point of view would be at this time to go slow indeed in terms of
this April bulge, should it materialize.
I hope it doesn't because if
it doesn't, we're obviously in pretty good shape in any event. As to
specifics, I would come out somewhere between "A" and "B."
And if we
got a bulge, and the net result were that we ended up with a quarter
that looked like "A," that wouldn't bother me all that much either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS.
I'm basically impressed by the fact that all of
our worst fears have been realized. We have nearly 9 percent
unemployment.
For every Federal Reserve District, the opening
sentence in the Redbook was about depression or not functioning well
or no sign of recovery. We have the thrifts going down. We have a
liquidity crisis in the thrift industry in at least half of the
Districts.
We have a massive reduction in credit ratings, as Emmett
mentioned, and a very high level of business failures. What more do
you want?
We have the economy essentially out flat. And under any of
these alternatives we don't get a great deal of recovery. At the end
of the [projection period] we get to maybe 75 percent capacity
utilization and still have well over 8 percent unemployment. As I
thought through it, so many of our other problems would be alleviated
if we just had some reduction in interest rates at this point.
It
wouldn't help all the thrifts, but it would certainly help some. And
going along with a 13-1/2 percent or 13-1/4 percent interest rate,
[with rates] rising sharply next year, is not my idea of how to put
this economy back to work.
Given the alternatives that we have and the wide division of
preferences here, I obviously want to associate myself with Governor
Partee and Governor Gramley and go for alternative A. And if it turns
out that that's not doing the job of recovery then, as I said last
time, we should raise our targets. We can do it a number of different
ways. The one modification I would make on "A" is that I would go for
a billion dollars of borrowing rather than $750 million because I
think the $750 million is too strong a signal that we are going for
ease. But I don't think 13 percent is an acceptable level of interest
rates for this stage of the [cycle].
I think we can do more.
I have
some reluctance to ease sharply because I don't think we are going to
get the correction in the federal deficit that we need to offset the
collision course that I anticipate next year if the deficit is not
changed. But, under normal circumstances and with a normal fiscal
policy, we should be a lot easier than we are now. And the fact that
fiscal policy is so overly expansionary is the only thing that keeps
me from urging an even greater relaxation in monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

3/29-30/82

MR. BOEHNE. There was a good bit of talk earlier about
jeopardizing the gains that our policy has brought so far, but the
other side of that is that we also must avoid becoming prisoners of
our own mechanical procedures. And I think the questions that Chuck
and Frank and others have raised about NOW accounts underscore that
fact.
We don't really have a good handle on M1 and whether we're
excessively tight or excessively easy. So, I think we ought not be
fearful about superimposing our judgments on these procedures.
I
would start out with alternative B, but I would accept errors in the
direction of alternative A.
I would find erring on the side of "C"
not to be acceptable.
I would put an M2 sentence in the directive and
use it primarily as an informational variable. I think we ought to
give more weight to M2 in this period.
But my main point is that we
ought to remain more flexible than usual in this period by weighing
the incoming information on the economy, the size of the [M1] bulge,
if any, and interest rates and so on, and not become overly wedded to
a set of policy specifications that we agree to today and that may
require more frequent consultations than usual.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I will admit to a significant bias caused by the
circumstances in the Middle Western District. And though I certainly
don't disagree in any way with the fundamentals of the staff economic
forecast, I am skeptical or merely unconvinced with regard to the
timing as well as the strength of the recovery. Also, it seems to me
that an awful lot of uncertainty about the composition of M1 and M2
has been expressed around the table. Meanwhile, we have an economy
that is operating under the very most difficult circumstances
possible.
While I'm not in any way suggesting a major change in what
we are doing or how we are doing it, I do think that we have to
provide at least a modest degree of relief, and it seems to me that
alternative A is a way of doing that.
I would be very strongly in
favor of alternative A as a way of trying to accommodate a possible
bulge that could occur in April, but particularly because M2 is in a
reasonable position within its range.
So, I would very much be in
favor of alternative A.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I listen to this dialogue
and debate, one thing seems to stand out loud and clear as far as many
of us are concerned. And I think Frank expressed it and others
followed:
That the observed money supply has really overstated the
effective money supply, given the fact that so much of the growth
since November has come in NOW accounts and in OCDs. Therefore, I
would join those who would not be in too much of a hurry to lean
against that kind of bulge.
In responding to the tactical question
that Steve posed to the Committee of how long we can continue to let
M1 run above its range for the year, if this bulge had come in regular
demand deposits, I'd be on the other side of the fence.
But since it
didn't and since the April bulge will be equally mysterious for a
while, I would not be in any hurry to lean too hard against it until
we have more solid information as to what we're really doing.
I
expressed myself pretty forcefully earlier on about the urgency of
getting real interest rates down. We can't do much about long rates.
That is going to have to be a solution that depends on some major
efforts to get the budget deficit down.
But I think we can do

3/29-30/82

-47-

something in the short run about short-term interest rates. And I'm
really quite concerned that in the immediate future, unless these
short rates come down, we are going to be inhibiting seriously if not
aborting a prospective recovery. Where all this nets out is that I
would lean somewhere between "A" and "B" in terms of what we ought to
be doing in the March-to-June period. And as others have suggested,
I'd place more emphasis on M2 in view of the low visibility that we
are going to have on the meaning of the M1 figures, particularly as we
move into April. As I say, I'd not be in too much of a hurry to get
back within that range until we get better information on what the
true effective money supply is, based on its changing behavior [and]
content.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, Governor Partee stated the
I don't have anything
case for alternative A very well, I thought.
really to add to that.
I would just like to remind everyone of what I
thought I heard Mr. Axilrod say and that is that alternatives C and B
assume that the NOW accounts or precautionary balances or whatever you
And if
want to call them are going to work themselves out very soon.
they don't, there is the likely implied risk of their being an
obstacle to the recovery.
I don't think we ought to take that risk.
We don't need to take that risk and I think we'd leave ourselves in a
position to be more flexible if we adopt alternative A.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, as I stated prior to the recess, the
decisions we make today have to be made in the context of what they
will mean for our policy in the second half of the year. In looking
at this, I don't think we can take lightly the targets that we have
announced.
I don't think we can assume glibly that we can arbitrarily
adjust those targets upward when we make our July adjustment without
risking a perception by market participants that our action was paving
the way toward further inflation. And if we made an upward adjustment
in order to bring relief to the economy, I would assume that it would
have exactly the opposite effect from what its proponents might be
seeking; an upward adjustment in our annual ranges would probably
bring an upward movement in interest rates rather than any reduction
in interest rates.
So, I would opt for something like alternative B because I
think it would position us probably as well as we could anticipate
under our present difficult circumstances.
But I feel just as
strongly as anyone could feel that if we temporize, that if we do have
an April bulge and if we say we don't want to be mechanistic [in
responding to it] or however we phrase it, we are going to get
ourselves in a position where we are going to have to live with
If we
unacceptably fast growth of M1 in the first part of the year.
look at it from day to day and from week to week, and if by doing so,
as we have occasionally in the past, we validate that increase and
don't take action to pinch it out and pinch it out awfully quickly, I
think we are going to have to jam on the brakes in the second half of
the year. And that is going to bring us a negative reaction in terms
of economic activity later this year or early next year and and we
will be accused of having precipitated another recession. Regardless
of how we want to view it and explain it--and nobody is more skillful

3/29-30/82

than you are, Mr. Chairman, in explaining the confusion that arises
out of NOW accounts or sweep accounts or financial innovations--the
people out there who set these interest rates have their eye on M1.
You can't fool them into saying, well, M1 has performed this way and
M2 has performed that way. That is what runs this locomotive and I
think we have to recognize those things.
And that's why I would
disagree with those who say that we shouldn't respond quickly if this
bulge occurs. I think it is incumbent upon us to react very quickly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee has an additional comment.

MR. PARTEE. Well, yes.
Larry, I don't regard that target
for this year as set in stone.
I think there are circumstances under
which we would be prepared to shift the target. What I said was that
if the NOW account dominance continues and we find ourselves, let's
say when we next meet, looking at a sustained 30 percent rate of
increase in NOW accounts or something like that, I think then would be
the time to consider whether or not to make an adjustment in the
targets for the year, based on an unexpected strength in NOW accounts
--not in M1 generally, but in the NOW account performance--because of
some kind of precautionary development. Now, I'm inclined to think
that [the bulge] is going to come out.
I can't understand why people
would keep so much money in their NOW accounts at 5 percent interest
when they can get substantially more in almost any alternative they
could go into.
Or, Paul may be right; the seasonal may be bad, but
that would bring it out too. That is, if the seasonal has been wrong
in the first part of the year, by definition it will be wrong later on
and we'll see a weakness in NOW accounts.
Or it could be that the
sweep accounts will develop so that we'll get an observed slowing in
Ml because sweeps are taking money out of the accounts.
I don't want
to prejudge at this point but I'd just say that if in fact NOW
accounts continue to perform as they have so far this year I, for one,
And I think the
certainly would be prepared to change the targets.
Chairman could very readily state why we changed the targets.
It
would not be because we eased but because of this unexpected
development with regard to NOW accounts. We have to have that kind of
freedom or we're slavishly stuck with numbers whose contents we don't
know.
One other comment I would like to make is that I rather agree
with the thought that we ought to use M2 more as an information
device. But I'm still very concerned that I don't have a good handle
on what information M2 is giving us.
It looks as if we are going to
have to pay more attention to M2 in the period ahead than in the
period past, and I would like to have the staff begin to develop a
rationale, which so far is totally lacking, for using an M2 guide.
[We need information on] what kind of cyclical attributes or interest
rates or elasticity attributes M2 would have.
I think we need that
before we can really rely on it, because we don't know what the
behavior of that number [means] in the short run.
MR. ROOS.
There have been studies and recent studies made-not that our studies are necessarily all inclusive or all conclusive-that show that M2 is a much inferior predictor of economic activity
than M1 and that we can't control it.
MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, there are people who maintain
just the opposite:
that M2 is a better predictor.
I think the last

3/29-30/82

-49-

study I was associated with showed that we got very little additional
information when we added the M2 components to M1.
And I don't know
that that has changed much.
But M1 is deteriorating, I think, and it
may be that we'll have to have a rationale for using M2.
There's no
reason that can't be developed.
After all, until he found that he
didn't have so much to hit the Federal Reserve over the head with,
Milton Friedman was for M2; it's only recently that he has changed to
M1.
Could I ask Steve to repeat his proposal on how
MS. TEETERS.
we might use M2?
I don't think I understood it.
MR. AXILROD. Well, what I was suggesting was that if M1 were
running strong relative to this 8 to 10 percent that we think makes a
rough allowance for the possibly peculiar behavior of April, the
Committee might consider in effect adjusting the reserve paths when
that is happening if M2 is not running strong--if it were running
right around the top of its range or something close to where it is
now. On the other hand, I also thought that because of the
uncertainties in April, if M1 were running weak, it might simply mean
that we did make a good seasonal adjustment; and you may not want to
react to that. Then, too, you could take into account the behavior of
M2 and, if M2 were also running weak, it might mean that the money
supply as a whole could be considered to be running weak relative to
your basic objectives.
I'm suggesting using M2 as kind of a fly wheel
to help judge the behavior of the whole group of aggregates, given the
uncertainty about M1 in April and May.
MS. TEETERS. As I read the first quarter, we had a
tremendous increase in M1 but the associated increase in M2 was not
all that strong. Is that correct?
MR. AXILROD. Well, it was a pretty good growth.
I may be
off slightly in my number, but it's something like 9-1/2 percent on a
quarterly average basis.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little high on a quarterly
average basis. If you look at it on a December-to-March basis, it's
just about at the top of the range.
MR. AXILROD.
It would be 9 percent from December to March;
it's running right at the top of the range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't heard from Mr. Boykin and Mr.
Morris in terms of specifics.
MR. BOYKIN.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I would favor alternative B.
Given the uncertainties and what we don't know about April and what we
don't know about the NOW accounts and many other things, alternative B
would seem to me to represent a prudent course that would at least
position us to address the situation as it becomes clarified without
an abrupt change in direction. With respect to the conversation about
a change in the ranges, it seems to me that any change should be a
very forthright decision as opposed to a de facto working in that
So, at this point in
direction, which I think alternative A might do.
time at least, alternative B seems to me the prudent place to be.

-50-

3/29-30/82

MR. MORRIS.
Well, Mr. Chairman, there was a time when we had
another man named Martin on this Committee.
MR. MARTIN.

A much better tennis player!

MR. MORRIS.
He used to talk about leaning against the wind.
If you want to know which way the wind is blowing right now, the wind
is clearly blowing the economy down.
Therefore, we ought to have a
policy which is conducive to a turnaround in the economy, even if we
only get a sluggish upturn as I expect.
So, for all the other reasons
that Lyle gave, I would support alternative A.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the wind policy.
MR. MORRIS.

I thought you were against a leaning in

I used to be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It depends upon how strong the winds are
blowing.
I guess we've been through everybody with a little variety
of opinion.
MR. PARTEE.

Except for you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Members of the Committee are nicely split
and nonmembers of the Committee are nicely split. We have an odd
number of nonmembers, so they're not quite split evenly; there is a
small majority.
Let me say just, in terms of changing the targets and how
temporary this NOW account phenomenon is and whether it's partly
seasonal, that I have a little suspicion that we're not going to know
by the next meeting, unfortunately. My suspicion is that if it is
partly seasonal, we ought to begin learning about it rapidly after
April. That's because it may be partly a tax phenomenon:
Individuals
build up their balances--and they always did, we just didn't know it
before--as we move into April.
But the timing of the next meeting is
going to give us maybe one week's clue to that, I guess, the way it
works out.
We are not going to have much of a track record, but we
will have to live with that.
MR. PARTEE. Well, we wouldn't have to
fact until the July meeting.

[change the ranges]

in

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends.
We can [change the
ranges] any time. But by July we certainly ought to have a handle on
that.
We may not know all the answers; we may not know why; but we
will have more suspicions and we will have some results of whatever
analytic or survey work we do.
Just in terms of the economy, I share the view that was going
around earlier. The staff has [projected] a pretty good recovery,
considering the circumstances and considering that we don't want to
lose the progress on inflation. But there are a lot of doubts that
tend to register on the low side rather than on the high side.
If we
got that much, I wouldn't be unhappy.
I don't think we are in a
position where it would be wise to try to manipulate interest rates
overtly downward.
I'd love to see them come down and stay down.
I

3/29-30/82

-51-

wouldn't love to see them come down for a month and then have to go up
again.
That would kill us for a variety of reasons, I think.
I think what
Anyhow, we have this great variety of opinion.
is of operational significance before we meet again is largely going
to be how to handle this April situation. We don't know in which
We have a great split in opinion on the
direction it's going to go.
I must say I reconcile that in my mind very nicely, but I
Committee.
Given all the problems we
don't know whether the rest of you do.
have, I think it may make more sense in the short run--or even in the
long-run period given the doubts about what M1 means in some cases--in
For M2 over
effect to watch pretty closely what is happening to M2.
the course of the year as a whole we've been anticipating growth of
something between 8 and 9 percent; I suppose slightly below 8 percent
is the staff's forecast for the year as a whole. Nobody knows for
sure whether it's reasonable analytically or not, but with the kind of
nominal GNP that results from a quite reasonable economic forecast I
don't think it's a bad forecast in terms of our objectives and where
And M2 in the 8 to 9 percent area seems to be [viable]
we want to go.
against recent experience. Maybe recent experience is no good, but in
the last 3 years M2 has been within 1 percent of that and we have
And if it
never had a decrease in velocity of more than 1 percent.
came out in the 8 or 9 percent area, it would seem to allow enough for
this forecast, if nothing else went wrong. Given all the
uncertainties in M1, and given the doubts in the economy, I would not
feel comfortable about tightening up in effect to chase too hard at an
I don't know whether
April M1 figure if M2 is also running low.
that's going to be the case; I have no reason to believe that it will
be the case, but I would feel very uncomfortable about "tightening,"
So, I
in the common parlance, with a low M2 figure at the same time.
come out close to the A alternative so far as M2 is concerned. Let's
say around 8 percent.
I'm not sure I'd want to push on M1; it's very
doubtful where it's going to go, but I don't know that we have to set
I don't even know what it means in
out for a 4-1/2 percent M1 figure.
the context of dealing with it before the next meeting if we are going
to allow for more [growth] than that in April because we will come
back by the time we know April and then re-decide on the basis of what
we know about April. But the more orderly thing for M1 somehow does
seem to me to be something like "B," which on the face of it brings us
back about where we want to be, if you take the numbers literally. By
June or July it follows what the midpoint of the range would have been
if we had started from the base of last year's target rather than from
It doesn't say we can't raise it if all the
where we did start.
But I feel a little more
analysis shows [the need for] that.
comfortable with something on the lower side for M1, particularly if
M1 produces a little miracle for us and comes out lower than we now
expect in April and early May.
MR. PARTEE. Well, as you say, as a practical matter, it's
"B" has April at 9.1 percent and
almost entirely where we set April.
I don't care whether it is put at 9 or-"A" has it at 9.9 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether either of those is
right.
It seems a little strange, putting all our money on somebody's
It
judgmental correction of a seasonal adjustment which is doubtful.
But I think we have to reach some
is piling doubts on doubts.
judgment as to how we want to accommodate or not accommodate, how
rapidly we respond to an increase, and where we set the borrowing in

3/29-30/82

-52-

the first place.
If we set the path consistent with a lower level of
borrowing than we now have, which is what--$1-1/4 billion roughly?
MR. AXILROD.
borrowing.

The current week's path implies $1.4 billion in

MR. STERNLIGHT.
like $1-1/4 billion.

The last several weeks would average more

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me finish.
If we [set the
borrowing level] below that, theoretically we produce a little easing.
If the April bulge is [large] enough, we might have to respond to some
degree; it would give us a little more room for responding without
being any higher than we would have been in the first place.
I don't
know whether that is a good idea or a bad idea. But I can imagine
that in a difficult circumstance it might give us a little leeway
without sending things through the roof.
If we have to respond to
some degree, maybe it does make some sense to start out at $1.1 or
I guess that's what I would
$1.2 billion or something in that area.
propose and we'll see what happens.
I'd leave the federal funds rate
range where it is.
I'm not sure at this time that I would want to
announce a higher fed funds rate range.
If anything, I'd rather
announce a lower one, but I-MS. TEETERS.

Where is it now--11 to 18 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 12 to 16 percent happens to be where
it is now.
[Not changing it] in some sense just doesn't raise a
question.
I surely would feel uncomfortable about raising it.
MR. PARTEE. Then why don't we widen that range again to
where we like it and make it 11 to 16 percent?
MS. TEETERS.

With a billion dollars of borrowing.

MR. PARTEE. A lot of Committee members would like a wider
fed funds range and this seems an ideal time to do it, consistent with
those desires, Mr. Chairman.
MR. BLACK.

Widen it at both ends?

MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not among those who are enamored of an
enormously wide range, but I wouldn't object to that. Well, let me
throw something like this out on the table:
Something around 8
percent for M2; something close to, say, "B" for M1; and 12 to 16
percent for the funds rate range--I don't feel strongly about 11 to 16
percent; and for borrowing let's say $1.1 billion, just to pick a
figure out, to start the path off. The operational question is
whether we build into the path some allowance for a bulge in April.
If we do and it doesn't appear, then we get the borrowings dropping
pretty fast.
MR. AXILROD.
Chairman.

That's what I was going to mention, Mr.

3/29-30/82

-53-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I guess we can make it asymmetrical, if we

want to.
MR. AXILROD. Well, we could go whichever way the Committee
wants.
What we have proposed is given in the Bluebook, which would be
allowing for something like 8 or 9 percent [M1 growth] in April to
start with and zero in May. But if the first week or two in April
seems weak rather than strong [relative to] the 8 or 9 percent, there
would be no reason--if it were consistent with the Committee's view-not to reconstruct the path to where it would allow for 3 or 4 percent
[growth] each month, as we normally would do, absent some doubts about
April itself. But that would depend on getting some evidence in the
early part of April.
MS. TEETERS.
Steve, when does that bulge come?
Does it
usually come in the first weeks of April or a little early?
MR. AXILROD. Well, last year in the first week of April, M1
seasonally adjusted rose $5.4 billion: unadjusted it rose $17 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can see the difficulty of this
business just in that figure. We had a $17 billion increase in the
money supply in one week last April that came out to $5-1/2 billion or
whatever seasonally adjusted.
They sit there and guess.
Well, maybe
this week it will be $18 billion. Who knows when you get that big a
figure?
MR. AXILROD.

This year we've allowed--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they have made a good estimate if it
is anywhere between $5 and $20 billion, I suppose.
But that's going
to produce all the difference between a minus and a big plus number in
the seasonally adjusted figures.
MS. TEETERS. The point I want to get at is that we would
know early if it is going to occur.
It probably would occur early in
the month of April; that is traditionally when it has happened.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I am not sure.

Is that right?

MR. AXILROD.
The earlier it occurs, the bigger the odds are
on the month being high. Last year it occurred early.
In 1979 the
increase unadjusted was pretty large; the first week had the biggest
increase but the last 3 weeks had increases, unadjusted, of about 50
percent.
So, it was fairly evenly spread in 1979, looking at the
unadjusted number. And in 1978 it was more in the first week.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A lot of it does depend on how the tax
checks are handled and that would be after the 15th. If they sit on
them for a while, then we get a big increase after the 15th.
MR. AXILROD. The market is sitting around worried that the
first week will be strong, largely because they have looked at last
year. And, as I say, we are projecting a big increase, $3.2 billion
seasonally adjusted.
If that didn't develop, and the week of the 14th
weren't strong, we would get a preliminary view of that in mid-April.
Then one would tend to think that it would be better [to construct
the] path on a more even basis, consistent with whatever view the

3/29-30/82

Committee has as to what it wants for the 2 months.
a week or two to know about that.

But it would take

MR. BOEHNE. That means it would be mid to late April before
we'd really get a handle on it.
MR. AXILROD.
flexibility to--

Yes, if the Committee wants to give some

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we have now deals with hopes, but we
have a minus coming up this week. We expect--we have a string of
"ifs" here--if it held the following week, we would have room for some
increase in the first week in April without making April high.
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

But who knows whether any of it will hold?

MR. PARTEE. As you suggest this, would you visualize that we
would say in the directive that we're seeking growth in M1 at a 3
percent rate from March to June?
No, it can't be; that's too low.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That isn't very low compared to our

targets.
MR. PARTEE.
It's well below, I tell you. As we say, we are
prepared to take 5 percent or so when we are running in a current
state well below what we say our target ranges are. I'm prepared to
give up.
I'm prepared to concede the winter as being a NOW account
surge if it doesn't go away.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if it doesn't go away.
know that it is going away?

But how do we

MR. PARTEE. But if it goes away, we ought to be running a
steady state that is closer to our target ranges.
MR. FORD.

Yes, but Chuck--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but if we also say M2 around 8
percent and the staff builds that operationally into the path, coming
out with a path that's somewhere between "A" and "B" is not as
restrictive as the 3 percent.
MR. PARTEE.

But M2 has very little effect on the path.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Well,

[unintelligible]

deal more.

MR. GRAMLEY.
Is the path that we are building one that says
a 9 percent increase in M1 in April and a 10 percent increase in M2?
If so, I'm not worried too much about the words.
MR. PARTEE.
MR.
argument.
I
assumes that
and I am not

Yes, I would buy that.

GRAMLEY.
I am worried about the substance of your
think 3 percent as a target for the second quarter
we are going to get a reversal of this build-up in OCDs,
at all sure that that is going to take place. And I

3/29-30/82

-55-

don't want policy to follow a course that is going to push up interest
On the other hand, if we have a path
rates if that doesn't happen.
based on a 9 or 9.1 percent increase or thereabouts for M1 in April
and a 10 percent increase in M2, then we can come back next time and
look at it again.
Maybe that-MR. PARTEE. Yes, I agree. But I thought we were wavering on
what we were going to build into the path.
MR. GRAMLEY.

Yes, that's what I wanted to be sure of.

MS. TEETERS. Are 3 percent for M1 and 8-1/4 percent for M2
The 3 percent M1 [in the Bluebook alternatives] has 7-1/2
compatible?
percent M2.
That
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's what we have in there.
assumes a decline in growth in the nontransactions component of
something more like 9 percent.
That is a drop from the rate of growth
If that doesn't happen, then I'd say
we have in the first quarter.
So, again, it depends on how much scope
it's more like alternative A.
the Committee, in its own judgment, wants to leave.
MR. GRAMLEY. The thing that I think we need to worry about
In putting more
now is the phenomenon that happened last summer.
attention on M2, I think we let more constraint develop on the economy
ex post than we wanted. And Governor Partee was reminding us over and
over again that we were going to do that.
I wish I had listened to
him then.
I think that's something that we have to be careful about
in April.
If the M1 number happens to come in at 3 percent, let's
say, one could easily interpret that as no bulge. But in fact if the
economy was weakening and the signals of economic weakness were
gathering [momentum], then we would be sitting back and accepting 3
percent and it would just be the wrong thing to do.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. GRAMLEY.
MR. PARTEE.

Then we'd have a quite weak May and June.
Yes.
That's right.

MR. CORRIGAN. But if the NOW accounts were starting to
unwind, 3 percent wouldn't be the wrong thing to do.
MR. PARTEE.

That's right.

MR. GRAMLEY.
If that were happening and if we had a fairly
significant continuing growth of currency and demand deposits and M2
and the OCD phenomenon began to unwind, then I wouldn't worry too much
about it, particularly if it were not accompanied by further signs of
developing economic weakness.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know the meaning of that April
phenomenon. We'd have a very strange result if M1 in April were going
up by 9 percent and M2 were going up quite a lot and we got an easing
market.
MR. GRAMLEY.
instead of all this?

Can we take a vote just to go right on to May

-56-

3/29-30/82

MR. BLACK.

Let's stick to the one we all can agree on!

MR. FORD.
I like the combination that you cooked up here,
Paul, if I understand it correctly.
You are saying to the Desk, as I
would interpret it, to anticipate unusual growth in M1 and don't get
excited about it unless both M1 and M2 get completely blown away, with
a very high M2 growth rate and an M1 that was going over the estimate
that's built in.
The Committee would be saying, as I understand you,
start to close in on the path and come back to the path fairly rapidly
only under those conditions--if both M1 and M2 were being blown away.
On the other hand, also resist, if it turns out that the professors
and Arima are right, and you find that early in April the money supply
is fading away on us.
Don't necessarily just sit by with that either
and let us get a collapse.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, wait a minute.
I think I'm saying
the first half of what you are saying.
The second half is-MR. FORD.

You wouldn't mind?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn't mind M1 coming in lower than
that.
I tell you, I'd be delighted if M1 came in lower than 9
percent.
And if M2 were coming in around 8 percent, that would be
fine.
I wouldn't react to that all that quickly.
I would lower that
bulge path because the bulge didn't take place. And then if we get
weakness coming into May, that's the time to ease.
MR. BLACK. I think we ought to consider leaving that
sentence in the directive that we debated about and put in last time,
to implement that thought you just expressed, Mr. Chairman. We said
in effect that some slowing in the rate of M1 growth, associated with
reduced pressure in the money market, would be okay.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, by coincidence or otherwise, I wrote
that sentence in myself.
That is what I am saying. Just to clarify
the issue:
Let's cite this "A" and "B" combination for the quarterly
target and say $1.1 billion in borrowing, which raises the path from
where we now have it.
It says, okay, tentatively construct the path,
believing in a bulge in April.
If the bulge appears, we have no
tightening of that general magnitude.
If the bulge does not appear
and M2 growth is running reasonably high, we change the path to make
it a more even path.
If M2 is running weak, we may keep the path up
there.
MR. FORD.
And do you go for this widening of the funds rate
band to 11 to 16 percent?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ipsy-pipsy, so far as I'm concerned.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I'm a little worried about the market
perception when we narrow or widen the range--I'm not talking about
the absolute levels now at all--because the market attributes much
more significance to our narrowing or widening that range than we do.
We don't really give it much significance. But market observers don't
understand why we would be narrowing or widening the range unless it's
of some importance to us.
I have heard recently views that we are
keeping the fed funds rate within a very narrow range in terms of
actually looking at the market behavior.
So, I don't particularly

-57-

3/29-30/82

care, except that if we want to de-emphasize the constraints that are
implied by the range, we ought to try, if at all possible, not to keep
shifting back and forth between a narrow range and a wider range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on balance, I agree with that
argument. My own attitude would be that if the federal funds rate
began going below 12 percent, consistent with everything we have said,
If
I would be in favor of a two-second consultation or none at all.
it began going up in the 16 percent area, I'd be extremely worried.
MR. GUFFEY. First of all, let me say that I'm attracted by
your proposal with respect to the aggregates and the implications for
constructing the path. But it does bother me a bit that you are
proposing to drop the borrowing level from about $1-1/4 to $1.1
Actually, this week the [target] level is $1.4 billion. My
billion.
concern stems from-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

How is it running this week, by the way?
It's averaging $1.2 billion so far this

week.
MR. GUFFEY.

But the path has $1.4 billion.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

But $1.4 billion is--

MR. GUFFEY. And it has been greater than that over the
intermeeting period, hasn't it?
Over the last several weeks borrowings
MR. STERNLIGHT.
averaged about $1-1/4 billion; in the preceding several weeks it was
more like $1-1/2 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Where is the funds rate today?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
Funds today are at about 15-1/4 to 15-3/8
I think the rate is being affected by these pre end-ofpercent.
quarter statement date pressures.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, my concern about dropping the borrowing
level at this particular time is the perception in the markets; they
are expecting a big bulge in April. Whether they are right or not is
all speculation, but the fact of the matter is it will be visible very
soon after this meeting that the borrowing level has dropped from the
prior week's level. And it would not be uncommon if [market
participants] arrived at the conclusion that we had met and that we
had eased in the view of a very large bulge in the money supply in
prospect. As a result, I like very much your proposal for the
aggregates, but I'd rather have the borrowing level remain about where
it is at the present time until we see some additional developments.
The path should be constructed on about $1-1/2 billion of borrowings.
I don't know
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have a point.
Mr. Solomon characterized our
whether I'd worry about it or not.
proper attitude earlier as alert but relaxed, or relaxed but alert.
Maybe it would take some of the steam out of all this worry about
April if they felt we were indeed a little relaxed. I don't know.

3/29-30/82

MR. GUFFEY.

-58-

But if you give--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I suspect the difference is so small that
they won't notice it much because they haven't seen $1.4 billion
recently.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Also, there is a special situation in
the market whereby in the last few weeks the fed funds rate has come
in almost consistently higher than one would expect from the level of
borrowing.
So, therefore, probably with $1.1 billion we will get
about 14 percent with today's conditions.
I don't think the market
would see that as terribly significant. The funds rate has been
averaging about 14-1/2 percent, fluctuating between 14-1/4 and 14-3/4
percent roughly, in the last few weeks with that borrowing level of
$1-1/4 billion.
So, I don't think we would see that much movement in
the fed funds rate.
MR. BLACK.
very well.

I share Roger's concern.

I think he expressed it

MR. FORD.
Well, you said $1.1 or $1.2 billion.
put it at $1.2 billion and everybody might be happy?
MR. GRAMLEY.

Why don't we

I strongly would prefer $1.1 billion.

MS. TEETERS. We can afford some easing.
You know, we are
really at the bottom of the recession.
I don't see why you are so
enamored of keeping interest rates in the 13 to 15 percent range. And
it certainly won't help the international situation. We are really
ruining ourselves with the rising value of the dollar as far as our
exports are concerned. We could afford some narrowing of those
differentials in the international market.
MR. BLACK. Nancy, my concern is not with the short-term
rates, but what I think it might do to the long-term rates.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. BLACK.
MS. TEETERS.

The long-term rates haven't moved at all.
They're moving down to some extent.
There are still 17 percent rates on mortgages.

MR. BLACK. They're higher than I want to see them, and I
surely would like to see them come down.
But if we relax much, we may
see them go the other way and that would be really bad at this point.
MR. PARTEE.
I can't really imagine, Bob, whether we choose
$1.1 or $1.2 or $1-1/4 billion for the initial borrowing level, that
it is going to affect long-term interest rates.
MR. BLACK.

Well, I think a lot of that is psychological,

Chuck.
MR. PARTEE.
They won't even know what we have decided here
until the middle of May and then it will all be history.

in at.

MR. BLACK. Well, they will know what the figures are coming
Last week borrowing was $1.3 billion, and if we come in

-59-

3/29-30/82

anywhere near $1.1 billion, in view of their expectation that we will
have a bulge in April, I think that will be interpreted as Roger
expressed it.
I may be wrong; it's just my feeling.
I think we
really have them believing us now, and we have to appear to be moving
against that bulge if it's greater than the market is expecting it to
be.
I'm hoping and rather expect that it's not going to be as big as
the market thinks and that we might even have short-term rates coming
down. I hope that happens, but-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I wouldn't particularly like to
see happen--but we can't play it all that finely--is to have the
market rally a little and the short-term rates go down and that lasts
three weeks and then goes back the other way.
MR. BLACK. Yes, I wouldn't want to force it down; but if
that falls out as a result of the aggregates being within what I would
consider a reasonable range, I would certainly welcome that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't get a bulge in April, I
suspect we will get a rally in the market regardless.
MR. BLACK.

Well, I think so too.

And I hope that's what

happens.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

Why don't we flip a coin?

MR. BOEHNE. Well, on the argument between $1.1, $1.2, $1.3,
and $1.4 billion, if you go back over the last few weeks, adjustment
borrowing in billions has been $1.1, $.99, $.97, [$1.2], and the last
week in February it was $1.5.
I didn't see the market falling out of
bed one way or the other.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're looking at different figures. I
get confused by that, too.
You are looking at pure adjustment
borrowing. Apparently the figure we use is adjustment borrowing plus
seasonal borrowing.
MR. BLACK.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

So, you have to add $150 million or so.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the main point about variability
in the level is still there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your point is right.
But we are a
little lower relative to the recent average than those figures say.
I
don't think [the difference] is big enough to be terribly noticeable.
MS. TEETERS.
But the point is that interest rates also have
been a full percentage point higher than we anticipated with the level
So, there's a tighter market
of borrowing over this period of time.
with that level of borrowing than we thought there was going to be.
MR. BLACK. But we knew we were guessing at what the rates
would be at the time we projected that.

3/29-30/82

MR. PARTEE. What are the borrowing numbers?
Now I'm totally
confused.
What has been the recent record of borrowing that we are
associating this beginning number with?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I believe the last several weeks averaged
about $1.26 billion or something like that.
MR. AXILROD. In the eight-week intermeeting period, the
average was $1.4 billion. But the average has been a little lower in
March. March 3rd was $1278 million; March 10, $1141 million; March
17th, $1163 million; and March 24th, $1343 million.
MR. BALLES.
extended borrowing?

Steve, that's just the grand total excluding the

MR. AXILROD.

$1.2

Yes.

MR. BALLES.

Okay.

MR. PARTEE.

Well, that $1-1/4 billion sounds fine.

MR. CORRIGAN.
billion.

So,

in those four weeks it averages to about

MR. AXILROD. That's right.
when the borrowings were rising.

So, the aggregates strengthened

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the difference between $1.1 billion
and $1.2 billion is not going to make or break me.
I think the lower
we go the more quickly we may have to snug up a little if April comes
in high.
So, you play one of those off against the other.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
billion if April comes in high.

We have a little more room with $1.1

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can argue that we'd have a little more
room [to tighten], that's right.
We have to show a little more
motion--

MR. WALLICH.
It may be giving a false signal; the rate may
go down first and then [go back up].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is what it comes down
to.
We have to balance a small chance of a false signal against
buying ourselves a little more flexibility by moving [borrowing] up
again.
It is not driving things through the ceiling. I'm not dying
to give false signals, and that is a consideration if [the bulge] is
going to be temporary. We have more room for flexibility and false
signals; [we'll have] real signals once they get that budget in place.
MR. FORD.

Let's not hold our breath waiting for that!

MR. BOEHNE. Well, what difference would it make in the funds
rate, Steve, with a borrowing range from $1.1 to $1.2 billion?
MR. AXILROD. Well, on our rule of thumb, either 20 or 25
basis points, and that's [likely to be] wrong.

3/29-30/82

-61-

MR. BOEHNE. We're getting carried away with our own
inability to be precise here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's not going to make that much
difference. We're playing at the margin.
MR. BLACK.

Well, the big difference is in expectations, I

think.
MS. TEETERS.
MR. FORD.

What is your proposal again?

Make a proposal, Mr. Chairman.

MR. CORRIGAN.
don't get it.

It depends on whether we get the bulge or we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The proposal is to put in around 8 percent
[for M2] and around 3 percent [for M1]--either "around" or "about,"
one of these terms of art that we use--for the quarter as a whole.
And I'd slightly prefer just staying with the 12 to 16 percent funds
rate range because that's where we are and recently we have been about
in the middle of it, roughly.
I'd make one wording change.
I'd say
"probability" instead of "possibility" in this sentence that's
proposed:
"The Committee also noted that deviations from these
targets should be evaluated in the light of the probability..."
That
suggests a little more weight on the M2 number.
I also thought of
putting in some sentence, as Bob Black suggested, to the effect that a
shortfall of M1 growth, consistent with progress toward the upper part
of the range for the year as a whole, would be acceptable in a context
of appreciably reduced pressures in the money market, which is very
similar to what we had last time.
Operationally, what I am saying is
that we tentatively allow for some bulge in April in making the
target.
In other words, the borrowing would not go up with an [M1]
increase in April of a magnitude of 9 percent at an annual rate, which
I guess is what Steve is suggesting.
I gulp a little at something
that big, but that's what he said.
I'll take it.
That's what we
would do if M2 in fact is somewhere around this number that we are
talking about.
MR. GRAMLEY.
But the number we use for M2 for April is not
the quarterly average, presumably.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well,

I was thinking of that.

MR. GRAMLEY.
If we get a bulge in M1, then presumably M2 is
going to be higher also, since M1 is a big component of M2.
In fact,
what is consistent with 9 percent in M1 is about the same or a little
bigger M2 growth, is it not?
MR. AXILROD.
If you took the alternative A path, we have
9-1/2 percent for M2 in April.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
I think Lyle has a good point that we
wouldn't want to apply the M2 directive factor, so to speak, on a
quarterly basis.
We would have to see a stronger growth in April in
M2 before we clamped down. And if we're targeting a 9 percent
increase in the nonborrowed reserve path for April--

3/29-30/82

-62-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, all else being equal, that
is right.
I don't know what it amounts to quantitatively when M1 is
$400 billion and [its growth] is 6 percentage points high relative to
the quarterly target, 6 percent or 1/4 of the whole, less than 1/4,
1/5 of the whole, 6 percent at an annual rate.
I don't know what that
amounts to.
What is 6 percent of 20 percent?
I guess it's about 1
percent.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, it's probably about 1-1/4 percent, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will moderate my comment by saying for
the month of April "around 9 percent" is set for M2; it begins to get
me a little nervous, but I guess that's all right.
Now, I lost the
context of where I was.
We have that path for M1; if [its growth]
just for the month [of April] is around 9 percent, we hold to it.
If
it's above that, the suggestion is that the borrowing level would go
up.
If it is below that, and M2 is also around--I guess in this case
someplace between 8 and 9 percent, depending upon how much M1 is
below--we might not ease up on those borrowings very much at all until
we saw M2 coming in low too, so long as M1 were around the 3 or 4
percent area.
If M2 began actually going minus, we would be easing
up; or even if it went below 3 percent, we would be easing up.
MR. CORRIGAN. But in that case, doesn't that mean that the
path effectively would have to be redrawn?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, depending upon what M2 is doing we'd
have to be redrawing the path.
If M2 were weak and M1 were coming in
at 9 percent or maybe even higher, we would accommodate it.
MS. TEETERS.
Will we have enough information to know what M2
is doing during the month?
MR. AXILROD.

Well, we do now get weekly M2 data.

MS. TEETERS.

We do?

MR. AXILROD. We have shifted over to that through the
Monetary Control Act data, so we have-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By the middle of the month or a little
after the middle of the month we should begin getting an idea.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you mean that if somebody filed a
Freedom of Information Act request, you'd have to give [the data] to
them?
You prepare a weekly M2?
MR. CORRIGAN.

Not if we are quiet!

MR. AXILROD. We certainly don't do it in anything except a
tentative experimental way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the record we do not prepare a weekly
M2 number, but we get some hints as to where it might be in terms of
trends.
We do not have a weekly M2 number.
MR. AXILROD.

Not seasonally adjusted.

-63-

3/29-30/82

MR. GRAMLEY. There's a danger, I think, in this operational
prescription, and that is that if the economy weakens and the demand
for M1 weakens correspondingly, so long as M1 growth is above 3
percent, we would proceed to adjust the path downward. But we would
keep initial borrowing where it is and interest rates where they are.
If the source of this weakness in M1 is a weakening economy, we have
big problems.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
little in M2?

Well, wouldn't you expect to see that a

I don't know. It seems to me
MR. GRAMLEY. In one month?
that the shifts in demand for M2 are sufficient so that it may or may
not.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what we're going to
know from a weakening in M1, either, for a couple of weeks.
I would have thought that we would want to look
MR. PARTEE.
more at what NOW accounts were doing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd certainly look at that within
But I suspect this early part of April is going to
that total, too.
be so mixed up that we won't be able to make anything out of it.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope. though, if we saw an M1 number
that was coming in around 3 percent, that we would want to have a
consultation to make sure that we are following procedures that make
sense in light of what we see going on in the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, around 3 percent is a flex point in
Unless M2 looked pretty strong, we
terms of this prescription I had.
If M2
probably would begin easing, just in terms of what I said.
looked strong, we would not [ease], taking literally what I said.
MS. TEETERS.
higher level of Ml?

If M2 comes in weak, would you tolerate a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. RICE.
point, if

Yes.

Higher than what?
Like 5 or 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, higher than 9 percent even at some
I think that's what we are saying.
[M2] is weak enough.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

That's giving a lot of flexibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It comes into that application of judgment
that somebody made a plea for.
I assume this all contemplates a consultation
MR. GUFFEY.
before the paths would be redrawn, based upon the data that you have
just described.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't think so, necessarily.
there were any confusion about it, we might well do it.

But if

3/29-30/82

MR. GUFFEY.

I would hope so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are talking in the first
instance about a very small change.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if it's a very minor adjustment
we don't need a consultation to do it.
If it's a significant
adjustment, then there's an advantage to having a consultation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.
We're talking here in the first
instance about adjustments of $100 million or so.
MR. CORRIGAN. Well, if M1 is between 3 percent and 9 percent
you're talking a minor thing, but if-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Oh, yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. In the extremes--if it's greater than 9
percent or less than 3 percent--it's not minor.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If M1 is coming in at 15 percent or at
minus 5 percent or something-MR. PARTEE.

Which is probably what it will be doing.

SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It well might.
either of those possibilities.

I would not discount

MR. BOEHNE.
Well, there are so many "ifs" here and we are
not going to nail them all down or even come close to it.
I think we
simply have to have confidence in the Chairman's good faith and good
judgment to get the Committee back together to take a look at the
situation if too many of these "ifs" begin to pop up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I must say that I think we have nailed
them down beyond what the situation probably can stand.
If we do
that, there has to be a certain reliance on judgment.
I agree with
that.
MR. PARTEE.
for April?

Operationally, you are going to put in 9 percent

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.
borrowing level?

At this point.

And we are going to start with what initial

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I didn't get to that point.
There is some disagreement about $1.1 or $1.2 billion.
I can live
with either.
MR. FORD.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, why don't you name one and let's vote on it?
Make it $1.150 billion.

3/29-30/82

-65-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's an obvious solution.
don't we put in $1.150 billion. That's my solution.
SPEAKER(?).

Why

I'll vote for that.

MR. CORRIGAN.

That's a variation of Partee's law, isn't it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a beautiful solution. I was going
to ask for preferences, but--.
Partee's solution is never quite right
but it's just a little bit wrong all the time!
MR. BOEHNE.

It's never right but always wrong.

MR. PARTEE.

Well, it's never entirely wrong, either!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.
cut the baby in half.

You know the Solomonic decision is to

MR. AXILROD.
Mr. Chairman, just so I understand the M2 for
April.
Left to our own devices, if the Committee adopted 8 percent
for M2 growth, we would put in a 9-1/2 percent for April and a 7-1/2
percent for May. That's what falls out of our patterns.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put it a little lower in April.
It is
just so close, what difference does it make?
Put in 9 or 9-1/2
percent; you are not going to judge it that finely anyway halfway
through the month.
MR. AXILROD.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
run through it again?
MR. BLACK.

Is it understood or shall I

Is the M2 figure 8 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.
talking about?

All right.

For the quarter, it's "around" 8 percent.

Oh, that's okay.

That's March to June you are

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I interpret "around" to mean that I would
not be very upset if it went a little above 8 percent for the quarter.
MR. BLACK.

I would not be either on that

[aggregate].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd put it at 8-1/2 percent, but that's
fine-tuning too much. I don't have to repeat it again. What it
amounts to is:
With something between 3 and 9 percent on Ml, we look
very hard at M2.
And we look at M2 when we are outside the range
there, too, as to how hard to move, but we would move [if it were]
outside that range. I think that's what it means in practice. That
great discrepancy between 3 and 9, 6 percent at an annual rate, is
judging the money supply within one half percent a month. We have
allowed ourselves all of $2 billion leeway.
MS. TEETERS.

How often do we hit our April projection?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.

How often do we hit any projection?

3/29-30/82

-66-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, actually I meant to comment on that
earlier and I did not.
I just want to take note of the fact that for
this period since the last meeting, which was exceptionally long, we
came about as close to the M1 and M2 targets as I can ever remember.
MR. BLACK.

M1 too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CORRIGAN.
MR. BLACK.

Yes, both M1 and M2.

A sign of things to come, Mr. Axilrod?

At one point.

Don't count on that, either.

MR. PARTEE. That, however, probably increases the odds that
we'll be wrong in the future.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

Probably.

Shall we vote?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER(?).
vote at 1:00 p.m.
Ready?

If I delay 30 seconds, we can have the

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
President Balles
President Black
President Ford
Governor Gramley
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich
President Winn
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Well, I'll say "yes" one more
time
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Okay, thank you.

END OF MEETING

