Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
May 17, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 17,
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

1994, at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips

Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, and Melzer, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Ms. Minehan, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Goodfriend, Lindsey, Promisel, Simpson,
Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis,
Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Judd and Ms. White, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco and New York
respectively
Messrs. Altig and Coughlin, Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland
and St. Louis respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 17, 1994
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to open the meeting
by making a motion to approve the minutes?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I'll call on Peter
Peter.
Fisher for a report on foreign currency operations.
MR. FISHER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see Appendix]

Questions for Peter?

MR. BROADDUS. Peter, you mentioned communication. Most of
the research I've seen suggests that intervention like this, if it has
an effect, it's mainly by way of communicating future likely policy
actions. With that in mind, what do you think the prospects for the
dollar would be if we did not follow through at this point with pretty
strong policy actions?
MR. FISHER.
MR. BROADDUS.

The dollar would trade off.
Significant downside risk or--

MR. FISHER.
It's very hard to put a number on that. Let me
start by saying that if the Committee does something in the range of
what the market is expecting, I'm not sure the dollar will move up
very abruptly. I think it will tend to pip up and pip down a little
bit as has happened with previous actions of the Committee. I think
inaction by the Committee could have a downside risk to the dollar.
The market is fairly neutral at this point. In the interbank sense,
its position is such that inaction could result in significant dollar
sales.
MR. JORDAN. This is really a follow-up question. A
coordinated intervention like the one in which we participated on May
4 carries with it the message that there was communication taking
place about fundamentals. Everybody knows there was intervention with
coordination. Can you share with us what the nature of that
communication was among the central banks and ministries of finance,
and whether the market correctly perceived what that communication was
about?
MR. FISHER. I think that the morning of May 4 began with
President Tietmeyer's release of his statement that they did not have
an interest in seeing the mark overvalued against the dollar. One
consultation in which I was engaged was a discussion of the nature of
the dollar's reaction to the mark and that it seemed to move awfully
quickly and without regard to where people thought interest rates were
going in each of the countries. The nature of the disturbance in the
exchange market was the focus of my discussions with most of the other
countries that I consulted with--I consulted with my counterparts in

5/17/94

the G-7 central banks and a few others. When I say "disturbed" market
conditions, I'm referring to April 29 when very seasoned professionals
were unable to get business done, unable to get phones picked up, and
where the exchange market was not responding to fundamentals in the
sense of the direction of interest rates being pretty well laid out
for them and they seemed to get caught in other backwashes in the
market.
MR. TRUMAN. President Jordan, just to amplify on what Peter
said, since you referred to the finance ministries, the principal
consultations initially were between us and the Treasury Department,
and between the Chairman and President Tietmeyer on the day before his
statement. These consultations were followed up by some discussions
about whether the Bundesbank felt it was appropriate to join in a
coordinated operation. It was only on the morning of May 4 that there
were any additional consultations with the Japanese along with the
other central banks.
MR. JORDAN. I assume that market participants don't know the
magnitude of the intervention. I don't know how well they can guess
at those things, but when I saw the amount that the Germans did and a
statement by Mr. Issing, I read that as a lack of enthusiasm for the
business.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I guess that's right, but I can tell you
that the Bundesbank Directorate did discuss this operation. Whether
Mr. Issing was present at that discussion I do not know. But both Mr.
Tietmeyer's statement--the excerpts from his speech, which were
deliberately released early--and the size of the Bundesbank operation
were discussed by the Bundesbank Directorate.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just add that I've had a number
of conversations with Mr. Tietmeyer.

5/17/94

MR. JORDAN. There was a press commentary after the May 4
action--I don't remember its precise contents--but people in the
Treasury and in the Administration more generally supposedly viewed
the action as an alternative to domestic monetary policy actions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The issue never came up, at least not in
my conversations. Governor Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. Peter, given what the Chairman just said, which
I agree with, and given what you said--that even if our policy moves
along the lines of market expectations, there's not going to be upward
movement in the dollar--that opens the question as to what is next and
means that we may have another run on the dollar. How long do you
expect the latest intervention to hold? I suppose the intervention
last August bought us 9 or 10 months. I assume the second
intervention will buy something less than 9 or 10 months.
Do we have
any ammunition left?
MR. FISHER. With regard to the risk for the dollar going
forward, I would again focus on the dollar/yen exchange rate. I think
the operation and the action of the Bundesbank last week and whatever
the Committee does in the realm of the expected, if I can put it that
way, will tend to stabilize the dollar/mark rate. I don't see any big
downward potential in the dollar/mark rate on its own terms. The yen,
though, will be the locus of attention particularly in the run-up to
the G-7 Summit this summer. That puts us back in the political
context, and whether the Administration maintains its current
formulation or reverses I think is a bigger risk for the dollar.
However, if the dollar can get through the G-7 Summit roughly at its
current level against the yen, then I may be sticking my head way out

5/17/94

but I would see slightly greater odds for dollar strength thereafter
than dollar weakness.
MR. LINDSEY. Does the potential reversion, which hopefully
we won't have, that you mentioned involve foreign policy issues or
does that include monetary policy statements?
MR. FISHER.
I'm not quite reading you.
by the Administration or--

The monetary policy

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, in other words dollar bashing being
foreign exchange statements, how about Fed bashing being monetary
If there were a recurrence of the former, would
policy statements.
that be harmful?
MR. FISHER. That will tend to disturb the foreign exchange
market. I think one of the very helpful official statements on May 4
was that by Mr. Altman to the effect that he had no argument with the
Fed over interest rates. That really came on the heels of the
Tietmeyer comment; that was a very useful setting for the operation.
So obviously, yes, if some of that Administration enthusiasm for the
current Fed policy were lost, that would tend to be destabilizing to
the dollar.
MR. LINDSEY.

How about Congressional statements?

MR. FISHER.
I think they are more expected by the foreign
exchange market than Administration statements; they may be in the
same vein but I don't think they have the same effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, I have a variation on Al Broaddus's
question. As you know, the Europeans have been somewhat concerned
about the effect of our actions on their long-term rates.
Does the
market anticipate or do you yourself think that if we were to take an
action today that it would have an upward effect on European rates or
have their actions sufficiently decoupled their rates from ours?
MR. FISHER. Well, if the history of the last three or four
months is my guide, I'd have to say I would expect an impact on their
long end. It's hard to imagine there won't be some such impact. I
think, though, that we have seen more decoupling in this period-between the last meeting and now--than we saw in previous periods.
So, in that sense I can be modestly hopeful that there would not be a
negative impact on their long end. I think the Bundesbank's actions
last week are probably going to be the most helpful in that regard.
After the moves in mid-April had tended to squeeze out expectations of
rate reductions, they have been put back in with last week's action
and that may help decouple European rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, any further questions?
If not,
would somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Foreign Desk
since the last meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

-5-

5/17/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Joan Lovett.

Without objection.

[Statement--see

Questions for Joan?

Jerry.

MR. JORDAN. Before February when we started to announce our
actions, it was standard practice in the daily program to protest a
federal funds rate move away from the intended rate, maybe sometimes
going against what you saw as the reserve needs of the current
maintenance period. Since February we've announced our decisions
three times, but in monitoring the Call over the eight weeks since the
March meeting there were at least a couple of occasions where it
appeared that you still needed to protest a rate to indicate that
policy had not changed even in the absence of an announcement. It
sounded like the Street still thinks that there is a possibility that
we could change the funds target without announcing the change and
therefore your daily program still has to account for that.
Is that
right? And what would help to clarify the situation for you?
MS. LOVETT. Well, I think that what really is at stake is
that while we have announced the changes that we have made, the market
still sees itself as always looking for when we're going to make a
change in the future. On occasions when they think we will or we
should, they move the funds rate up immediately in the morning well
before any kind of an announcement by the Committee would be likely.
And the rate sits there until we demonstrate something to the
contrary. And so on a couple of occasions where the market thought
the data were such that perhaps there was going to be an action in
coming days, they moved the funds rate up to reflect that possibility.
Part of the theory that seems to be at work there is that if people
really believe that the Fed will move, for some it means buying cheap
funds relative to what they will be later. Moving the funds rate also
is a way of testing the Fed to see what its stance is. And so even
though we recently have announced our policy actions, what we respond
to is the market moving ahead of our announcement of Fed policy
I think that's always going to happen.
actions.
MR. JORDAN. Are there still people out there who think we
might change the intervention level on the funds rate without an
announcement?
MS. LOVETT. Yes, there are some people who still think
that's a possibility; it hasn't been ruled out because we have
mentioned that these announcements have not necessarily been for all
time. I think the market tends to set up for itself a series of time
points. It looks for announcements on the discount rate now within a
certain period of time in the morning, policy announcements any time
after that, but always the possibility of something being signaled
ahead of the announcement. Even if that is not forthcoming, there are
circumstances when they move the funds rate ahead of the Fed. For
example, on the day of the employment data release on Friday, May 6,
most people didn't think that the Fed would take action that day, but
they still moved the funds rate up on the theory that perhaps the
Federal Reserve would do something on the following Monday. And thus
the constellation of where the funds rate would be over the balance of
the period suggested that it was worth pushing the rate up.

-6-

5/17/94

MR. JORDAN. If they've come to believe that all increases in
the funds rate will be accompanied by an announcement, then the
absence of an announcement would seem to lessen the need to protest.
A protest action would occur if you saw a need to drain reserves but
you felt you had to add reserves because the funds rate was too high.
Shouldn't the absence of an announcement, which would indicate that
the funds rate target has not changed, have the same effect as your
protest move? When you do your protest move you're going to have to
wind up taking more back out than you otherwise would.
MS. LOVETT. Well, I guess it's really their anticipatory
moves that we're talking about; it's not the actual Fed moves; it's
the market anticipating the Fed moves before they occur.
MR. JORDAN. Well, what's the difference between our failure
to issue a press release and a protest action by the Desk?
MS. LOVETT.
Perhaps with the passage of time, as people
become accustomed to our new disclosure practices, those anticipatory
moves will not require our protest actions. But we're always going to
have anticipatory moves; I think that's a given. How the market would
view our absence from protesting I think would require more experience
with our new disclosure practices.
I don't think there's enough
experience with them now for the market to be confident that, had we
stayed out when they pushed the funds rate a point higher, we were not
paving the way for the Committee. We're not in the position to pave
the way for the Committee.
MR. KOHN. The day before the March FOMC meeting nobody
expected us to change policy that day or to announce a change that day
but funds were still high.
MS. LOVETT.

Right.

MR. KOHN. And if we had not gone in, that would have looked
as if the decision somehow had been made ahead of the meeting.
MS. LOVETT. Or that we were trying to get the market ready
for it--to pave the way for a decision.
I think that there just has
not been enough experience with the announcements for people to feel
comfortable in terms of what the timing of those announcements is and
so forth.
MR. JORDAN. I would hope that over time one of the benefits
of announcing would be the leeway to allow the funds rate to move on a
daily basis over a little wider range without worrying about an
incorrect perception of current policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
announcing.
MS. LOVETT.

That's one of the advantages of

Yes.

MR. LINDSEY. Joan, just a quick question.
estimate of the Treasury balance shortfall?

What is your

5/17/94

MS. LOVETT. Well, relative to our expectations on the April
tax collection themselves, we fell short by $12 billion. And if we
take April and May combined there was a big catchup in early May.
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes.

MS. LOVETT. They only fell short by about $9 billion. We
had forecast an increase in the April tax take of something in the
neighborhood of 25 percent over the level a year ago and it appears to
be coming in between 5 and 10 percent above. Everyone seems to have
had those same kinds of overestimates, so people are still trying to
find out if there will be some offsets in June or whether in fact all
these adjustments were made last year and people really did get ahead
of the change in their tax liabilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, would
somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Messrs. Truman and Prell.

So move.

Without objection.

Let's now move on to

MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. PRELL.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. PARRY. Mike, I have a question about the inflation
numbers:
Last year at this time we had an unpleasant inflation
surprise. This year it seems, if you look at the year-over-year
comparisons at least, that the consumer inflation numbers are coming
in somewhat below the forecast. Part of that is probably due to
recent changes in the seasonal factors for the CPI, but that probably
is not a complete explanation; I don't think it is.
Is there some
perspective as far as that development is concerned that ought to be
brought into this discussion?
I know you cited the 6-month inflation
rates and they don't look quite as favorable.
MR. PRELL. Well, clearly, I was trying to suggest that for
someone who wanted to look for evidence that things were not going so
well. We do still regard these longer trends in the indexes as quite
relevant to gauging the behavior or the direction of inflation. Last
year, to be sure, the spurt that we saw was, it appears now,
considerably a matter of seasonal adjustment problems. Looking back
now, things don't appear quite so bad. Our recent experience has been
a shade better than we anticipated a few months ago. The very latest
data aren't any better than anticipated. If there has been some good
news recently, it's been on the labor cost side. The employment cost
index in the first quarter was considerably lower than we had
anticipated, and in our view that sets the world right in a sense. As
you know, we had wondered a bit about why ECI increases had leveled
out last year in the face of unemployment rates considerably higher
than they are now, the substantial reduction in the current inflation,
and to some degree in shorter-run inflation expectations. So, we give
some credence to those numbers and it has led us to trim a little off

5/17/94

our wage forecast or our total compensation forecast on the benefits
side going forward. And so we are reasonably comfortable that, if the
economy follows the path we're talking about, the inflation trend will
remain stable to perhaps a shade lower. But I did want to highlight
some risks and certainly to underscore our view that the room to
maneuver here in terms of faster growth than we're projecting seems to
us rather limited, if one really is concerned about inflation.
MR. PARRY. Did you say that the very latest data are in
accord with expectations?
MR. PRELL.

Current CPI.

MR. PARRY. Well, the thing I'm thinking about is that the
2.4 percent change in the total CPI over the past 12 months and the
2.7 or 2.8 percent change in the core rate over the same period are a
little better than expectations.
MR. PRELL. Yes, for the total over recent months, we're
doing somewhat better.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mike, you indicated that you thought there might
be some significant revision in the first-quarter GDP number when we
get the revision. Will that be at the end of this month?
MR. PRELL.
MR. LAWARE.

Yes.
Would you share that with us?

MR. PRELL. Well, I can address this on two levels.
One is
simply the arithmetic of plugging in the actual data that are now
available in place of the assumptions that the BEA had made. And this
is primarily data that have changed on inventories, retail sales, and
construction. On net, those numbers would seem to chop a good
percentage point off of the 2.6 percent GDP growth rate that was
estimated initially. Now, we're anticipating that some of the
incoming data, particularly on trade, perhaps will come in better than
BEA had assumed. And ultimately, perhaps on the next round of
revisions when there are some further changes, for example, in
construction, we may get closer to the 2.6 percent. So, notionally,
in framing this forecast we've been thinking that GDP in the first
quarter was probably a little less than the 2.6 percent, probably 2
percent plus rather than what the incoming data just mechanically
would suggest. And then we made an estimate of, in essence, the best
change for the second quarter, and that's what gives us an estimate of
something over 3 percent for the first half.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
There has been a fair amount of discussion about
capacity--how much of it we have left before we have inflationary
pressures--and about the growth potential of the economy. Most of

5/17/94

these estimates, particularly the growth potential, can change with
seemingly small changes in assumptions, like labor force participation
rates, productivity increases, and that sort of thing. I presume that
you are thinking of a capacity growth rate of maybe 2-1/2 percent or
maybe 2-1/2 to 3 percent. Do you have a view as to whether we're
likely to be on the high end of a range like that or on the low end,
given the recent trends in labor participation and what appears to be
fairly strong capital spending, especially equipment spending?
MR. PRELL. Our working assumption is that, in the near term,
potential output growth is about 2-1/2 percent. I think one might
take a more optimistic view of the underlying productivity trend-assign more of the increase we've seen over the past few years to
perhaps sustainable underlying trend growth, as opposed to the normal
cyclical component. But we think that's going out on a limb a bit at
this point. We've already assumed a considerable pickup in trend
productivity growth from what we were experiencing prior to the 1990s.
On the labor force side, we haven't seen much lift yet in labor force
participation and the population trends are very hard to read. It's
conceivable that the trend in labor force growth isn't even quite so
strong as we've anticipated, which is not robust by historical
standards. We feel that the 2-1/2 percent potential is a reasonable
working assumption. We don't advocate that the Committee take that
number as gospel and make its policies on that assumption and close
its eyes to the incoming evidence. But we think that's a reasonable
estimate for now.
I must say that, for example, in a recent Business Week
article there was much talk about how the world was changing in terms
of productivity growth, and I think high-tech investment is one of the
elements in that story. In quantitative terms, the net investment
from that kind of equipment isn't very large because it's rather
short-lived; it turns over relatively rapidly. So the capital stock
in that sense isn't growing very rapidly. But if you believe that it
is affording firms the opportunity to reorganize in major ways the way
they do things and is really creating disproportionate efficiences in
a sense, then I think you can make a case for stronger growth. The
other thing I found puzzling in that article was that it said because
of all of this, one needn't worry so much about inflation. And the
key argument it made was that if there were pressures, firms would
just ship production abroad. Well, that's a rather puzzling argument.
It says basically that you can avoid inflation by sucking in imports,
but that doesn't really enhance domestic economic growth in the GDP
sense. So, I think there's some loose thinking behind some of the
more optimistic stories.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. First, to follow-up on Bob Parry's question
about the inflation statistics, the first four months of 1993 were
initially reported as averaging 4.3 percent. We use a thing that we
call the median CPI as an alternative to the CPI less food and energy
to try to monitor what these numbers are telling us as the year
unfolds. We were getting 3.6 percent for those first four months
versus the official 4.3 percent. Now that they've revised the
seasonals, they're reporting the first four months of last year at 3.4
percent; that brought it back close to where we were. For the first
four months of this year, we're getting 2.9 versus the 2.3 percent.

5/17/94

-10-

So as an exercise as to what the seasonals did, I had the staff apply
last year's seasonal factors to the first four months of this year,
and that would have produced a 3.1 percent rate for those months, the
same range as where the median is. That tells me that .8
would have
to be redistributed over the subsequent eight months of the year if we
were still operating with the last year's seasonals. Now, I don't
know whether the new seasonals are truth or not, but I do know that
other things the same in the raw component, the final eight months of
the year will have a higher inflation rate, and I don't know which
months the seasonals stole from. But it biases me toward saying that
it's more likely for higher inflation numbers to get reported rather
than lower from this point.
MR. PRELL. Well, President Jordan, let me just say that we
have no reason to think that this hasn't been a distinct improvement
in the seasonal adjustment.
MR. JORDAN.
median, though.

Right, I don't disagree; it's closer to the

MR. PRELL. Well, actually, the median generally has been
running very close to the regular core inflation number over the past
year. They are almost identical on a 12-month basis. But the key
here is that I don't see on technical grounds a reason to be very
concerned at this point that, in essence, the recent data have been
overstating the degree of deceleration and that we're going to get a
vast surprise later on simply because the adjustment in the seasonal
factors has been overdone. The methods seem to us to be reasonable:
We consulted with them during the process of their revisions, and
don't believe that they really are missing significant residual
seasonalities.
MR. JORDAN. Well, I think that the median and the so-called
"core" track very well, within a couple of tenths, most of the time
and furthermore over longer periods of time the median and the actual
CPI come out to be virtually identical, but the median for these four
months currently is running 2.9, and I have more confidence in that
than I do in the 2.3 that was reported for the first four months
because the core is 2.7 for those months.
MR. PRELL. Yes, but that's splitting hairs in terms of the
measurement accuracy.
MR. JORDAN. Well, not quite because remember last year we
got the dip in the latter months of year as initially reported; those
got revised, too.
If the median is telling the truth and we have had
four months of 2.3 and it's really going to average out 2.9 over the
year, then it's going to have to be running a few months up in the
range of 3.3 to 3.4. We just have to expect that that's the way the

numbers will work out.

This is not saying what's right or wrong but

that this is the way the statistics were kept.
The other question is about the Greenbook. I try hard to
assess what I think about the economy versus what the Greenbook says
and use the latter as a starting point to understand the logic of how
policy plays into the numbers that you provide us with. And I have
gotten sort of comfortable with the familiar reversion pattern that
whatever happens--the surprises in the fourth-quarter of 1993 and the

-11-

5/17/94

fourth-quarter of 1992 were on the up side but we had a weak first
half of last year--there's a tendency for real output to revert over
some period or horizon to some idea of potential capacity. And that
goes in both directions; it's symmetrical. The CPI projections tend
to revert to something under 3 percent out there someplace, so that
gives us nominal. As I read this Greenbook the logic of the policy
linkages seemed to be clear, but I want your response on two things.
One, am I getting it right? Second, where is the vulnerability? That
is, increases in short-term interest rates hold down, you say, bond
and equity prices which in turn influence real output, namely
investment spending including residential and nonresidential
investment spending. And as people see the effects of that long rate
on output, that influences inflation expectations as the economy
converges on potential, and that finally influences what actual CPI
inflation turns out to be. So is that a correct characterization of
the linkages and, if so, where is it vulnerable?
MR. PRELL. Well, I think it's pretty close with the minor
exception that I would suggest that, in terms of the inflation
forecast, the behavior that we're predicting is not simply a function
of expectations but also of our judgment that the output path
producing the unemployment rate and capacity utilization rates leaves
a modest amount of slack in the system. So that force is tending to
tamp down wage and price increases. In terms of the risks in this
outlook, they are so numerous and disparate that it's hard to know
where to begin. That isn't particularly different from any other
forecast. This may be one of the reasons why the markets seem so
unsettled and volatile; and like many other forecasters we have a hard
time, in light of the dramatic reversal of the bond market, judging
where the equilibrium may be. The market movements have been very
fast and very large, and judging what the impact will be as we move
forward several months or quarters is a very tricky business.
As I suggested, there are considerable differences of opinion
among private forecasters and we think they mirror some of these
uncertainties. On the one hand, there is a view that we are in the
midst of what will be a dramatic and very well sustained capital
spending boom that will interact in some sense on the trade side where
we will be very competitive. In that view, as these foreign economies
pick up, we will see tremendous increases in exports, and this kind of
lift will provide the income to support a healthy rate of consumer
spending right on through 1995.
On the other side, there are those
who are beginning to find some hints of weakness here and there; they
think the higher rates that we have, assuming they are sustained, will
have an even more serious damping effect on the housing sector and
that consumer demand will be damped not only by that but also by the
effects of the tax increases beyond what we had anticipated. They see
that saving is already at a low level, that we've already seen
increases in debt and probably will have more ahead, so consumers may
feel more constrained down the road. And certainly even with the
recent better news there are those who are skeptical about how quickly
the foreign economies will come on and thus what kind of impetus we'll
be getting in the next few quarters from a diminished drag on the
trade side. So that's sort of a range of some of the thinking that I
see, and there certainly are elements of risks in those directions in
our view.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

5/17/94

-12-

MR. HOENIG.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

My question has been

answered.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mike, in the same vein as Jerry's question, it
seems to me that much of the overall profile of the projection depends
on the idea that the recent run-up in long rates is going to restrain
the economy in the future. In that context--I know you think that
most of the recent increase has been real--I would be interested in
knowing particularly with regard to the 30-year Treasury bond rate,
which is currently about 7-1/2 percent, roughly how much of that you
think is real.
MR. PRELL. Well, if I take the base as last October's low
when the rate was about 5.8 percent, that's an increase of some 170
basis points, if I've done my arithmetic correctly. I would judge
that more than half of that is real. That's a seat of the pants
judgment and I can't point to any clear-cut analytical support for it.
I certainly see nothing in changes in inflation forecasts going out
the short distance for which most professional forecasters' results
are available; and nothing in the household surveys indicates that the
longer-range inflation expectations have risen dramatically. Looking
at stock market behavior and trying to intuit something about what may
have happened to the real returns that are built in there, I see a
significant element that must have been real as opposed to inflation.
MR. BROADDUS.

I'm just trying to pin it down a little more.

MR. PRELL. In looking at the behavior in the housing market,
as limited as the evidence is at this point, people have not on the
evidence dismissed these higher rates as being simply a reflection of
higher inflation in terms of what they might expect for their wages or
for house prices going forward. We wouldn't have seen as much effect
as we have perhaps if there really had been that kind of inflammation
of inflation expectations.
MR. BROADDUS. But would you say that currently, taking the
30-year bond rate, that maybe 4 percentage points of it is real? Am I
doing my arithmetic right?
MR. PRELL. Well, looking out over a 5- to 10-year span, I
guess I would be more comfortable asserting that market expectations
would be on the order of 4 percent inflation. They could be a little
lower, but that would leave the real rate a little lower than it has
been.
MR. KOHN. The backward-looking survey indicators contained
in the financial indicators package put real rates at 3 to 4 percent.
MR. BROADDUS. Wouldn't 4 percent be on the high side
historically for the longest real rate? That's really what I'm trying
to get at.
MR. KOHN. Yes, except for the 1980s;
it was for much of the 1950s and 1960s.

the rate is about where

-13-

5/17/94

MR. BROADDUS. But by longer-term standards, it would be
quite high I think. I tried to figure that out in the current-MR. PRELL.
Indeed, that's one of the reasons, given our
assumption that there will be at least mild fiscal restraint and that
inflation expectations will be going down, I think there is a
discernible downside risk to our bond yield forecast; we have it
really not getting much below 7 percent by the latter half of 1995.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for the gentlemen?
not, would somebody like to start the Committee discussion?

If

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District continues
to be healthy. Housing has remained very strong, although many now
expect that perhaps some slowing will come with higher interest rates.
Our auto plants are still
Manufacturing continues to improve.
producing at very high levels. The energy area remains mixed but
natural gas activity is still good. Farm income may be hurt a little
by some fall in cattle prices, but grain prices should be good, and
therefore income should be reasonably good overall. An executive with
one of the larger rail lines in our region that goes to the West told
me that activity has never been this high. Not just whole shipments
to fill backlogs but intermodal transportation volumes are at record
highs, and shippers are increasing their prices and the increases are
sticking.
The banking industry has not been this strong in our District
in three decades. Our classified asset levels are as low as they've
been since the data have been collected. We had the lowest number of
banks losing money since the '70s, and earnings are above 1.3 percent
on assets. Loan-to-asset ratios have risen from a low of about 48 to
over 50 percent. Loan demand, judging from what bankers tell us, is
picking up. There is this issue that was mentioned earlier with some
interest rate rises--the FASB rule and what it might do to the banks
and their level of activity. That has not been a major concern to
date. Capital ratios at our banks are averaging over 8-1/2 percent.
So things are generally good in the region.
As far as the national outlook, we have differences with the
Greenbook in some individual areas, but overall we are fundamentally
in line with the Greenbook growth projections. We do have a little
higher inflation projected than does the Greenbook, partly because of
basic natural rate of unemployment issues and those sorts of things.
Other than that we're in line with the Greenbook. That concludes my
comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. In terms of the District, the underlying level of
activity, which of course has been strong, just continues to gain
momentum. The auto industry, for example, which directly and
indirectly so dominates our area, continues to exceed our earlier
expectations. Second-quarter production schedules were set at 12
percent over last year, and since retail inventories are at relatively
low levels, even if there is a fall-off in sales this ought not to
affect the production schedules. The third quarter at this point
seems a long way off; nonetheless, the early expectations are that the
production levels will be up very substantially over last year. And,

5/17/94

-14-

of course, the third quarter is normally a very slow quarter. While
the April auto sales were down a bit from the first-quarter level,
some of that reduction results from the shortage of the better selling
models. Production capacity constraints really are getting to be an
increasing problem. In this environment, the steel business continues
to be excellent; the raw production side of the industry is operating
essentially flat out. And it's more than just autos. The appliance
business is also very strong, as is the demand for other housingrelated steel products. There is, though, a little capacity available
in the finishing end of the steel business, and the majors will be
increasing their purchases of semi-finished steel products from
foreign sources to fill out that available capacity. An activity that
I haven't mentioned in years because it's been so absolutely moribund
is the rail car manufacturing business. There also has been a decided
pickup in demand as the fleet has gotten a lot older. While people in
the industry do not expect that deliveries will be quite as high as
some of the published reports that you've seen, nonetheless, we are
told that shipments of 35,000 to 40,000 cars annually over the next
few years seem reasonable. Not surprisingly, prices of rail cars are
being increased this year, and there is a more substantial price
increase scheduled for next year.
The heavy-duty truck business has been even stronger since
the last meeting. The Class 8 sales forecast has been raised again,
this time to 195,000 units, and the sales level will be constrained by
capacity limitations as will the sales of medium-size trucks. GM, for
example, would like to add a third shift to one of their medium truck
production facilities, but they just can't get the qualified workers.
Offsetting this somewhat, retail sales so far in May are reported to
be a little slower than earlier in the year, but I think this is a
comparative issue, not one of weakness in market conditions. Sales of
some items, such as home appliances, continue at a very fast pace. A
very large retailer told me the other day that their sales of
appliances, for example, in April were 25 percent over the sales level
of last year.
In the ag sector, so far the planting has been going well.
Corn and soybean acreage is expected to be up this year, and both the
corn and soybean plantings, as of last week at least, were well ahead
of the normal schedules. It is, of course, a long, long way to
harvest. Nonetheless, we are off to a good start with what are
regarded as generally good moisture conditions. Sales of ag equipment
are well ahead of last year, with sales of large tractors some 18
percent higher than last year; and last year was, in a comparative
sense, quite strong.
All of this strength certainly gives a very positive tone to
the District, but I do think there are some worrisome signs on the
pricing front. In the steel business, I've mentioned at a past
meeting or two that there is a $10 a ton price increase scheduled for
July 1, and at this point virtually everybody expects that to stick.
In addition, the majors are adjusting discounts and pricing for
extras, which will have the effect of raising steel prices by about
another 2 percent. Aluminum manufacturers are reducing their
production to firm up the prices. Admittedly the latter are at low
levels, but the reduced production levels nonetheless have resulted in
higher prices, and I am told that the Russians are cooperating with
this effort. One very large user of aluminum told me the other day

-15-

5/17/94

that they are forecasting about a 17 percent increase in the price
they will pay for aluminum next year. Many other manufacturers report
an upward shift in the cost of their raw material and component
purchases. By no means is this a dramatic shift, but it indicates
just a different attitude and a different tone out there than has been
the case in the past. Some, of course, are finding ways to pass these
increases through in the form of higher prices for their products.
For example, although their heavy truck prices won't be increased this
year, one very large manufacturer is planning a pretty significant
price increase next year. Of course, retail auto prices are being
increased as we go along here. Despite all this, so far there does
Though
not seem to be any upward pressure on the wage front.
everybody we talk to says there is a shortage of qualified labor, so
far at least it has not resulted in higher wage rates; but I just
wonder how long that can continue to hold.
With regard to the national economy, our numbers are
essentially in line with those of the Board staff. I do think that at
this point the risks, both in terms of growth and inflation, are on
the up side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Part of the Twelfth
District continues to show very strong growth. Outside of California,
the growth of employment between March 1993 and March 1994 was 3.3
percent. And over that period three states--Nevada, Idaho, and Utah-ranked first, second, and third in the nation in terms of job growth,
and Arizona ranked seventh. In the Pacific Northwest, we see economic
growth that is best characterized as being pretty solid, but at a less
spectacular pace than in the other states that I mentioned. I might
note that I had an opportunity to meet with the head of a major
construction company based in Oregon; he's been in the business for 30
years and he said this is the strongest period that he has ever seen.
His biggest client is Intel, and they have a huge project going on in
Albuquerque, another one likely to start soon in Arizona, and another
one in Oregon itself.
One of the interesting things is that these
projects are not all for the Pentium chip. As a matter of fact,
they're building plants for the next generation--which are still in
the design phase. But in any case, these are major projects.
Hawaii's economy remains weak and the job losses continue in
that state. On a mildly positive note, though, the visitor count
seems to be up from what it was a year ago. California appears to
have hit the bottom of its long down cycle, but the current pace of
activity seems to be improving very slowly. If you look at the
California employment data--and they seem to be revised very
frequently--they show a trough in December but job growth between
December and April is up only 1/2 percent at an annual rate.
Other
broad-based measures such as state tax revenues, retail sales, and
personal income show basically no trend. I'd say the only area in
California where there are convincing signs of significant improvement
is real estate and other construction. Existing home sales, housing
permits, and nonresidential construction awards all improved very
significantly during the last two quarters compared with the same
levels in early 1993.

-16-

5/17/94

Turning to the national economy, our policy assumptions are
very similar to those in the Greenbook, and we come to similar
conclusions about what is likely to happen in the economy. However,
we do seem to have a somewhat different view on the responsiveness of
In our model, that responsiveness
the economy to interest rates.
appears to be a little larger. Consequently we have a little weaker
economy in the second half of this year, and next year we have a
little stronger growth because we have long-term rates coming down a
bit more than in the Greenbook. With regard to inflation, with the
small amount of unused capacity in the economy, we do not see the
prospect for improvement in inflation from this point on, and we
certainly don't rule out the possibility that the inflation numbers
could begin to look even worse in 1995. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.
I've been reporting for several meetings that
the tone in our District is pretty positive and nothing has changed.
I've been in this business for about 20 years now, and I would have to
say that I can't remember a time when the anecdotal information we
hear in our District was any stronger than it is now. There are very
few weak spots--that we hear about anyway. I think it's fair to say
that most people that we talk to are broadly optimistic about
prospects for the near term, at least for growth of jobs. A lot of
noteworthy things have happened but I guess the single most noteworthy
development in our region recently has been the enormous improvement
in commercial real estate activity. Activity in this sector appears
to be increasing sharply. I don't think there has been a great deal
of actual new construction yet, but vacancy rates are declining,
prices are rising, rents are rising, and markets seem to be tightening
in a number of our communities. Just a couple of examples:
The
Raleigh-Durham market in North Carolina was described at our last
board meeting as being as tight as it has been in about a decade, and
it has been a pretty good market through this whole period. We also
are hearing a number of reports that things are improving in this
sector here around Washington. We get reports that the northern
Virginia, D.C., and the Baltimore/Washington corridor markets are
tightening, rents are up, prices are rising at least to some extent,
and that of course was one of the worst situations in the country.
More broadly, we're told that there is substantial domestic and
international investment demand for commercial real estate properties
in our region despite the recent backup in long-term rates. So the
news on the real estate front is bullish in our area, and that's
refreshing because it wasn't very long ago that people were talking
about a 15-year real estate depression in this part of the country.
Elsewhere, we are still hearing, as I reported earlier, a lot
of anecdotal comments suggesting increased concern about the outlook
for prices and inflation. I think it's fair to say that these
concerns are not restricted to bankers and financial people. When our
small business and agriculture advisory committee met a few weeks
back, we polled them on their inflation expectations and the vast
majority expect some worsening in that situation. They see the
economy strengthening; they see labor markets tightening; they didn't
use the term shortages of skilled labor but they said there were
shortages of "good" labor. And they talked about tightening in a
number of other markets. So a clear majority of these people are
expecting inflation pressures to rise, and I think that's the general

-17-

5/17/94

attitude not just in that group but across my region broadly.
that's the District situation.

So

As far as the national outlook is concerned, as I understand
it, the staff is now assuming that the funds rate is going to rise to
about the 4-1/2 percent level sometime around fall, and that an
increase of that magnitude will be sufficient to hold the growth of
real GDP to about 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate in the second half
of this year and through 1995 and also keep the core rate of inflation
at about 3 percent over that period. Now, moderate GDP growth like
this might not be a great outlook in all circumstances, but my feeling
is that it wouldn't be a bad outcome right now, given where we are and
what is happening. After all, it would follow a year of solid growth
in which we have moved much closer to full employment. I think it
would lay a nice foundation for sustained growth out beyond the
projection period. We don't talk about this too much at non-HumphreyHawkins meetings, but there may even be a little further progress
toward our longer-term price stability goal. But I have to say that
I'm concerned about what I see as the generally accommodative policy
we've followed up to this point. I still think that may give us more
thrust in both real GDP growth and nominal GDP growth, at least
through the end of 1994, than the Greenbook envisions. And I don't
think it's by any means assured that a 4-1/2 percent funds rate is
going to get us the relatively moderate inflation and real growth that
the Greenbook is projecting for next year. In short, it seems to me
that there are substantial upside risks in these projections on both
the real side and the inflation side, and we need to give the upside
risks some careful weight when we discuss policy later in the meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Conditions in the
Sixth District are also very, very good and the expansion is pretty
broadly based and relatively balanced. Let me just tick off some of
the sectors of the economy. In the retail sector, sales did taper off
a little in April although the activity in recent months has exceeded
retailers' expectations by a sizable margin. Many of them are
planning to add to their inventories. Auto sales are still quite
strong in most parts of the District. The interesting thing to me is
that the dealers are expecting continuing growth, although at a
somewhat more moderate rate, in this area through the rest of this
year and into next year. Tourism, as I've reported before, is a
source of considerable strength in the region. There has been a falloff in European travelers but that's being taken up by domestic
travelers and also by people from the Caribbean and Latin America.
I
won't say anything about the casino gambling again because we all know
I'm going to bet that it will continue!
about that.
On the production side, our survey in April for industrial
production suggests that there has been some leveling off in output.
But the expectations for future activity are above those seen at this
time last year. There was some effect on production from the
Teamsters strike, so that cut down activity a little, and suppliers to
the automobile sector are running at near capacity in the District.
Textiles, particularly in the household area and apparel fabrics, also
are sources of strength. The only weakness on the production side is
in defense and aerospace.

-18-

5/17/94

On the real estate side, sales of single-family homes remain
quite strong throughout the District. Many realtors are reporting
that the recent increases in mortgage rates have actually spurred
buying on the part of people who were sitting on the fence, as it
were. Inventories of homes remain quite tight in many areas, and
realtors are reporting increases in prices as well. Builders are
reporting strong increases in the number of homes under construction,
although speculative activity is practically nonexistent. Traffic
through the subdivisions is quite heavy, and that's in contrast to the
assertion in a letter that I read this morning that you received, Mr.
Chairman.
On the multifamily side, markets continue to improve, too.
Building permits were up 50 percent over a year ago in the first
quarter. Nonresidential real estate is also doing better. Commercial
real estate agents are more positive now about future activity than
they have been in a long time. On the financial side in the states,
budgetary pressures that were in existence a while ago have
practically disappeared due to the new growth.
On the price side, in contrast to some of the comments I've
heard today, we're finding that price pressures are practically
nonexistent, with the exception of construction and perhaps a little
bit now in textiles. Lumber prices have stabilized in the last few
months, but the costs of other building materials have increased and
we are also seeing some wage pressures for skilled labor in the
construction industry. Wage pressures are basically fairly quiet in
other sectors.
Retailers are telling us that intense competition is
keeping a lid on prices.
In the banking sector, I would echo what Tom Hoenig said, in
that banking in our District is quite strong; loan demand is up,
particularly in the consumer sector. So, Mr. Chairman, I think that
is probably as positive a report as I've been able to make in quite a
long time. It's hard to find any weaknesses in our area.
With respect to the national economy, I must say that I've
been impressed by the strength of the data we've gotten since we last
met, notwithstanding the lower-than-expected first quarter. I had at
the last meeting tended to downplay the rather bullish expectations
for growth in our forecast, but I've become a little more convinced
that the upsurge in the fourth quarter may continue to play out for a
little while longer. So, our forecast for GDP is somewhat stronger
for 1994, fourth quarter over fourth quarter, although we do show a
deceleration in 1995.
Also, we don't see inflation reaching a peak
until 1995.
I won't go into the various differences in the forecast
and I wouldn't want to make too much of the differences because while
our forecast does differ from the Greenbook in the near term, the
forecasts converge in 1995. What I think comes out of both of those
forecasts as far as I'm concerned is that some additional move in
policy as contemplated in the Greenbook probably is needed and in time
will cause inflation to moderate. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Things are clearly in
recovery mode in New England. Payroll employment has grown for the
region as a whole in each of the last three months and jobs overall

-19-

5/17/94

This improvement is broadare about 2 percent above a year ago.
based. With the sole exception of durable goods manufacturing, all
major industry categories had more jobs than a year ago. On a
geographic basis, only Connecticut continues to show job losses. The
New England unemployment rate declined for the third straight month to
5.6 percent, well below the rate for the nation as a whole. Other
indicators are also positive; average weekly hours in manufacturing
reached a new post-recession high, help wanted advertising rose in
March, and per capita income growth of 3.7 percent exceeded the
national pace slightly. All this good news should not obscure the
fact that the region as a whole has gained back only about a quarter
to a third of the ground lost during the recession, no matter what
data are used to measure progress, although one could question whether
we want to go back to the late 1980s in terms of how heated up things
were in New England. Companies continue to report that competition is
very keen and that their own quality and efficiency improvements are
the primary determinants of survival, not rising overall demand.
There's no rising tide to carry them all to prosperity. On the other
hand, there doesn't seem to be any remaining undertow either.
Several contacts, including some on our board, complained
that the Fed is raising interest rates just as the economy finally
shows some signs of life. In response to our questions, however, a
number indicated that they were seeing attempts by suppliers to
increase prices, but these attempts were being resisted. Retailers
saw strong growth in March but a fall-off more recently. Cautious
optimism may be the best way to express the New England viewpoint
almost across the board.
On the national scene, we too believe that growth will be
somewhat stronger than projected by the Greenbook. We've been
impressed by the degree of tightening in labor markets recently, but
on the other hand our projections of the NAIRU are at the low end of
the range that seems to be used by Board staff, and we are a little
more optimistic about potential GDP growth. While our sense of the
components of the picture varies from those in the Greenbook, we do
agree with projections of low inflation, at least in the near term.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Eleventh District continues
to grow moderately, about in line with the national growth rate,
possibly a little weaker. Our expansion is broadly based, with the
exception of energy and defense-related sectors. Construction in
particular is very strong; it moves from strong to booming in some
areas that are benefiting from relocations from other parts of the
country. Median prices of existing houses are up 6 to 10 percent
depending on what market one is talking about. Construction is going
on all around me, and my house is the only one that I know of that has
not gone up in estimated value. I just got that in the mail.
SPEAKER(?).

Maybe it's because of the residents!

MR. MCTEER. It's a big mystery. The gains in nonresidential
construction are also significant, matching those in housing. Retail,
warehouse, and industrial buildings are strong throughout the
District. Even commercial property is beginning to rise in price,
although there is still a lot of excess commercial property in the

5/17/94

-20-

major metropolitan areas, including an old Reserve Bank building in
Dallas that is still on the market.
As I've indicated, we are benefiting a good bit from
relocations. We are benefiting from being in what we refer to as the
low-wage, low-cost center of the North American free trade area now.
We've been asking our directors and Beigebook contacts questions about
pressures on prices and wages for some time. We are getting some
indications that price pressures are beginning to appear, and some
wage pressures have been mentioned. This is the first time since 1985
that people in our area are mentioning upward pressure on wages.
I don't really have anything of value to add about the
national economy except that it seems a lot stronger than the firstquarter GDP numbers would indicate, especially the real final sales
number. Then the April retail sales number brings to mind a Richard
Pryor comment, "Who are you going to believe, me or your own lying
eyes?"
There seems to be a conflict between those numbers and the
feel of the economy out there.
When I talk to people about policy, there seems to be a
difference of opinion on whether we're ahead of the curve, too far
ahead of the curve, or behind the curve. There's more uniformity of
opinion, though, that we need to do what we're going to do quickly and
get it behind us.
I often hear that we're creating uncertainty with
small steps, and they urge us to do what we need to do. As a matter
of fact, last week we had a vote in our board meeting on a discount
rate recommendation.
dissented from the vote, but
even he said whatever you do don't do it piecemeal. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
The District continues clearly to be a part of
the Northeast--its growth trend is positive but somewhat slower than
the nation. Manufacturing continues to grow, but the pace of growth
has flattened out some. The bookings for the future also have gone up
rather substantially but that too seems to be flattening out.
I
suspect it may have to do with some capacity constraints. A major
railroader in our District reports what others have said in the
railroad business: they're operating flat out.
They can't get cars
fast enough to ship the goods. Residential construction has made a
good-sized rebound, although I think some of that is clearly seasonal.
Once that part is out, I think we will have moderate growth.
Nonresidential construction is mixed. Some areas are still dead and
likely to be that way for some time. Other areas are beginning to
show some signs that there will be additional construction, probably
more so next year than this year. Retail sales clearly have picked
up. The automobile business is strong, and it's clearly a seller's
market at this point except for a few lines.
Bankers, who heretofore
have not seen a whole lot of growth in commercial lending, are now
reporting modestly rising demand. Business loans, both to finance
inventory accumulation as well as capital equipment, and consumer and
real estate lending continue to pick up. In our labor markets the
rate of unemployment for the District as a whole is about the same as
for the nation, although it varies quite widely around a relatively
small District. However, the growth in new jobs has been on the
sluggish side despite the improvement in the economy. Consequently,
wage pressures are well contained. On the price side, there clearly

-21-

5/17/94

is a desire and a wish to raise some prices, but I'm still hearing
mostly that it's very difficult to make those increases stick.
As far as the national economy goes, I don't have a lot to
add. I think at this point in an expansion the risks tend to be for
faster growth rather than slower growth. Perhaps it's just my own
District and the influence that that has, but my sense is that the
odds pretty strongly favor moderate growth and that there is not a lot
more upside risk to the economy than downside risk.
On monetary policy, because the District is improving but not
as fast as the nation, the increasing interest rates and our actions
have been more justifiable on a national basis than a District basis.
I am running into what has just been echoed across the table: Do what
you have to do and get it out of the way so that we can get this
uncertainty behind us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District economy
continues to be very healthy. The only exception to that is the
energy sector, which of course is not very large in the District;
otherwise, things continue to do very well. I think people are
becoming increasingly optimistic, and that's starting from, at this
point, a fairly optimistic base. A few anecdotes, some of which I've
reported before, which I think are interesting and relevant: I've
heard a number of reports over the last several months about lean
inventories, with the clear implication that people expect some
attempt to step up production and build inventories over the next
several months. I would expect that to occur. Continued reports
about labor shortages, particularly of skilled labor in many markets,
do not seem to have translated into a broad-based increase in wage
pressures, although in the Twin Cities market it does appear that wage
increases--this is from the panel that we work with in trying to plan
our own compensation--turned out to be larger in 1993 than those that
had been planned. Exactly what was going on there I don't know,
although we face a pretty tight labor market.
On the banking side, there are reports of increases in loan
demand and some preliminary indications that banks are starting to bid
a little more aggressively for funds through small time deposits-something we haven't seen for quite some time. As far as pricing and
price pressures go, it's very hard to find any broad-based indications
of acceleration of inflation, but what I am hearing is that discounts
are diminishing and the frequency of sales is diminishing. It's very
hard to quantify, but that does seem to be occurring.
With regard to the national economy, I must say the logic of
the Greenbook forecast does appeal to me. It seems to me that the
increase in interest rates, particularly in long rates, may work as
that forecast envisions, that is, growth in real GDP will slow once
again--whether it occurs in the third quarter or somewhat later
remains to be seen. That may succeed in stabilizing the rate of
inflation about where it has been. Although I must observe that in
the last couple of expansions--coming out of the 1980-82 recession and
the 1973-75 recession--once the economy built up momentum, those
expansions seemed to go on longer and to be stronger than we,
certainly, had anticipated. Now, some of that may be the fact that,

5/17/94

-22-

of course, the momentum is not independent of the policies we pursued;
and maybe we just reacted too late. But at least a naive reading of
those expansions suggests to me that once the economy starts to
develop some momentum, that tends to go on for a while.
Some numbers that I was looking at raise questions in my mind
about what we might be able to say about the inflation outlook. These
numbers suggest, though I guess it's a little too early to even call
this analysis, that the relationship between labor market conditions
and the performance of wages or compensation seems to have
deteriorated in the early 1980s--around 1983 and 1984--and hasn't been
reestablished. This suggests that we can't conclude very much from
labor market conditions and what that might imply for wage pressures.
Similarly, there seems to be deterioration in the relationship between
utilization rates and consumer prices that occurred about the same
time. I don't take much comfort from that; it raises uncertainty in
my mind, if nothing else, about the price outlook, and it forces me to
rely a little more on my intuition. My instincts at this point are
that the risks of inflation certainly are on the up side, particularly
because we're not indifferent to errors in that direction. In other
words, we're not terribly concerned if we undershoot inflation. We
might be a lot more concerned if we overshoot.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District is
performing in a fashion much more similar to the Seventh District than
the Third District. It's a pattern of fairly uniform strengths that
are getting stronger. The ag sector is looking forward to a third
very good year overall. It's early to tell whether they will meet
that expectation, but they've had two good years and there certainly
is a lot of optimism in the ag sector and the ag banks. In processed
foods especially, capacity is up a lot. One county on the western
side of Ohio reports an increase of 7 million "layers" in the past
year--turkey processing plants. That means a lot of new capacity.
Motor vehicle plants are going flat out, and a lot of them
are running above what would be sustainable long-run capacity. But a
lot of new capital spending is occurring, a very significant amount by
the major manufacturers. That is adding a lot of optimism to people's
assessment of the current situation. Capital goods overall are
booming; and the return of the machine tool industry, notably the
higher value, high-tech end, is especially encouraging to people in
such major communities as Lexington, Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh; all
are reporting that the high-tech firms are doing quite well. The one
sector that I would note where there is consistent weakness and talk
about layoffs or cutting back is health care. We have some very large
health care operations in the District, and they continue to be
pessimistic.
I might note a couple of anecdotal things that need to be
paid attention to going forward. One is the continued strike at
Allegheny Ludlum Steel; they've been on strike since before Easter.
This is a governance kind of issue: Management is saying that they
are going to see this through and tends to talk in terms of months
rather than days or weeks before it is settled. It's important
nationally because they provide the stainless components for the
exhaust systems for General Motors. There is no alternative

5/17/94

-23-

domestically at this time. General Motors has indicated that they are
now preparing to go to Japanese stainless steel by month end if they
The other alternative would be to go to carbon steel
can get it.
components and promise buyers that they will subsequently recall the
vehicles and put in the stainless components. GM says that they are
not going to shut down production based on this labor stoppage. The
other thing that stainless steel is critical for is transformers and
electric power operations. There are no alternative sources.
So,
Allegheny Ludlum has-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There used to be a big stainless high
alloy industry in this country, but it has evaporated.
MR. JORDAN. Yes, and it's a tough one for us, and it's
adding a degree of pessimism to the Pittsburgh area especially. The
other more or less anecdotal report relates to residential housing.
What we are hearing in the District is that the problem is not the
cost or availability of funds but the cost and availability of
building materials. The Ohio Trade Council Union has become a
developer of medium- and low-income housing and
complains about escalating costs of production
and that is what he sees as the source of inflation, not the cost of
funds.
Turning to the national economy, my reading is certainly
influenced by conditions in the District.
It's not a question of
encountering any kind of head winds; rather, it's the buildup of tail
winds that I think is of increasing concern. I no longer feel that
it's a case of simply backing further off the accelerator but that we
may have to start contemplating tapping on the brakes fairly soon. I
don't know where neutral is, but I think that we are well shy of a
neutral policy and getting there may not be enough. The Greenbook
projections depend critically in my assessment on the deceleration of
nominal GDP growth. It's the nominal spending where I have my
concerns rather than the decomposition of that into its real and price
components.
In 1992 we had growth of over 6-1/2 percent for the full
four-quarter period and that was more than had been expected. There
was some deceleration in 1993, even with the robust fourth quarter,
thanks to the weakness in the first half of the year, but growth for
the year still was 5-1/2 percent.

Growth this year is looking like

another 5 to 5-1/2 percent. But for the forecast to work, it is
important for nominal GDP to decelerate to under 4-1/2 percent in the
next 18 months.
I don't see what will make that happen.
I have no
confidence that the kind of policy assumptions in the Greenbook or the
linkage of working through long-term bond yields are going to produce
that deceleration of nominal GDP. The way I now tend to think about
where we are is not that we are entering the fourth year of the
expansion, but rather that we are someplace in the first year of a
classic expansion. As it looks to me, the period of about 2 or 2-1/2
years after the end of the Gulf War was one of economic restructuring
in a lot of sectors and a lot of regions. The talk about it being an
anemic recovery was because it wasn't a recovery, in a sense, but
rather a period of restructuring. Some time during the course of last
year we entered into what would be more of a classical recovery from
recession. If that interpretation is right, then we should be
thinking in terms of a year to six quarters of 5 to 6 percent real GDP
growth. Yet, most of us are saying that we don't see that the economy
has the capacity to handle that many quarters with 5 or 6 percent real

-24-

5/17/94

GDP growth without way overshooting. If that's an accurate assessment
of where we are, then monetary policy is well behind the curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The national economy continues to
expand rapidly and its momentum appears, at least to me, to be
building. Industrial production, for example, grew at a 5.4 percent
annual rate for the four months ending in April, faster than the 4.6
percent rise in 1993.
Payroll employment rose at a 2.7 percent rate
in the four months ending in April, following a 1.9 percent rate of
increase in 1993.
The unemployment rate fell about a full percentage
point over the past year when comparable methods are used to measure
it. Despite efforts by businesses to build inventory in the first
quarter of this year, the inventory-to-sales ratio fell sharply as
sales boomed.
In the Eighth District, economic activity has also expanded
rapidly in recent months. Many firms report expansions, additions to
payrolls, and increases in sales. The District continues to grow
faster than the nation as a whole, as best we can determine.
For
example, during the past quarter nonagricultural employment increased
in all District states by a significantly larger percentage than the
national average, namely by 7-1/2 percent at an annual rate versus 2.1
percent nationally. Increases in employment are occurring in nearly
every major manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sector. District
reports reveal that the Eighth District's expansion is spreading to
parts of the District such as southern Illinois that had until
recently been sluggish. Particularly noteworthy developments are
occurring in the transportation sector.
Increases in auto production,
which Tom Hoenig and Si Keehn have mentioned, are expected to boost
auto employment in St. Louis to the highest level since 1989.
Commercial aircraft orders also are rising considerably. The
District's real estate sector remains strong as evidenced by doubledigit increases in building permits and continuing anecdotal reports
that homes available for sale are in short supply. Relatively strong
loan demand, especially by businesses, is also indicative of the
strength of the Eighth District's economy.
The momentum of the economic expansion, as I mentioned
before, seems to me to be building. I am not comfortable with the
Greenbook outlook that nominal and real GDP are poised to slow down in
the second half of this year. Such a slowing appears to be based on a
cutback in interest-sensitive sectors, especially housing. Housing
affordability, even with today's mortgage rates, in my view is very
favorable. And reports at last week's Business Roundtable meeting
expressed strong doubts that interest rate increases are retarding
spending to any degree at all or are likely to do so in the near
future.
The continuing strong performance of the District and
national economies reinforces my concerns about the inflation outlook.
In the Eighth District the prospects for increased cost and price
pressures have been boosted by low-levels of farm inventories and new
houses for sale, and more broadly by substantial job growth and
relatively low unemployment rates. Nationally, both consumer and
producer price increases have accelerated over the past seven months
from their pace over the previous five months. In addition,

-25-

5/17/94

inflationary expectations have increased as well, which is reflected
in declines in both bond prices and the foreign exchange value of the
dollar since our last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

GOVERNOR KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm essentially
the same place I was in March, so I'll try to be a little brief today.
We have moved policy considerably, three times now, which I think has
been entirely appropriate. The reason that I feel particularly
comfortable with that comes largely from the fact that I think
interest rates were too accommodative for present conditions and
needed to be changed. And probably we haven't completely eliminated
that yet and we do have a little more to go. Consequently, I would
expect to support a policy move action in the second half of this
meeting.
My comfort doesn't primarily arise from an especially high
level of concern that we are near full capacity and on the cusp of
some type of an inflationary flashpoint.
I certainly do recognize
that there's considerable strength out there and we get confirmation
of that from the consistent reports--and I'm sure they're correct-from around the Districts that there is a good deal of momentum.
Consequently, there surely is the possibility that the economy could
overheat. But I think there's reason for at least a bit of skepticism
that that is going to happen. A brief recitation, if I may; I did
this the last time we were here and most of these things have been
referred to in one form or other already this morning. I won't talk
further about interest rates; we know how much they've gone up. Their
restrictive impact is just beginning to be felt. Mike Prell made
reference to housing in particular. Second, one factor that I think
is important that we haven't talked about much is the impact of unit
labor costs. We've done very well in that regard recently. In fact,
it has been getting meaningfully lower now for some four straight
years. Staff tells me that in the case of the unit labor cost index,
which has been decreasing substantially and consistently, that that
impacts the economy with a six-quarter lag. This means that we've got
a lot more favorable impact to come from the restraint that is already
in place.
On the productivity side, we've recently been looking at a 2
percent increase. Staff has raised its estimate of trend to 1-1/2
percent, but if I understand correctly, they are only expecting 1
percent over the remaining part of the forecast period. All the
private sector conversations I've had suggest that we might continue
to do quite well in that regard rather than fall back. If that turns
out to be the case, it does two things for us, obviously. First of
all, it holds down cost pressures; and secondly, it extends the amount
of capacity that the economy has available before it gets itself into
difficulty.
In the area of consumer spending, we've talked before about
the very high level of debt that was built up through the 1980s; that
plateaued for a while but did not come down, and now it has begun to
rise again. This leaves me with a considerable question in my mind as
to how long the legs under consumer expenditures may be.
Indeed, if
they're very long, I would worry about that a lot because we're in a
new territory now in terms of consumer debt. Not unrelated to that is

-26-

5/17/94

the fact that autos have been a part of the push so far and that
probably has approximately peaked. We've talked about foreign
economies; I won't go into that any more but their weakness impacts on
us here. And then, of course, fiscal policy continues to be mildly
contractionary, at least over the rest of the forecast period.
All in all, I have considerable confidence that there's a lot
of underlying strength in the economy, a lot of good solid momentum,
I believe that the economy can
and that things look very favorable.
keep growing despite whatever constraints are out there and that our
recent policy actions as well as those restraints give us good
prospects for keeping inflation well in check. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
Second District's economy appears to be advancing at a rather nice
pace this spring. Preliminary March reports indicate that
establishment job growth was strong in most sectors of the economy.
Tax receipts suggest that personal income grew at a reasonable pace.
Retail sales surpassed the optimistic expectations of the merchants,
with actually some problems in April because inventory levels are
The commercial real
lower than the merchants would like them to be.
estate market is showing considerable signs of revival except in the
lower part of Manhattan Island. The anecdotal information for April
and the first part of May suggest that this growth is continuing. And
consumer price inflation is quite subdued in the District. There is
something of a malaise around the financial services industry because
of the difficult markets in the first four months of the year and
because of some concerns about individual firms and problems related
to them--for example, the case of Kidder Peabody and the death of
Lazard and then the New York Times article on Sunday regarding what
would appear to be some questionable relationships among firms in the
municipal finance area.
On the national level, we differ somewhat from the Greenbook
in having a little slower growth in the second quarter and a little
higher growth in the second half of the year, but the net result is
that we are just 0.1 percent above for the Q4 to Q4 period. We also
have a slowdown in 1995 to 2.4 percent growth in GDP, which is just
about where the Greenbook is. However, we're not quite as optimistic
about the CPI. We've got it up 3.1 percent whereas the Greenbook has
it up 2.8 percent. I would not be very satisfied with an upturn in
inflation as something that we would anticipate. So that raises the
question of what really is going on in the economy and what if
anything the Federal Reserve can do about it. We think that growth
has to be slowed down because we think that, certainly by the end of
the year, potential GDP will be fully used up. We will be at or very
close to the NAIRU and at the use of manufacturing capacity that has
historically given rise to cost and therefore price pressures. One of
the things that those who don't want to find inflation, especially
among journalists, are looking to is the possibility that the capacity
availability outside the United States will help us avoid inflation.
We looked at that quite carefully and find very little solace there.
In the area of interest rates, one of the things that's most
difficult to forecast--and it has been discussed by Mike Prell both in
the Greenbook and in his oral presentation and then by various members

-27-

5/17/94

of the Committee this morning--is to try to figure out just how much
the policy that we have put in place so far and its effect on mediumand longer-term interest rates will slow the economy down. In the
very sensitive areas of, say, the 7- to 10-year maturities, it's
difficult to figure out exactly what has caused that increase in
interest rates, but we've done a rather large amount of work on the
relationship between the Treasury market and therefore interest rates
in general and mortgage-backed securities; Joan Lovett referred to
that rather briefly in her presentation. But quite clearly, as
interest rates go up and the duration of any mortgage portfolio
increases, the hedging requirement moves out the yield curve. And we
think that has a fair amount to do with the considerable increases in
interest rates in the 7- to 10-year area, especially in the 10-year
note itself. If that is so, it means that we've got a closer linkage
than we have had historically between short-term interest rates that
the Fed directly can control and the medium- and longer-term rates
that have a rather direct effect on the interest-sensitive sectors.
I
think all of us would have to agree that we are not quite sure exactly
how that will play out in the future.
Another area that we find has to be looked at very closely is
the attitudes and therefore the likely spending habits of the
consumer. The consumer is a good deal more confident than he or she
was a couple of months ago.
But it's very difficult to find out
exactly what they are so confident about except that the increase in
employment would seem to have lowered the anxiety level about losing
jobs.
Still, one hears enough about layoffs especially in the white
collar sector to wonder how consumer confidence that is a large part
of all of our economic forecasts, and which Governor Kelley discussed
very well I thought, is going to affect the future. So we're in a
situation I think where we have policy actions that need to be taken,
but it seems to me that at this particular time the question marks are
rather larger than usual--although as Mike Prell pointed out, all
economic forecasts have question marks--and therefore make decisions
on policy that much more difficult.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. I've grown considerably less comfortable since
the last meeting with the consensus view that we have a solid economic
expansion under way. Not only was the announced GDP growth rate in
the first quarter way below staff expectations, but staff now expects
a further downward revision of the 2.6 percent number that was
announced. That, combined with recent statistics on auto sales and
production, industrial production, retail sales, and a modest reversal
of consumer expectations, has convinced me that the psychological tone
of the economy is very fragile. I attribute that fragility to job
security anxiety, fueled by continued corporate re-engineering with
the accompanying layoffs combined with worries about household cash
flow, debt levels, and impending changes in the health care system and
its costs. Nonetheless, the reduction in slack in the economy
certainly feeds my concern that there remains some prospect for growth
well in excess of potential, and I expect that further absorption of
slack will come from the export sector. As U.S. products become more
competitive because of dollar rates, technical improvements, higher
quality, and the recovery of European and Canadian economies as well
as a higher level of growth in Mexico, the growth in exports will

-28-

5/17/94

exceed staff expectations and stimulate a higher growth rate than in
the Greenbook forecast.
All in all, I believe that events already in train will tend
to heal the fragile psychology of the economy, all of which suggests
that additional restraint may be in order.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. It appears that the strength of
the expansion is deeper and wider than we have seen previously, based
on some of the comments made here today. This is partially due I
suspect to job creation and acceptance by employees of moves to
different jobs--thus more churning in the labor market. Confidence
continues to be reasonably strong both on the business side and on the
consumer side even in the face of a slowdown in the first-quarter GDP.
Credit demand has increased and the U.S. economy appears to be
adapting better to changes than our competitors--such changes as
technology, labor conditions, balance sheet adjustments, and so on. I
find myself with an analysis very similar to Mike Kelley's and John
LaWare's in that I see this strength as sustainable and don't see a
runaway growth outlook. We still have an environment of reengineering and emphasis on cost savings and productivity. This
question of job quality I think is continuing to put pressure on
income levels generally. We're also not through the downsizing of the
defense industry. The deficit is going to continue to limit fiscal
policy initiatives. The low saving rate that we have seen I think is
going to limit long-term investment opportunities. The capital market
volatility and stock and bond price declines do increase the cost of
capital. The volatility itself raises the cost of capital, and the
wealth effects that are felt by individuals may start to be seen in
reduced consumption and investment.
On the inflation front, as we've heard in some discussion
around the table, the recent history is quite good. I do think that
there are vulnerabilities, for example in commodity prices including
oil. And although farmers are optimistic at planting time, that's
when they're the most optimistic. That seems to be a universal truth
in the ag community. But we do have low carryovers, so this is a
fragile time going into this planting season.
One thing that hasn't been mentioned as much was the faster
increases in the producer price index in the first quarter of this
year. Although the April report was better, the index is still up
about 9 percent on an annual basis for 1994. We still have health
costs as an uncertainty, and the strength of the economy generally I
think is increasing the chances that inflation could start to heat up.
I think both the appearance and the actuality of the stronger
economy coupled with the realization that there are checks on this
growth are feeding some of the uncertainty that is reflected in the
wide range of forecasts for GDP, inflation, capacity constraints, and
interest rates. We see a little more diversity of opinion than we
ordinarily do on the forecast front, and this is feeding into the
capital markets. They remain volatile and fragile. I think we're
still facing a continuation of the sorting out process that was begun
in February. At that time many people were on the same side of the

-29-

5/17/94

market and positioned for more of the same--slow growth, with longterm interest rates expected to come down, and inflation expected to
be under control. So when the jolts hit the market we saw more of an
effect than might have been anticipated. Those jolts, of course, were
precipitated by the initial Fed tightening but also were supported by
reports of stronger growth more generally. People were having to
fully assess whether or not real rates should be higher. Then, of
course, we have domestic political uncertainties, Japanese trade
pressures, China, Korea, one can go on.
Traders also have very short time horizons and they tend to
think in terms of up or down, and neutral was really throwing them a
curve. That, I think, enhanced the uncertainty in the markets. This
portfolio unwinding that we've been going through is not an
instantaneous process because the portfolios are complex. We also are
faced with internal firm risk management constraints. The markets are
efficient but they're not complete. As Bill McDonough mentioned,
there has to be a searching for hedge opportunities as people seek to
unwind. We have seen some market liquidity constraints as near
substitutes have been sought and traders are trying to reduce
exposures.
In sum, I don't think the turmoil is over. And in terms of
the risks generally, while some people seem to think that they are
more on the up side, I see some countervailing forces to those upside
risks that are feeding the fragility and the uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, what struck me most at the table
today was the talk of inflation. I've heard more on that than I've
heard in all the meetings I've attended in 2-1/2 years. That was a
surprise to me. I don't think that the concern we have in the
analysis is really on the demand side. I think the staff is right on
target. We have moderately expanding demand. We have what would
otherwise be robust demand being checked this year by fiscal policy
contraction, by a rising yield curve, and by a deteriorating
international situation. That's moderate. What we don't know,
really, is what is happening on the aggregate supply side. Governor
Kelley mentioned a very, very positive scenario, one in which
productivity is improving as a result of substitution of capital for
labor over the past few years. If he's right, then we have room for a
very extended expansion. And, Mike, you have a surprising ally in my
former colleague, Jim Medoff--I don't think we've ever agreed in the
past--who sent me from the Center of National Policy an analysis of
the normalized help wanted index against the unemployment rate. He
concludes that the NAIRU is more like 5-1/2 percent because of the
changes you've mentioned. I think that assumes that it is positive
technical change that has driven the substitution of capital for
labor. If, on the other hand, what has caused this substitution is a
rise in the relative cost of labor to capital because labor is more
expensive, perhaps because of government mandates or what have you,
then really what we've had is a supply shock. And that may explain
why I hear so much talk about inflation here in spite of the fact that
the help wanted index is at the same level as it was at the depths of
the 1982 recession. That surprised me; no one is demanding labor, yet
we're hearing about inflation all the time.

-30-

5/17/94

We're going to have to see, and fortunately this is not the
meeting where we are going to find out whether we have to go to
something more restrictive. I think that President Jordan was right
on target. The thing that we have forgotten is that during an
expansion the mix in nominal GDP between inflation and real growth
tends to worsen.
In the Greenbook forecast, it's not worsening; it's
staying at about 50/50. That probably isn't going to happen. If
Governor Kelley is right, maybe it can last for a while longer; but
history says otherwise and my bet is that in three months or six
months we're not going to be talking about neutrality. But
fortunately we can wait for three to six months for that to change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, Governor, and that brings us
to our coffee break. Let's take five, seven minutes.
[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. MELZER. Don, I just wanted to ask about the April tax
payments and whether you think there is any peculiar behavior
occurring that may be depressing M1 in the short run. A year ago we
had a similar experience but you didn't mention that in terms of-MR. KOHN. It's hard to parse this, President Melzer. In
fact, April tax payments were up considerably from last year while
last year they were low relative to the year before.
It is true that
this year's payments were less than we and everyone else had expected.
So it's a little difficult to know exactly what seasonals were built
in. Before we got this surge in early May, it looked as if the
shortfall was bigger, and the low level of tax payments in April was
one of the factors we were citing as a reason why M1 might have been
slow in April because people hadn't built up their balances in order
to pay taxes. That explanation didn't seem to have as much weight
after the extra billions came in in early May and the tax receipts
over the April-May period looked as if they were about 10 percent
higher than last year. There might still be something in there since
M1 growth this year is still low relative to its growth before the
last year. It's very difficult to know what seasonals are implicitly
calling for.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Don, I read the Bluebook as saying a 4-1/2
percent funds rate is neutral and here's an attempt to produce that
kind of policy stance. All of your commentary was in terms of the "C"
versus "D" alternatives, a 1/4 point versus a 1/2 point increase. You
didn't discuss the pros and cons of going immediately to 4-1/2
percent, assuming that that is a neutral policy stance, nor did you
discuss the possibility that 4-1/2 percent is too low rather than too
"Well, we're not sure
high. A lot of your remarks were in terms of:
it's 4-1/2 percent; it might be 4-1/4 percent and there's even a
possibility it might be 5, 5-1/2 or 6 percent."
Even if we went to
4-1/2 percent immediately, or in the next six months, and if there
were no movement at all in bond yields, no effect at all, you'd still

5/17/94

-31-

have 300 basis points between the funds rate and long rates. What
historical experience would lead you to believe that a 300 basis
points upward slope in the yield curve is a neutral monetary policy?
MR. KOHN. Well, a couple of points.
First, as between the
4 and 4-1/4 percent, I had assumed that those were the two options on
the table. To be sure, moving eventually by more can't be ruled out-75 basis points or even more. I tried, but perhaps it didn't come
through in my remarks, to raise the issue that 4-1/4 percent certainly
might not be enough; and I expressed some concern that we not get
stuck calling this neutral and therefore find it hard to rise beyond
that.
I agree that the Committee certainly needs to keep its options
open--that 4, 4-1/4, even 4-1/2 percent may not be sufficient.
As to the slope of the yield curve, I think that's been a
sometime thing in predicting economic activity. The yield curve was
extraordinarily steeply sloped for several years in this current
expansion before the expansion seemed finally to have gotten under way
in a self-sustaining sense.
It's certainly true that the markets have
built into this spread more tightening than the staff forecast. I
think it's a question of judgment as to where the implied economic
strength is. Moreover, in judging the yield curve one has to take
account of uncertainties and liquidity premiums. With all the
uncertainty and higher volatility, some of the level of long-term
rates is reflecting liquidity premiums, not necessarily expected
movements in funds rates. But I don't disagree with the the overall
thrust of your comment, which is that 4 or 4-1/4 or even 4-1/2 percent
may not be high enough.
I think Mike came to the same conclusion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further questions, why
don't I begin? One of the interesting aspects of this whole period
has been the extraordinarily parallel pattern of movement between
dollar-denominated long-term rates and the deutschemark and the whole
series of other currencies, despite the fact that there are no very
persuasive reasons why all of these rates should be fundamentally
coupled. You have to ask yourself under what conditions you get a
coupling of rates for noneconomic reasons, or for reasons other than
the basic type we usually see.
The answer essentially lies in the notion, at least in my
hypothesis, that if there is a risk premium out there which is
generic, its impact will tend to be relatively the same depending not
on what currency is involved but whether there is uncertainty about
long-term commitments in financial markets and price stability in the
markets. If we hypothesize that there has been a very significant
increase in international portfolio holdings of many currencies, then
if you get a major element of uncertainty--for example, if I'm a
portfolio manager and I have long commitments in U.S. Treasuries on
the expectation that prices are going to go up, and the markets go
against me--what has happened is that my whole sense that "I know what
it's doing" has collapsed. And the tendency, whenever uncertainty of
that nature arises, is for human beings to disengage from whatever
they're doing, to pull back. And pulling back in the U.S. Treasury
market means going from 10-, 15-, and 30-year issues into the short
end of the market, tilting the yield curve back up. But it also
presupposes that any element of speculative uncertainty which exists
in the holdings of long-term deutschemark relative to short-term
deutschemark also induces an adjustment by sales of longer-term

5/17/94

-32-

securities and purchases of shorter-term. This adjustment obviously
can spill over into all sorts of portfolio holdings, provided there's
a large amount of communication.
It is just very difficult to know why it is that U.S. dollardenominated issues have so dominated the markets, and indeed why we at
the central bank, by tightening, have obviously dislodged a lot of
positions while creating a concept which is analogous to a generic
risk premium that explains not the intercurrency movements but the
movements from speculative positions--that is, from longer-end pricesensitive positions back to the shorter end. It also explains in part
the nature of the financial bubble that we obviously have run into.
This is a very interesting phenomenon because what we see is a very
large increase in implied volatility in the long end of the market
coming off the options, but only a very modest increase in the yield
spreads of a number of the different types of instruments we use to
measure credit risk. We've gotten a very small rise in the rate on
six-month commercial paper over six-month Treasury bills; BAA
corporate yield increases have been very small relative to U.S.
Treasuries during all of this period. Junk bond yield spreads are not
moving up, which is another way of saying that the concerns about the
economy as such are not being undermined by all of this financial
instability. What we come up against here is that there is a great
deal of uncertainty and a lot of nervousness. And indeed some of it
is purposeful on our part because if we are going to pierce the
bubble, the only way we're going to pierce it is essentially to create
a degree of uncertainty.
The issue of uncertainty as being helpful or unhelpful is
really not clear-cut. We experienced periods of relative certainty in
the latter part of 1993 which everybody just looked at as though the
markets had no downside price risks; everyone was committed. The
yield spreads were very marginal, and indeed they had all been coming
down dramatically from the 1987 peaks after the stock market crash,
and there was an element of euphoria that really gripped the markets.
You could see that in huge increases in mutual funds, both stock and
bond funds.
In fact, what we were dealing with largely was a
situation in which there was very little uncertainty. That clearly
was a very unhappy state of affairs; the mere fact that uncertainty
did not exist was not a good; it clearly was a bad. And our endeavor
to break that pattern, which we had to do even though it turned out to
be a much bigger problem than we suspected, was a very purposeful
endeavor to create a degree of uncertainty and readjust holdings from
weak hands into firmer hands as far as speculative securities are
concerned. As a consequence we have taken a very significant amount
of air out of the bubble. We had discussions in this Committee not on
the desirability of raising rates and tightening the markets because
the economy needed it--I think that was a universal view--but there
have been differences here about how much the financial system could
take before its tensile strength broke. And I think what we have
reached in conclusion at this particular point is the defusion of a
good part of the bubble.
I think there's still a lot of bubble
around; we have not completely eliminated it.
Nonetheless, we have
the capability I would say at this stage to move more strongly than we
usually do without the risk of cracking the system.
I think the economy is probably stronger than we suspect,
partly for reasons that I raised back in February; the inventory

5/17/94

-33-

situation just strikes me as too tranquil, and before this is all over
I think we've got to get something moving on the inventory side. Look
at the lead times on deliveries of materials; they've just moved up
modestly. Slowdowns in promised deliveries have clearly moved up and
that's far more than an issue of the weather in the month of February.
So there are the makings here of stronger inventory changes than I
think we recognize.
The most interesting aspect of the economic outlook as I see
it is that this far into the recovery--and it's almost immaterial
whether or not you take Jerry's view that in effect we're only in the
first year of the recovery--the actual inflation rates, wage rates,
and the like are lower than one would ordinarily expect. This raises
the question, which I've raised in earlier meetings, as to whether the
lack of financial tinder is a relevant consideration here in holding
inflation back. The truth of the matter is that it almost doesn't
matter, because as Gary Stern said--and I think quite legitimately--we
may not know what the future looks like but we do know at this
particular stage, with the relative lack of imbalances that exist in
the economy, that the chances of overdoing a tightening of monetary
policy and creating a cascading down in economic activity are really
not very large. If we overdo it, what we will do is push economic
activity farther out. The chances of our breaking the back of the
economy at this point--with inventory levels as low as they are,
capital goods markets still with significant momentum, and the orders
as strong as they are--have to be pretty low. The obvious problem is
that errors on allowing inflation to take hold, even if the data raise
questions as to whether it will, involve another type of risk
altogether. As a central bank we obviously can't take that kind of
risk.
The sentiment of the Board of Governors, as you probably
know, is to move the discount rate, as nearly all the Reserve Banks
have requested, by 50 basis points today. And the implicit view of
the Governors is to request of the Committee that we allow all of the
increase to pass through. There is a balance of concerns as to how we
should state that, but if we are going to act, I do think we should
indicate that we are taking out a substantial part of the degree of
accommodation that existed through the 1993 period. But I'd leave
open the issue of any further moves; while we may pause for markets to
interpret that, we ought to make adequate leeway to move should events
require that we do so. My own impression is that we probably will not
have to move before the next meeting if we do 50 basis points now.
I find it unlikely that we are near the end of this pattern,
but I do think we are now becoming more data dependent. There really
are two credible economic scenarios that we have to keep in mind. One
is something quite similar to the Greenbook forecast and, if that
scenario evolves, the inflationary pressures on the system will come
down. If it doesn't evolve, if we still have momentum in the system,
I think the pressures are going to pick up on us to move--not
immediately, but sooner rather than later. The crucial issue as far
as I'm concerned, however, even though it's not a critical matter in
the forecast, is to watch what's happening to the financial system-what's happening to bank loans, to credit extensions, to the degree of
financial tinder that is either not moving or moving. We need to be
very careful about this very large risk premium that exists in the
financial markets, which basically says that this bubble is a bigger

5/17/94

-34-

one than we had anticipated. We've caused a good part of it to
dissipate, maybe even most of it, but it's very obvious from the
implied volatility numbers we're getting out of the options that these
markets are not about to simmer down very quickly.
So, I merely have put the issue out on the table. I have a
particular view, were we to move 50 basis points, on whether we should
go symmetric or asymmetric. My preference is symmetric, but frankly I
don't think it means very much because if the economy accelerates
we'll be holding special Committee discussions, with or without
symmetry in the directive language. My own inclination would be to go
symmetric at this stage, but I don't feel very strongly about it.
With that I open this issue up.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as you know, I've been a
proponent of gradualism, but I believe we're at the point where we
need to take more aggressive actions. I think the gradualistic
approach may have created some uncertainty in the market. I've heard
some of the same comments as were reported earlier. People have
suggested that if we are going to do something, we ought to take
strong action. So, I'm really supportive of that action. I think
there is considerable momentum in the economy. Our forecast, as I
indicated earlier, is for stronger growth than the Greenbook forecast,
and even building in 50 basis points we see the inflation numbers in
1995 as unacceptable. So, I think that there ought to be a 50 basis
point pass-through to the market, and I would prefer a symmetric
directive as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I, too, would support a 50 basis point move and I
prefer a symmetric directive. I must admit I'm not convinced at this
point that our gradual approach was the wrong one, and it still may
serve us well in the future. But I do think 50 basis points is
appropriate at this time. The other point I'd like to make is that I
hope any public statement we make doesn't convey either the impression
that we are likely to do anything in the near term or that we are
likely to rest on our oars for a while. I think that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
preliminary draft.
MS. MINEHAN.

Excuse me, I'll just read you a very

Which you just happen to have!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just happen to have it here! This
implies that we move on both the discount rate and the funds rate.
"These actions, combined with the three adjustments initiated earlier
this year by the FOMC, substantially remove the degree of monetary
accommodation which prevailed throughout 1993. As always, the Federal
Reserve will continue to monitor developments in the economy and
financial markets to judge the appropriate stance of monetary policy."
I think that captures where we want to be.
MR. PARRY.

Good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

-35-

5/17/94

MR. MELZER. Alan, I would endorse what you recommended. I'd
like to briefly state my reasons. First of all, as you know I've
viewed the stance of monetary policy as having been very accommodative
for some time, which I think will lay the basis for an acceleration in
inflation. Over the last three years, for example, our net open
market purchases of government securities have totaled over $100
billion, which is a staggering number. This expansion in base money
has fostered a tremendous increase in liquidity, with the narrow money
stock, M1, increasing by one third over this period. Secondly, I
don't think we've gained credibility in financial and foreign exchange
markets with respect to our resolve to contain inflationary pressures,
let alone achieving or moving further toward price stability. With
respect to the risk of overdoing it, I would agree with what you said.
One of the things I looked at in that connection is the prevailing
forward rate structure, which is cited in the Greenbook; it
anticipates about 150 basis points of increase in short-term rates
before the end of the year. So, as I say, I don't think this move is
overdoing it.
In fact, if we don't keep up with sustained increases
in market interest rates, I think we run the risk of a policy that
continues to be accommodative and will simply increase the
inflationary pressures down the road.
With respect to the statement that you read, I would be
concerned about anything that was interpreted as our having reached
neutrality, because I don't think we really know. I'm a little
concerned that maybe those words--I don't have an alternative
suggestion--too strongly suggest that we've reached a neutral stance.
I just don't know what that is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Neither do we.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Needless to say, I support your proposal
enthusiastically, but I share Tom Melzer's feelings. When I heard the
statement I had the same kind of feelings that you had, Tom--that it
may tend to suggest that we've reached a plateau or reached
neutrality. Maybe we can work on it a little bit. Also, along those
lines, I don't have really strong feelings about the language of the
directive, but I think a symmetric directive would tend to create the
impression that we have reached a plateau. So, while I would accept a
symmetric directive, I have a preference for an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I support a 1/2 point increase, the symmetric
directive, and I like the draft statement the way it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I agree with President Boehne. We support the
50 basis points; we support the symmetric directive, and the wording
of the statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I support the proposal in its entirety. I am a
little concerned--somebody mentioned this earlier--about the comments
we get from time to time that we ought to take whatever actions we're
going to take and then pause. I don't think the statement gives the

-36-

5/17/94

impression that we're necessarily locking ourselves into that for any
extended period of time.
I guess what I'm concerned about is a view
in the markets now, and I don't know why it should arise now, that we
are more clairvoyant than we are--that we somehow know where we're
going and when we're going to stop. And I think we ought to be
careful and try not to convey that impression.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. I endorse the proposed moves, both of them. The
economic case continues to exist for this move and I think we do have
a window of opportunity for making it.
I support symmetric language.
I am a little concerned about the statement giving the impression that
we are satisfied or that this pause may run a while, although I can't
think of a better way of saying it.
That's the only concern I have,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly support the
proposal. The only question I have is a technical one. Is this a
single announcement today and is it going to be announced by you or
announced by the Committee or-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's going to be announced as a part of
the discount rate announcement. In other words, there's no need to
make two separate announcements.
MR. KEEHN.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor LaWare.

It's not by me; it will be by Joe Coyne.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm very pleased to support your
recommendation, and I think the elegance of the language permits the
interpretation that was intended--that we may still be probing, that
we are not sure that we are at neutrality, that we have taken a
significant step forward, but we're not at all committed to standing
pat.
I just think the language is beautifully composed.
MR. MELZER. One suggestion, I'm sorry to butt in, but maybe
the phrase "significantly reduces" rather than "substantially
removes."
I don't know whether that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We played with that.
I think it's a
tricky issue and I'm trying to avoid--if we ever tried to write a
communique around this table we would be here for a good six months!
President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER.

I support your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I also support your recommendation. It seems
to me that it is appropriate to go ahead and make our statement in the
market, and I think this proposal would do so. When we started this
series of moves of 25 basis points, we talked about the notion that

-37-

5/17/94

when we think the series of moves should come to an end we should so
signal. I don't think-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It was at the point when we thought that
the structure of the financial markets could take more.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Right, right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. At the very beginning we were concerned
that we would be hitting the markets too hard.
MS. PHILLIPS. I don't know whether we're at neutrality or
not. There is an argument that we may well be at neutrality because
we may be getting more of a kick from our tightening actions as a
result of the increase in long-term rates. So, in any case, I support
your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Your initial remarks I think are very important.
We can learn a fair amount if we think more about what's going on with
relative yields. Normally when we think about a relative move it's
either by quality spreads, by currency denomination, or by maturity.
At one time I studied the behavior of interest rates in periods of
crisis atmosphere relating to an international event:
Suez, the Bay
of Pigs Cuban missile crisis, the Yom Kippur War, Iraq in 1990, and so
on. The yield curve always steepens very sharply as portfolio
managers shorten their horizons. As the uncertainty dissipates the
yield curve flattens. That's quite different from the cyclical
behavior of the yield curve as an expansion matures. I think that
we're closer to conditions of 1978 than we are to some other
historical episodes. In April 1978 President Carter said that there
was no danger that excess demand would spill over and raise prices
just when the latter were about to explode. And through 1974, 1975,
and 1976, as you recall, the economy was fairly tranquil; wages were
fairly well behaved. Some of this started to change a little in 1977,
but nobody saw it coming. At least I certainly didn't. The
Administration had misread the situation in 1978 because they looked
at things like wages; they looked at a lot of things and said there
was no problem with inflation, and they were wrong. They never saw it
coming. And I'm concerned that we may be wrong again. It struck me
in the go-around earlier that at least some of you looking at the
world from inside the beltway--Governors Kelley, LaWare, and Phillips
--have a different feel of the economy than what I sense from the
other twelve of us.
Certainly I thought this was a marked difference,
and I'm not sure quite what to make of that.
I'm not troubled with the idea of saying we're at neutral and
we're on hold. If a very powerful move had to be made, we would act
anyway. None of us is going to know in advance whether any 25 basis
point difference is significant or not, whether it's to 4-1/4 or 4-1/2
or 4-3/4 percent. But to me it's quite different to say we're at
4-1/2 percent and we think that it's just as likely the next move is
down as up sometime out in the future. Being neutral implies an equal
probability that the next move will be down as up; we never know this.
If this group walks out of here today saying we're at 4-1/4 percent
and most people's commentary is, as it has been after the last couple
of meetings, that we've got more to go, I would find that troubling.

-38-

5/17/94

I would much rather if everybody walked out and said we're at 4-1/4
percent and we don't know whether the next move will be down or up.
To me that's a lot different than the majority of people responding in
"Well, we're
the weeks ahead, as we get queries about this, saying:
That adds uncertainty to
not quite at neutral; we've got more to go."
the bond market that I don't view as constructive. I would rather
have a stronger statement that we don't know when we're going to move
again and if we do, it might be down or up. If people are not
comfortable with that 4-1/4 percent, let's go to 4-1/2 percent and do
I'd rather do more than less.
a full point on the discount rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I support the 50 basis point
increase in the funds rate and the symmetric directive.
I think it is
going to be seen as a very powerful action by the marketplace both
I do think that we have to make a
inside the United States and out.
statement. There will be people whose only view of the world is based
on their own trading positions who will be disappointed by our not
saying the word of God is that this is it for some extended period of
time. We can't say that and shouldn't say that, but I think we should
be aware that it is not a sure thing that this action plus the
statement, which I think makes a great deal of sense, will necessarily
stabilize the financial markets.
I hope it does, and it probably will
after a couple of days, but it need not happen in the hour or two or
even a day or so after the meeting. I believe it will be very well
received outside the United States where attitudes are to a
substantial degree affected or influenced by our fellow central
bankers. The Chairman was at the last BIS meeting and, if I may say
so, did an unusually good job of explaining the U.S. position, and I
don't think anybody who attended that meeting will have any doubt that
this is a very firm, decisive action. And I think we will be very
much applauded by our fellow central bankers in many of the countries
around the world.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation and I
would particularly like to associate myself with Governor LaWare's
comments about the elegance and appropriateness of the statement that
you proposed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I support the statement, Mr. Chairman.
I think
we will be coming back. I thought President Jordan made a very good
point, and probably nine days ago I was about where he is.
But I
think this is the right move for right now and I don't know if I can
pick any number where I could go out and say that the probabilities of
moving up or down are equal. There's a level of uncertainty about the
economy and about the financial markets that causes me to express some
uncertainty about my interest rate objective. I think the statement
is very well written, and I support it.
MR. BERNARD. I'll be reading from page 15 of the Bluebook.
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to increase somewhat the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions, taking account of a possible increase in the

5/17/94

-39-

discount rate.
In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives
for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration of economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser
reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is on July 5 and 6, the
Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. This meeting is adjourned.
END OF MEETING

