Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
March 24, 1994
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips

Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, and Oltman, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Goodfriend, Siegman, Stockton, and Ms.
Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Ms. O'Day, Associate General Counsel, Legal
Division, Board of Governors
Ms. Misback, Managing Senior Counsel. Legal
Division, Board of Governors

-2-

Ms. Minehan, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Scheld, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Boston, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Mr. Coughlin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
March 24, 1994
A few opening comments on the tape of this
Secretary's note:
session were unintelligible.
MR. TRUMAN.

... elsewhere.

As you probably are aware,

the

Mexican authorities closed their financial markets today, but they
intend to open them tomorrow. There has been some limited trading of
Mexican instruments outside of Mexico. After an initial dip of 7 to
10 percent, the prices of those instruments are now down only about 5
to 7 percent. The Mexican authorities have asked for a demonstration
of our support under these difficult circumstances.
After consultations with the U.S. Treasury and the Bank of
Mexico we have agreed to propose to the Committee an arrangement
essentially of the same sort that was developed last November in the
context of the NAFTA vote. Specifically, what is proposed is a $6
billion temporary swap facility consisting of $3 billion each from the
Federal Reserve and the Treasury.
In our case our existing $700
million swap line would be absorbed into the $3 billion line. The
arrangement would be effective, essentially, on action.
It would be
available until the 29th of April.
It would have to be repaid by the
29th of July. And for your information, the Mexican presidential
election is on the 21st of August.
Drawings would be collateralized
by Mexican dollar assets at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. If
there were a drawing, there would also have to be an IMF letter of
support for Mexico's economic policies.
My understanding is that when the Mexican authorities open
their markets tomorrow they intend to defend their existing band.
They have about 1 percent or a little more--about 1-1/4 percent-leeway in their band since the peso has depreciated 6 or 7 percent
over the last several weeks. They would do so at least for a while.
My impression--and I can only say it's my impression--is that there's
not a lot of appetite to spend a great deal of money in this process,
but they feel they should do it for a while under these circumstances
and the uncertainties surrounding them. Their reserves are quite
adequate, in fact close to $30 billion I understand at the moment.
Assuming the FOMC approves this temporary increase of the swap line,
it would most likely be announced today or early tomorrow. A final
The arrangement proposed is separate from the permanent
comment:
increase in the swap line discussed at the FOMC meeting on Tuesday and
the associated consultation mechanism. I would expect that we would
come back to the FOMC in April with that proposal, which would in
effect supersede this action. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How does this differ if at all in the
details from the proposal that we discussed the previous time, which
was not implemented?
MR. TRUMAN.

It is essentially the same.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.

You say "essentially."

The only differences are the dates.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Then it is identical.

3/24/94

MR. TRUMAN.

It's identical except for the dates.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Any questions for Ted?

MR. BOEHNE. Ted, is this a unilateral action on the part of
the United States or is it a part of a broad package of international
support?
MR. TRUMAN. The request came from Mexico but they have only
made their request to the United States at the moment. And I have no
indication that they've asked for broader support at this time.
I did
consult with the Bank of Canada and they had not been contacted yet.
MR. BROADDUS. This is Al Broaddus. Has there been any
discussion or is there any possibility that this extension of credit
could be done entirely by the Treasury with perhaps backup from us in
the form of warehousing or something along those lines?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, that's certainly technically possible. My
sense is that the Treasury would prefer this to be a joint operation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there other questions for Ted?
anyone have any strong objections to the implementation of this?

Does

MR. BOEHNE. On the contrary, Mr. Chairman, I think this is
the sort of thing that we need to do.
I don't think we ought to do it
reluctantly. This is a legitimate request and a very unfortunate set
of circumstances and I think we ought to be accommodative to Mexico.
I believe the safeguards from our point of view are more than
reasonable. And I think this ought to be a cooperative arrangement
with the Treasury and we ought to go forward and do it.
I think this
is part of our role and I view it as a positive development in a
situation that's most unfortunate.
MR. FORRESTAL. This is Bob Forrestal.
the sentiments just expressed by Ed Boehne.

I entirely agree with

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. This is Bill McDonough. I
certainly support this proposal. The details of it are identical, as
has been pointed out, to those we spent a great deal of time working
on last fall, and I think are completely acceptable. In the broader
philosophical area we discussed last Tuesday, it seems to me that this
is a very appropriate responsibility of our country's central bank.
We also discussed the fact that Mexico was close enough to us that it
could have a destabilizing effect on our financial market if things
should go wrong there, and we had a very good indication of that
today. There's no question that the events in Mexico had an adverse
effect on both the stock and the bond markets in our country. I think
both to support Mexico and to carry out our responsibilities to our
own country we should definitely take part in this operation.
MR. HOENIG. This is Tom Hoenig. I support this.
I have a
question. When you say this program is identical to the last one,
will our relationship be with the central bank or will it now be with
the Ministry of Finance until the central bank-MR. TRUMAN. In the past, President Hoenig, our relationship
has been exclusively with the central bank; the central bank's status

3/24/94

just has been different than it will be. And this will be a swap
arrangement executed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on behalf
of the FOMC with the Bank of Mexico.
MR. HOENIG. And the fact that the status of the Bank of
Mexico will change April 1 will not affect it?
MR. TRUMAN. I don't think so.
but I don't think that's a problem.
MR. HOENIG.

I would defer to the lawyers,

Okay, thank you.

MS. MINEHAN. Ted, this is Cathy. You would expect then that
whenever they would draw on this facility they would do so working
directly with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and there would be
no further involvement of the Open Market Committee?
MR. TRUMAN. That's right, but there are several conditions
for drawings on the facility, one of which is that they would have to
have a letter from the managing director of the International Monetary
Fund saying that the IMF supports their economic policies. And the
other--the principal one--would be that they would have to have assets
on deposit at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York of $2 billion.
MS. MINEHAN.

Right.

MR. TRUMAN. The way it's set up, the initial drawing would
be $2 billion and then we would have to subsequently negotiate any
further drawings.
MS. MINEHAN. Okay. I'm very much in favor, in accordance
with the logic that Ed Boehne discussed on this matter.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, this is Al Broaddus.
I'm afraid
I'm going to be in a minority here. I understand the seriousness of
the situation and the commitment the President has made but I have the
same fundamental reservations about this as I had on Tuesday.
It
seems to me that this will ultimately be a permanent increase in our
swap line with Mexico. And I have a very strong preference for
limiting our participation, if we need to participate at all on this,
to the current $700 million swap line.
I recognize the short-run
issues but I believe, especially in the current context in which the
System and its role are under intense scrutiny in the country
generally and in the Congress, that ultimately this will do us more
harm than good.
MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, this is Gary Stern. I support the
action as proposed. In light of our discussion on Tuesday about
disorderly markets and the potential for disorderly markets when
Mexico opens its market tomorrow, it seems to me that this is an
appropriate action and I strongly support it.
MR. PARRY.
action as well.

action.

Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry.

I support the

MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. I certainly support the
I think Ed Boehne has phrased it very, very well.
This is

3/24/94

exactly the way we ought to use this kind of facility under these
particular circumstances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments?

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, if there are no further comments,
I assume that a motion is necessary because a vote is to follow.
It
is my pleasure to support the proposal and I so move it.
MR. LINDSEY.

I'll second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would you call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
pleasant evening.

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Thank you very much and we wish you a

MR. TRUMAN.
If we put out a press release, we'll make sure
it is faxed to the Reserve Banks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.
END OF SESSION

