Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
December 20, 1994

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 20, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, 1McTeer, and Stern, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, Sniderman,
Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

1.

Left before discussion of the economic situation.

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and
Dallas respectively
Messrs. Gavin and McNees, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston
respectively
Mr. Kuttner, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago
Mr. Hilton, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
December 20, 1994
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move approval of
the minutes for the meeting on November 15?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
President Jordan for a motion.

I recognize

MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to nominate
Mark Sniderman to be an associate economist of the FOMC.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would somebody like to second the

motion?
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Unless I hear an objection, it's

approved.
Peter Fisher has a number of interesting things to discuss
this morning. Peter.
MR. FISHER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
go on to Joan Lovett?
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

[Statement--See Appendix.]

Questions for Peter?

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

If not, shall we

[Statement--See

Questions for Joan?

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. You mentioned that the markets were thinner at
the year-end than they usually are. Would you expand on that?
MS. LOVETT.
It has been a disappointing year for a lot of
people in the financial markets. We have had some sense since
Thanksgiving that many people are just hanging on in the hope of
getting through December 31.
If they have done well or have managed
to do all right, they want to finish the year in that position. If
they haven't done well, they don't want to add to their losses. As a
result, there has been a general tendency for people to try to take
cover. This gives us a hint as to why we have had abrupt moves when
securities have come into the market in clumps, because people don't
feel they necessarily have the wherewithal to take them on. If they
do buy them, they have to re-route them right away or hedge them with
something equivalent.
MS. PHILLIPS. Is this causing more discounting of the Orange
County paper than you might ordinarily expect if they had been selling
that paper at another time of year?
MS. LOVETT.
I think that in the Orange County case there
probably are several influences at work. It was helpful that people
eventually were able to get a handle on just what the county has.
In

12/20/94

the first day or so, people couldn't get any information from Orange
County on almost anything, and I think that is what caused the biggest
Since that time, the markets have come back in many
market backup.
cases to where they were prior to the break of the news or maybe just
5 or 10 basis points past that, even with some of the securities being
liquidated. So I think the initial move occurred because of the lack
of knowledge of exactly what was going on and what was going to
happen. By the same token, markets are in an atmosphere where there
is an FOMC meeting and people view interest rates as being on an
upward trend. If you could have picked a time for Orange County to
sell, maybe this would not have been the time you would have picked.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move to ratify
the domestic transactions of the Desk since the last meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Messrs. Prell and Truman.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PRELL.

So move.

Without objection.

Let's now move on to

[Statement--See Appendix.]
[Statement--See Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. PARRY. Mike, you talked about the inflation forecast and
indicated that you made, in effect, an intercept adjustment in the
forecast to carry forward the favorable experience that we seem to
have had in 1994.
Would you talk further about why we have had that
favorable experience and why it might continue? We may be seeing
actual growth in excess of potential. As we get closer to capacity
isn't there a risk that we will have seen a delay in the typical
Phillips curve relationship?
If it were to reassert itself in 1995,
might inflation turn out to be a fair amount higher than you indicated
in the forecast?
MR. PRELL. That is a risk I hinted at in my remarks about
I think the key here is to look back at
the late 1980s experience.
why we projected the inflation that we did for 1994.
In essence, we
were concerned at the beginning of the year that the pattern of
expectations we were seeing, the very buoyant attitudes and so on, and
the rapid growth at the end of last year were going to give us a
stronger price increase this year than would have been dictated by our
analysis of where levels of resource utilization were. Looking back
now, we see a pattern that seems reasonably consistent with our
fundamental view of the Phillips curve picture. We did not get down
to our point estimate of the NAIRU until this summer.
Under the
circumstances, some further deceleration was not implausible. We also
think that perhaps we underestimated the cost effects in the medical
care area. We have had tremendous deceleration of the cost of medical
benefits, and this has helped to tamp down the rate of increase in
compensation. I think that has been a surprise that was not built
into our forecast and now appears possibly to have been a broad
element that was helping to bring down the inflation rate this year.
We don't see that contributing as much going forward. We think there

12/20/94

will still be some deceleration, but it will probably taper off to
some degree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Mike, there have been a couple of threads in the
discussion about 1994:
the Greenbooks in the past, this one, and
your remarks now. On one side, we have had a lot more growth in
output and employment this year than we--or anybody--had been
anticipating and much larger increases in short-term interest rates
than had been expected. In your remarks, you made reference to
questions about the demand damping effects of higher rates. The other
side is the greater underlying strength of the real economy. Which
has been the larger contributing factor: that there is something else
going on that has created more strength on the real side than we had
anticipated or, as has been conjectured in the press, that monetary
policy is less potent? To which of these would you subscribe?
MR. PRELL. I don't think one can rule out the possibility
that the interest sensitivity of the economy in the short run may be
less than it was.
Certainly, we have felt all along that, without the
disintermediation effects of Reg Q ceilings that we got decades ago,
there wasn't going to be quite the abrupt swing toward restraint that
previously accompanied increases in short-term market interest rates.
But we are still learning. Financial markets continue to evolve.
It
is conceivable that the lag structure is different. I just don't
think we have enough evidence to make a strong statement in that
regard. Part of what has happened this year has been a surprise in
the growth of European economies, in particular, that has helped to
buttress export demand. On the domestic side, while we cited a risk
repeatedly through the year that inventory investment could be
stronger than we were anticipating because businesses might become
concerned about the availability of supplies, as things turned out,
that seemed to be a much more dynamic feature in the economy than we
had anticipated. There is a cyclical dynamic to this. As inventory
investment and exports proved strong, that raised aggregate demand and
that in turn reinforced the desire for inventories. As we got more
production and more income, that raised consumption. So this is a
process that feeds on itself up to a point.
Going forward, it is critical, as I noted, that these levels
of inventory investment are unsustainable.
If the economy is going to
get back to a growth rate of no more than the long-run potential rate,
there has to be a drop-off at some point. The question is when that
drop-off in inventory investment will occur. We are also banking on
there being a significant lagged effect of the interest rate increases
that have occurred. It is still early, as has been discussed
repeatedly here. As estimated even in our current models, the lags
are long enough so that we would only begin to get significant effects
now and in the early part of next year. We are also building in
further rate increases, which will have their effect more in the
latter part of 1995 and into 1996, but we think these rate increases
may reinforce the effects in the shorter run, too, through increases
in adjustable rate mortgages and even adjustments in the stock market.
If short rates rise as much as we have assumed, it will be more and
more difficult for households to get enthusiastic about taking on what
appear to be some risks in the stock and bond markets when they can
get sizable real returns without risk in the short run.

12/20/94

MR. JORDAN. There are a couple of things that follow from
your remarks in looking into the year ahead and contrasting it with
1994.
When I started looking at your Greenbook forecasts for 1995 and
1996, on one side I welcomed the continued discipline that comes from
the concern about inflation and the overriding desire to contain it to
achieve our longer objectives. On the other side, though, I was
reminded of the feeling that I have had in conversing with employees
in Cleveland in the last couple of months; they keep telling me that
the unusually warm weather that we have had in October, November, and
December is not good because it means we are going to have an
unusually cold January, February, and March. There is this vindictive
weather god out there that catches up with us. What is it about the
process you go through in putting together the forecast that says that
favorable surprises in output and employment in one period must be
matched with unfavorable developments in a subsequent period such that
the level of output and employment always comes out approximately the
same in any given forecast horizon?
MR. PRELL. In fact, we didn't quite get back to the
unemployment level in our prior forecast. We took the kinder, gentler
approach to some limited degree here so that by the end of the period,
we are in essence back at our point estimate of the NAIRU as it
This means in
currently stands rather than somewhat above that.
essence that we don't see any disinflationary pressure through 1996.
We merely stabilize things. That is the design principle here. What
we have attempted to do is give you a baseline forecast that holds
activity to a path that at least doesn't let inflation get out of
control and tries to tell you whether that is achievable and how.
That exercise involves a great deal of uncertainty, but that is why
the good news in terms of output and low unemployment that we have
recently experienced gets offset by bad news of slow growth and
increasing unemployment later in the forecast.
MR. JORDAN. Okay. I expected that answer. Let me follow up
on it because it raises a big concern about our February meeting.
Some time between now and that meeting, we have to submit projections
to you whose so-called central tendencies are to be published in the
Humphrey-Hawkins report. What I suspected to be the case and
confirmed when I looked it up is that the numbers in the central
tendency in February are almost the same, with only slight
differences, as the prior December Greenbook projections. The central
tendencies, which of course exclude the outliers, tend to be a little
more optimistic than the Greenbook on output, a little lower on
unemployment--0.1 percent or so--and a little better on inflation.
But there is not much difference; essentially, the central tendencies
are the numbers in the prior December's Greenbook. If that turns out
to be what happens this time, I am concerned about what we are going
to be announcing publicly. The Chairman has to go before
Congressional committees two or three weeks after the February meeting
and go public with these numbers. The markets expect this Committee
to take some action in February to raise the funds rate again. Then
the Chairman is going to be in the position of saying that what we
expect to happen--actually I have never understood whether it is what
we want to happen or what we predict is going to happen--is that
output growth is going to drop under 2 percent, unemployment is going
to rise, inflation is going to rise, and therefore we will jack up the
funds rate.

12/20/94

MR. PRELL. I don't know if there is anything I can say! It
certainly occurred to me that taking these numbers just as they are
might provide a somewhat unappealing forecast in the Humphrey-Hawkins
report. But this forecast is not so far from the consensus view among
economists that a little degree of optimism, as you suggested,
wouldn't put it in the ballpark. I don't want to prescribe what
people should say here. What we have forecast clearly is a slight
uptick in unemployment between now and the end of next year, a slight
uptick in inflation, and growth that is only modestly below most
people's assessment of the long-term trend. We are a little bit
lower, I think, than the consensus forecast at this point for GDP
growth. We are lower on the inflation rate than the consensus
forecast. I admit that these are differences, but we think they are
consistent.
MR. TRUMAN. If I could add just two points: One is--I'm not
sure this is helpful--my impression that the Administration is going
through much the same problem. If they think that the NAIRU is about
what we have estimated it to be, they no longer are in a position to
say growth will slow down to potential of 2-1/2 percent because in
that case they will have built in a permanently higher inflation and
lower unemployment rate. I'm not sure how they will square that
circle. In terms of comparing the Committee's forecast with the
Administration's forecast, there may be some leeway on that score. My
second point comes back to your initial question on the effectiveness
of monetary policy and whether it may be reduced. In today's world,
of course, we tend to assume that one of the channels of monetary
policy is through the exchange rate. That is why we have model
results that suggest the overall effect may be the same as it was 15
or 20 years ago, but the channels have changed with the relaxation of
Regulation Q. I don't know whether you want to call it an exogenous
event, or a favorable event, or an unfavorable event, or something
unrelated where there has been a breakdown in monetary policy. But,
of course, with the dollar having gone down this year rather than
going up, which would have been your ex ante assumption, you do have a
difference that could either be attributed to a stronger than expected
"economy" in some sense or a short circuiting of that channel in this
particular instance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions?

MR. BLINDER. I'd like to ask a question of Mike that keys
off of where he finished with Jerry Jordan. Yesterday in the
briefing, Governor Yellen asked Mike a question about the difference
in the forecasts attributable to the tightenings that are embedded in
the Greenbook forecast but not yet acted upon by the FOMC. She cited
some numbers generated by the staff model. Mike, you indicated that
you didn't really accept those numbers. I'd like to know--it is
germane to the question that was just asked--what would be the
forecast at a constant funds rate or the difference in the forecast
between a constant funds rate path and the funds rate path embedded in
the staff forecast?
MR. PRELL. The model simulation we have done using a
constant funds rate has only slightly more growth in 1995 and then
appreciably greater growth in 1996.
MR. BLINDER.

Right.

-6-

12/20/94

MR. PRELL. By the model's assessment, that would add several
So in that sense, the
tenths to the inflation rate in 1996.
difference here is one of stable inflation at slightly over 3 percent
versus an accelerating price picture with the inflation rate moving up
into the mid-3 percent range by 1996.
I don't have a basis for
seriously questioning this outlook. I do think there is a risk in the
near term that, if the economy behaves anything like what we are
anticipating and if the fed funds rate were to remain at 5-1/2
percent, inflation expectations could mount in ways that wouldn't be
anticipated in the structure of our model.
It is manifest that the
market is expecting as much tightening as we have built in, if not
more. The recent response of the markets to the tightening action
shows that they are rather sensitive to indications that we are going
to resist inflationary tendencies. The common forecast is for
inflation to move up.
I'd say the consensus is about 3-1/2 percent,
looking at the Blue Chip forecasts for 1995.
I think there would be
considerable worry--unless there are clear indications the economy has
weakened in the next couple of months--if the Fed were not to move the
rate up significantly.
MR. BLINDER. I wasn't pushing a constant-funds-rate policy;
I was just asking what the effects of that policy were, particularly
on the real growth rate and on the inflation rate. On a fourth-tofourth quarter basis, your forecast has real GDP growth decelerating
from 4.1 percent in 1994, to 1.9 percent in 1995, and then to 1.8
percent in 1996.
If you accepted what was in the the staff model and
you backed out the effects of the coming tightening, that 1.9 percent
and 1.8 percent would change to 2.1 percent and 2.5 percent. Now, to
my way of thinking about the marginal effect of new policy with
respect to timing, wouldn't you expect the inflation effects to be
zilch in 1995, pretty mild in 1996, and in fact mostly having an
impact in 1997?
I am talking about additional policy changes, not
about the tightenings we have banked already.
MR. PRELL. I think inflation mounts because, in this
alternative, we are running with an unemployment rate that remains
below the NAIRU out through 1996 and presumably into 1997, so we are
getting an accelerating picture.
MR. BLINDER.

Sure.

I'm only talking about the derivative.

MR. PRELL. But I think that in the near term, taking into
account exchange rate and import price effects and so on, the model
begins to get additional inflation creeping in within 1995 and
building a bit.
It is very gradual and probably undiscernibly
different. That again goes back to the comment I made earlier. It
could creep up on you, and sustaining the low unemployment rate, as
happened in the late 1980s, eventually does build up to a significant
pickup in inflation. That is what our forecast has been designed to
avoid.
MR. BLINDER. I was not questioning any of that; you
misinterpreted the question; it is only about the marginal effects of
policy. If we have passed through the NAIRU, which seems reasonably
likely, exactly what you said ought to be happening. But the marginal
effect on inflation of policy tightening from today forward, to my way
of thinking, ought not to be on this Greenbook page. That is really
the question. Or do you agree with that?

12/20/94

MR. PRELL. I think it would show up certainly in the tenths
column, but we are talking about a matter of a couple of tenths over
the next year or year and a half.
MR. BLINDER.

Okay.

MR. PRELL. It is not dramatic.
I would caution that in
thinking about the slowdown in the economy, one does not want to think
of that as purely a straight interest rate effect. Some of it is the
inevitable reversal of that cyclical dynamic in the inventory
investment area that I talked about. Our inventory equations, just as
other forecasting tools, don't work all that well, so it is not
something I'd want to bank on the model to capture. This is a very
important element in the timing of the deceleration as we see it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This reminds me of a discussion I
remember having at the CEA in 1973 when everyone was talking about the
small inflationary effects that were on the horizon--0.2 or 0.3
percent. Our models are really gross simplifications of the real
world. As I've indicated before, simulations on reduced-form
structures, which without appropriate add-ons give us silly forecasts,
should not be employed with a great degree of confidence at this
stage. I think our capability of doing the type of simulation that
you are discussing here is really marginal. We have to be careful
about reading terribly much into it.
Just remember, it is the same
econometric structure in the model that engendered a significant
slowing in the second half of 1994, which didn't occur. The
difference is the add-ons and the underlying structure that we don't
capture.
I'm not saying it is not useful to discuss what the
potential impacts and lags are; it is just that I hope that everyone
retains a large dose of skepticism in applying these types of
structures. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Mike, how much additional fed funds increase is
built into your forecast?
MR. PRELL. We have the funds rate moving up into the 6-1/2
or 7 percent area by early next spring.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? Let's move on to
the Committee discussion. Let me just say, incidentally, that I've
noticed at the last couple of meetings that our discussions of
economic conditions have spilled over into an awful lot of policy at
this point. I request, if you can possibly do it, that you stay with
an analysis of what you see and leave the policy prescription for the
next segment, or we will be contaminating our agenda here in an
inappropriate way.
MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, it seems though that that would be
easier to do if the Greenbook based its projections on where policy is
currently. What we have here is a Greenbook that assumes a further
tightening, the amount of which is unspecified. So that makes it very
difficult for us to-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Bluebook.

I think it was specified in the

12/20/94

MR. PRELL.
It is specified and you should have heard through
your research director what the specific numbers were. I apologize if
there was a slip in communications.
MR. MCTEER. I must have missed it when I read the Greenbook,
Surely, it was
but just now you said a 6-1/2 to 7 percent funds rate.
one or the other or 6-3/4.
It seems sort of vague.
MR. PRELL. My point is that we think the tightening needs to
be significant. I think a problem with specific numbers is that they
imply a false sense of precision about what it will take. Yes, to
enter something into an econometric model, we would write down 6-3/4
percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I acknowledge your issue but still
request that, if you possibly can, you stay on this side of the fence.
President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Let me just kick off the regional overview.
The First District continues to expand at a moderate pace. We have
had a rate of job growth for the region as a whole that is behind the
nation. Our unemployment numbers are about the same, and as usual
there are all sorts of variations by state, with Massachusetts still
leading the pack and Connecticut still bumping along. Consumer and
business confidence in the region has risen sharply according to both
recent data and an increasing amount of anecdotal information. On the
other hand, while District bank lending has grown through the third
quarter, the pace of its growth is well behind that of the nation as a
whole. And if you compare the districts, the First District is
lagging in all kinds of bank lending.
Job growth continues to be concentrated in services,
especially business and health excluding hospitals. Manufacturing
employment continues to lag, but the anecdotal reports from First
District manufacturers are generally positive. Strength is fairly
broad-based. However, there continues to be weakness in the defense
area.
Most of our manufacturing and retail contacts report
increases in input prices, though their comments often revolve around
the same inputs, largely paper and wood products in our area. They
are also starting to report increases or planned increases in selling
prices. Larger organizations, both retail and manufacturing, seem to
indicate that the downsizing is over. About half of our contacts
report that they are going to be hiring in the new year. If they have
price increases in mind, they probably will be putting them through
about the beginning of the year. There are reports of wage increases
in the range of 3 to 5 percent.
I think, however, that the high side
of this range probably reflects some desire in companies that have
been through downsizing to reward those people who are remaining. I
don't think that is necessarily reflective of a trend of continuing 5
percent wage increases.
Now trying to stay on the right side of this fence, with
regard to the Greenbook, we were more optimistic generally speaking
when the year began. We thought there was likely to be a lower full
employment level, a little more potential for growth, and certainly no
inflationary risk of any size. We saw balanced risks at that time.

12/20/94

As the year has gone by, we along with everybody else have been
impressed by the degree to which the data are always stronger than we
expect.
I see that Boston is widely thought of as a dove on these
matters, but even the most dovish of the people at the Boston Fed now
believe that the risks are more on the up side.
Our own forecasts are now a bit more pessimistic than the
Greenbook. We think 1995 will have more overshooting on the
employment side and a greater risk of inflation than is embodied in
the Greenbook.
If this doesn't stray too far over the fence, we think
that the tightening in the Greenbook is about the minimum that is
needed.
[Laughter]

run.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN.

That is like Babe Ruth bunting a home

You handed me a challenge.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter Fisher has an announcement that I
thought we ought to interpose.
MR. TRUMAN. He's not here, but maybe I can make it.
He can
clarify the facts later, but let me just state that at about 9:30, the
Mexicans did announce that they had moved their intervention band by
15 percent and will continue to crawl that band by four new centavos a
day. So, they basically have moved the band by 15 percent. We don't
have any market quotes-Actually, we do. The
[Re-entering the meeting]
MR. FISHER.
peso has traded at 3.83 to 3.86, down about 11 percent from yesterday;
Screens in New York are
it has not approached the outer band at all.
not quoting the Mexican stock market, but talking to people in Mexico,
the decision seems to have been taken well in Mexican markets.
Even
though the ADRs--Mexican stocks traded in New York--were down, reports
indicate that Mexican stocks are trading up in Mexico. So, the market
seems to be taking it well in Mexico so far, and the peso hasn't
traded out to its limit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you are going to do 15 percent, you
really want the market to do 10 to 12 percent on its own.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sounds just about perfect.

Let's hope it doesn't happen again.

MR. BLINDER.

The first 35 minutes.

MS. MINEHAN.

Right.

MR. BLINDER.

I take the longer view, an hour or so!

It's not over until it's over.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
exchange trader!
MR. BLINDER.

You'd never be a good foreign

No!

MR. TRUMAN. As Peter mentioned in his earlier report, one
problem with their monetary policy is that they have an auction today

12/20/94

-10-

of their tesobonos and another auction tomorrow of their pesodenominated debt. Financial market reactions will depend on how they
choose to play those auction results.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To get good results on that or at least
not disastrous results would be very helpful.
President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District
economy continues to grow at a healthy pace and gains remain spread
across all states and all industries. Our bank directors are almost
uniformly positive about current conditions and the near-term outlook
for our region. One key example comes from the transportation
industry, where reports show strained capacity resulting from very
strong demand for shipments of coal, autos, building materials, and a
variety of other products.
In almost every part of the District, we
continue to hear reports of shortages of labor, spanning both skilled
and unskilled. Consistent with these reports, current data show
nonfarm jobs in the District up almost 3 percent in October from a
year earlier, about equal to the nation. Most states added jobs at
rates close to the District average, but a couple--New Mexico for
example--were substantially over the average.
Manufacturing continues to improve, with most of the strength
Our contacts in the District's key
in the durable goods industries.
automobile assembly plants tell us that they are operating at capacity
levels following the changeover to new models. Major expansions are
under way in the District for plants producing computer chips and
other computer equipment.
Construction activity remains robust across
the District. Most of the recent strength has been in public projects
with some modest slowing in home building. The energy sector is at
least stable over the past few weeks, but farm incomes are probably on
the weaker side for us, especially in cattle and hog production. Bank
credit continues to increase at most District banks, with strong loan
growth offsetting some modest decline in securities.
At the national level, we are looking for growth in the last
quarter to be as much as 5 percent.
I look for that momentum to carry
forward into next year. I also share the view that the economy is
currently operating beyond long-term potential levels.
Such measures
as the unemployment rate and capacity utilization certainly suggest
that and perhaps even an overheating economy. At the current policy
stage and looking forward to next year, I think we do have continued
inflationary pressures that confront us as we enter 1995.
With that,
to avoid going over the fence, I'll shut up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, economic activity on balance in
the Seventh District appears to be even stronger than at the time of
our November meeting. Like the Greenbook, we have raised our estimate
for real GDP growth for the fourth quarter, and I expect it to be in
the 5 percent range.
It also seems likely that rapid growth will
persist into the first quarter of 1995, with some likelihood of growth
in excess of 3 percent. With real GDP already slightly above
potential output, this robust pace of real activity threatens to
generate a noticeable increase in CPI inflation later in 1995, moving
inflation above the Greenbook forecast.
Indicators of consumer
activity in the Seventh District remain quite robust. For most of the

12/20/94

-11-

District, the holiday sales season is running very strong,
particularly for such durables as personal computers, electronics,
appliances, and big screen televisions. Only sales of soft goods such
as apparel have lagged.
The District's manufacturing sector continues strong after
the summer supply disruptions in the automobile industry. Auto and
light truck sales are running at about a 15-1/2 million unit annual
rate in the fourth quarter. Although availability continues to
constrain sales for some models, many of the problems should be
resolved over the next six months, allowing domestic producers to
continue to gain market share. Over the next six months, the Big
Three automakers plan to boost light truck capacity at existing plants
by about 800,000 units through a number of changes to production
processes. Production schedules for the first half of 1995 are quite
aggressive, up 4 percent in the first quarter from strong year-ago
levels and up 5 to 6 percent in the second quarter. While this is a
very upbeat assessment, some extremely tentative signs of moderation
in automobile sales were reported to us just recently. Specifically,
reports yesterday from two major automobile manufacturers revealed
some softness in demand at the dealer level. Although retail sales
remain strong, some dealers have pared back their orders from
manufacturers, possibly as a result of declines in showroom traffic,
unexpected increases in stocks, or higher interest rates. In
response, one manufacturer has taken the unusual step of trimming its
production plans and reducing overtime levels at several plants.
Although it is too early to attach much weight to these reports, they
may represent early tangible effects of this year's increases in
short-term rates.
Heavy-duty truck sales were strong again in October, and it
now looks as if sales for all of 1994 will set a new record high.
Orders also remain brisk, with the backlog extending into next year's
fourth quarter. The backlog is due at least in part to producers
allowing customers to lock in current prices and avoid expected price
increases next year if they are willing to accept later delivery.
Significant strength is also evident in our District's steel, machine
tool, and office furniture industries.
In the agricultural sector, the situation is more mixed. It
appears that some slowing has occurred in sales of farm equipment,
especially for large tractors and combines. Still, domestic
manufacturing schedules are up strongly in November and apparently in
December as well. Prices in livestock markets have been depressed by
large meat supplies, particularly for hogs. On the other hand, crop
markets have been supported recently by improving export prospects and
by the heavy use of government price support programs, especially
among farmers in District states. Upward price pressures are reported
for food packaging costs, including very steep 25 to 30 percent
increases in corrugated cardboard prices, with another increase
expected in January, as well as increases in prices of tinplate and
bottles used as beverage containers. In addition, the explosion of a
major fertilizer plant in Iowa has added temporary pressures to tight
supplies and sizable price increases already evident for fertilizer.
On the employment front, labor markets continue to firm.
Auto-related employment is at its highest level since 1979, and
overall manufacturing employment in the District is back to its 1989

12/20/94

-12-

level.
In Michigan, the unemployment rate in November was the lowest
since the end of 1969, and in Illinois, the rate was the lowest since
the late 1970s. Moreover, surveys of employer hiring plans in the
Midwest are the highest in at least 18 years. The tightening in
District labor markets has been accompanied by more frequent reports
of upward pressure on wages due to labor shortages.
Overall, Seventh District economic activity is consistent
with the national economy. It has continued to grow at a rate that,
if maintained, would lead to increasing inflationary pressures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District's economy is
growing solidly. Outside of California, the pace of growth is
moderating in some of the intermountain states, although Oregon's
economy seems to be accelerating. Economic indicators for California
show continued improvement, aside from the financial problems in
Orange County.
The current estimate of the Orange County investment pool's
losses is $2 billion, but the ultimate loss probably is going to be
slightly higher. That $2 billion is equivalent to around 2-1/2
percent of Orange County's $75 billion personal income or around .3
percent of total state income. However, the comparison with a single
year's personal income overstates the economic impact of the financial
losses, since a large proportion of the funds was earmarked for
capital expenditures that are spread over several years.
Since more
than 97 percent of the funds in the pool were invested by government
entities within Orange County, most of the economic effect will be
felt in Orange County itself, which accounts for roughly 10 percent of
California's economy. The county and other participating governments
appear to have been largely successful so far in finding ways to meet
immediate cash needs. There is still a great deal of uncertainty
about how the effects will be distributed among the affected
However, it is clear that these local government
jurisdictions.
entities will cut spending substantially. Orange County already has
postponed some large capital projects and put a freeze on hiring and
all nonessential spending. A number of other jurisdictions are making
similar moves.
One of the immediate effects has been to raise the cost of
borrowing for Orange County governments and for the State of
California. As was discussed earlier, credit spreads rose on
municipal securities all over the country after Orange County filed
for bankruptcy. These spreads generally have fallen back to the
levels that prevailed before the problems in Orange County became
public. The exception seems to be the State of California. Credit
spreads on state issues rose more than on most other tax-free bonds.
Subsequently, spreads have come down only a little from their postbankruptcy peaks, and they remain higher than they were before the
bankruptcy. This might reflect market speculation that the state
government, which already is financially weak, eventually will be
asked to bear some of the cost.
In this regard, I should point out
that in contrast to California State bonds, the credit spreads for
actively traded city and county issues within California look about
like those for municipals in the rest of the country.

-13-

12/20/94

Exposure of Twelfth District banks to Orange County has been
and continues to be minimal. Loans and direct holdings of Orange
County debt by banks are small, and the same goes for exposures under
letters of credit. However, a few banks face some indirect exposure
through sponsorship of mutual funds with Orange County holdings.
Sponsors of some affected mutual funds, notably the money market
funds, bought the funds' holdings of Orange County debt to prevent
their funds from realizing the full losses. In other words, they
wanted to make sure they didn't "break the buck" on the money funds.
In general, the market seems to have differentiated among various
mutual funds according to the extent of their Orange County exposure.
We also learned that one of the banks that has a tax-exempt money
market fund, instead of buying the Orange County paper at par as was
done by a few other banks, issued a letter of credit for the Orange
County debt, which of course increased its price and reduced the
problem.
I'd like to turn to the national economy now and hopefully I
will remain on the right side of the fence as well, but I certainly
don't want to be on top of the fence.
[Laughter]
The national
economy continues to exhibit surprisingly strong growth in employment,
output, and spending. Indeed, the evidence suggests that the current
pace of real economic activity has not been diminished very much by
the tighter stance of monetary policy this year, or at least that any
policy effects have been more than offset by other factors.
Simulations of our own structural model, which has a monetary policy
response similar to models such as DRI's and Ray Fair's, suggest that
the tightening so far this year has reduced the growth rate of GDP by
about 1/2 percentage point in 1994.
The tightening also is projected
to reduce GDP growth by a full percentage point in 1995, and another
1/2 percentage point in 1996. Long bonds have moved up more quickly
than they often do in response to a policy tightening; there were
charts in Part II of the Greenbook that illustrated this. This early
increase has probably accelerated the effects of policy, so a greater
proportion of the effects of the monetary restraint than suggested
above may already have been achieved. I might note parenthetically
that this has a rather interesting implication for the MPS model where
one-half of the effect is in the third year. That is very different
from any other model. The more conventional models are showing a
faster effect.
Even assuming that monetary policy tightens further, as in
the Greenbook, our structural model sees a substantial risk that
inflation in 1995 and 1996 will be somewhat above its current pace.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in the
Sixth District continues to expand, although the pace of the expansion
has decelerated somewhat from the growth rates we saw earlier in the
year. Consumer spending is holding up quite well. We had a rebound
in retail sales right after the Thanksgiving holiday that has
continued this month, and most retailers are now expecting that they
will exceed last year's strong levels by as much as 6 to 8 percent.
However, they are also reporting that their sales are dependent to a
large extent on special promotions and discounts, and that obviously
is cutting into their profit margins.
Big ticket items are selling
particularly well. Sales of apparel, which had been weak for some

12/20/94

-14-

time, are also seeing strong gains. We have had reports starting in
November that automobile sales were slowing, and that has continued
through the first half of December. Tourism remains a very bright
spot in the District economy.
Manufacturing activity was relatively flat in the Sixth
District last month, although most plants expect to see gains over the
next six months. Producers of lumber and building materials are
operating at or near capacity, but several of them have noted that
shipments have begun to decelerate. The same pattern is showing up in
home furnishings and equipment. In contrast, activity at producers of
paper, pulp, and chemicals rose substantially, and demand for auto
parts is also strong. Again, the outlook for capital spending was a
little less favorable than a month ago.
Home sales in the District fell below strong year-ago levels
in most areas, although realtors are reporting that they expect a
rebound in sales in the spring. Multifamily real estate markets
continue to improve and rental rates are rising. Commercial real
estate is also doing relatively well throughout the region, although I
find it interesting that some architects report that demand for their
services is in decline; that could imply some softening of
construction next year. With respect to loan demand, bankers say that
it's mixed, with increased commercial real estate lending and
declining mortgage lending. Automobile lending also declined along
with sales.
Labor markets haven't changed very much in the District since
last month. We continue to see labor shortages reported in certain
areas. It's most pronounced in Tennessee and in Atlanta. In Atlanta,
it's related partly to the Olympics and partly to retailers who are
finding it very difficult to get people for the holiday sales period.
Skilled construction workers are in strong demand everywhere, and
wages in that industry are rising sharply.
As for prices, about 50 percent of manufacturers indicate
that they are still being pressured by the rising costs of raw
materials. They are noting difficulty again in passing these costs on
to final goods.
I would just add with respect to Orange County that we
haven't seen any fallout in our District from that episode.
Now your fence looms rather large in front of me as I turn to
the national economy, but let me go at it this way if I may. We, too,
were surprised by the rapid rate of growth in 1994 and by the
relatively low inflationary response to that growth. As opposed to
the last couple of meetings, we did not run forecasts with an
assumption of tightening. We did it with constant federal funds this
time. It's interesting that our GDP forecast through the fourth
quarter of 1996 brings the rate of growth in real GDP down to about
the 2.5, 2.6 percent level throughout that period without any
tightening at all. The CPI through that period is higher, as you
would expect, than the Board's forecast, but it remains at about a
3.2, 3.3 percent level throughout 1995 and 1996, with the unemployment
rate somewhat below the Greenbook forecast. That raises the question
in my mind--and I think I raised this last time--whether or not there
is something different going on in the economy this time around that

-15-

12/20/94

would suggest that potential growth is higher and the NAIRU is lower.
But I think the basic question is whether or not there can be greater
growth in the economy with less inflation, thereby implying somewhat
less tightening than is forecast in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Our directors and other business contacts
continue to report generally robust activity in our region with just a
couple of exceptions that I'll mention in a minute. I guess the most
striking anecdotal information we have gotten lately has to do with
labor market conditions, which as a number of other people have noted
for their Districts appear to be tightening very noticeably throughout
our region. At our last board meeting about 10 days ago, we had
several reports of shortages in both retail help and construction
workers. The shortage of construction labor is said to be pushing
construction costs up in North Carolina. Also in November, West
Virginia posted the biggest monthly increase in jobs ever in that
state, and it was quite broadly based across the West Virginia
economy.
Elsewhere, most of the information we have on holiday sales
has been positive. Also on the positive side of the ledger, we see
increasingly clear signs of a firming of conditions in commercial real
estate markets in a number of local areas. Actual construction has
not accelerated markedly yet, but commercial vacancy rates are
declining, rents are beginning to increase in at least a few
metropolitan areas, and there is talk about increases in other areas
not too far down the road. Prime space has become increasingly hard
to come by, especially large blocks of it.
Lest you think the only news we ever listen to in our Bank is
good news, let me mention a couple of signs of possible moderation in
activity in some sectors in our region. We do a monthly survey of
manufacturing activity in the Fifth District, as a number of other
Reserve Banks do in their respective Districts. Our November survey
suggested fairly significant slowing in activity in that sector, which
is very important in our District. This slowing is in some contrast
to the published national data. Also, we see continuing signs of a
flattening in residential real estate activity across the District.
At their meeting a few days ago, our Charlotte directors said that
buyer traffic for single-family homes had hit a wall in the month of
November. We never know how much weight to give to that kind of
anecdotal information, but it does seem a little at variance with some
other things we have heard.
Finally, with respect to prices in the District, our latest
monthly survey suggests that both manufacturers and retailers are now
expecting somewhat sharper price increases over the next six months
than they were just a few weeks ago.
Nationally, of course, the broad contour of the Greenbook
forecast hasn't changed a great deal. The thing that struck me is
that--there has been some comment about it already--in spite of the
strong projected growth near term, the bulge in the CPI predicted for
the first quarter of next year is noticeably less pronounced than it
was in the November Greenbook.
Inflation remains relatively steady
over the whole two-year forecast horizon. I think Mike's comments

12/20/94

-16-

suggested fairly that projections key off of the recent favorable
actual inflation data rather than the apparent strength in real
economic activity and the strong job growth and low unemployment rate.
Let me just say that I don't envy the staff's task in
developing this forecast. I think developing any kind of reasonable
and credible forecast in this situation is exceedingly difficult and
the forecast we have is certainly plausible.
Still, I think we have
to recognize that this projection can be described as relatively
optimistic under the circumstances. There are considerable risks in
the forecast at this point, greater perhaps than we have seen earlier.
I think these risks are probably somewhat more balanced than they have
been up to now, but there still are substantial upside risks. As we
all know, the economy is clearly very strong; it's really roaring I
think; but there are quite a few signs of weakness here and there.
There is a lot of talk about passing intermediate-level price
increases through to final prices at the beginning of the year. So I
think there is certainly a possibility, more than marginal, that we
could begin to see the economy overheat as we move into next year and
see an inflation rate significantly higher than the rate the Greenbook
is projecting. At the same time, I think the downside risk on the
real side as we get out into late 1995 and early 1996 is greater now
than it has been, especially given the further tightening of policy
that may be needed to contain inflation going forward. Because of
this--and I'm going to step on your fence if I may here just briefly,
Mr. Chairman--while I think some additional restraint will almost
certainly be required before this thing is over, I believe we need to
be somewhat more cautious in applying it than was necessary earlier
this year when we were further away from a cyclical peak and when we
had a serious credibility problem.
Speaking of credibility, I think the recent behavior of the
bond rate suggests, to me at least, that we have acquired some of
late.
In my view, that is the most encouraging development we have
seen in some time.
The trick is going to be to maintain it going
forward as we move into a situation where the risks are at least a
little more balanced than they have been. I might just note once
again if I may that precisely in this kind of situation, something
like an inflation target might be helpful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you. For the most part, the Ninth District
economy remains very strong; much of it is operating at full
employment or maybe even beyond. Two interesting pieces of
information have become available since the last meeting. On the
anecdotal side, I think there is some accumulating evidence that
housing is slowing down, both sales and construction activity--that
there has been some response to higher interest rates. I wouldn't say
that the supporting information is overwhelming, but I think there has
been enough of it to indicate some effect in our area. Secondly, we
did have a meeting with a large number of Twin City business leaders
several weeks ago, and I would say the general tenor of that meeting
was that whatever we have here, we don't have equilibrium. What I
mean is that most of their talk was about labor shortages across the
board, from the skilled to the entry level jobs.
That market hasn't
cleared.
It has not resulted yet in a lot of wage pressures, although
people talk frequently about raising wages in one part of the pay

12/20/94

-17-

scale or another. But it sounded to me as if there is more to come,
that we clearly have some disequilibrium. The same thing was true
when they discussed what they were seeing in terms of crude and
intermediate materials prices and availability. There obviously are
pressures there. It sounded to me as if there is more to come and
that ultimately that will put pressure on final goods prices. Now
whether this results in simply a blip in inflation at the consumer
level or something more sustained remains to be seen. But clearly
there is a lot of pressure. If these people are representative, there
is a lot of pressure coming.
With regard to the national outlook, I guess what I found the
most surprising part of the Greenbook forecast, something that people
have already commented on, was the inflation outlook. If I used the
Greenbook type of framework, which as I understand it relies a lot on
capacity pressures to drive inflation, and look at how the economy has
performed and where we are in terms of the unemployment rate and
capacity utilization and so forth, I think I would come out with a lot
more inflation over the next several quarters than is there. My
concern is that we could get an acceleration of inflation--the 1/4
point or so that the Greenbook seems to envision is just noise. That
could happen or not happen depending on a lucky or unlucky break or
two. My judgment would be that if we get an acceleration of
inflation, we will not need a magnifying glass to discern it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is the point I was trying to make
before, Gary. This business of a 1/2 percentage point increase in
inflation at an annual rate as though that means anything-MR. STERN.

You can go from 0.2 to 0.3 of a point--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
5 percent!

You can round the numbers to the nearest

MR. STERN. You can go from 0.2 to 0.3 percent per month and
that gives you a percentage point right there. On a monthly basis, it
doesn't look like very much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Eleventh District continues
to show the same healthy rate of growth that has been in place
throughout 1994. We have been looking intensively for signs of
slowing activity in response to tighter monetary policy. So far the
only perceptible slowdown has been in single-family construction,
which peaked in April, but this decline has been more than offset by
strong activity in multifamily and nonresidential construction. There
has been no slowing in the rate of expansion of the most interestrate-sensitive sectors of our manufacturing industries--rubber,
plastics, lumber, nonelectrical and electrical machinery, primary and
fabricated metals, furniture, paper, stone, clay, glass, all of those.
Defense-related and energy-related manufacturing are the only areas
other than single-family construction that show signs of weakness. I
continue to hear scattered reports of price and wage pressures, but
the number of these reports seems to have dissipated since the last
FOMC meeting. Nonetheless, capacity constraints are strong and
possibly intensifying for electronics, petrochemicals, and paper
products. Wage pressures are reported in the electronics,

12/20/94

-18-

telecommunications, fabricated metals, and trucking industries. Firms
in the temporary help industry expect even greater difficulty
recruiting skilled workers next year, which could put even more
pressure on wages and prices.
In spite of growing pressures on wages
in several industries and rising materials prices in a number of
others, we have seen little evidence of price rises on final goods and
services, especially at the retail level.
In fact, our Beigebook
contacts in the retailing sector tell us that intensified competition
in recent months has brought the average of their selling prices below
those of a year ago.
As the Greenbook points out, we have all consistently
underestimated the strength of the economy throughout this year. All
the risks seem to be on the up side at this stage with respect to real
growth as well as inflationary pressures. The improvement of job
prospects, consumer confidence, and credit availability are propelling
strong growth in the consumer sector.
The need to add to capacity is
putting upward pressure on investment spending. Stronger economies in
Europe and Latin America will be increasing our export demand. There
is nothing in the new fiscal policy proposals that would stifle these
demand pressures. Quite the contrary, the anticipation of tax cuts
will likely add to demand pressures, capacity constraints, and price
and wage pressures in the coming months. Mr. Chairman, I'll defer the
next sentence!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chairman.
[Laughter]

I don't know how successful this is.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
Second District continued recent trends of a robust economy in New
Jersey and a slowing expanding economy in New York State. Data for
the most recently available month indicate that employment grew 2.7
percent in New Jersey and stagnated in New York. Consumer sales
throughout the District in November grew quite moderately, but the
data and the anecdotal evidence indicate a strong Christmas season in
all parts of our District.
On the national level, I feel that there is great uncertainty
about where the economy is going, or at least I am very uncertain. I
do not believe that growth in the very strong fourth quarter, which
could well be 4-1/2 to 5 percent or even more, is the real world but a
happenstance of all possible positive elements coming together. If it
is not too good to be true, at least it would seem too good to
continue, and growth next year should slow down to a sustainable pace.
Our Q4/Q4 GDP growth forecast for 1995 under current policy
assumptions is 2.4 percent with the CPI at 3.3 percent and going up.
We think that the cost pressures that have been discussed by many
people probably are already baked in the cake.
The greatest uncertainty is to figure out where current
monetary policy is and its effect on the economy. Is it tight and, if
tight, in relation to what? We did some work on comparing the present
policy stance at full employment, and we tried to find some previous
periods when one could say the economy was more or less in the same
macro performance position. We came up with April 1972, May 1978, and
November 1987 as periods to be compared. Then we looked at various
indicators of whether monetary policy is tight or not.
If you look at
the real fed funds rate, which we compared with the latest 12-month

-19-

12/20/94

CPI, it's now 2.6 percent, which is considerably tighter than in the
The monetary aggregates, M1
1970s and somewhat tighter than in 1987.
and M2, are very much tighter than in all the previous comparison
periods. The Treasury yield curve is flatter, which would indicate
that the market feels that policy is better positioned than it was in
those previous periods. Even the crude PPI, which has been rather
troublesome lately, if you look over the 12-month trend it too
indicates that price performance is better, and therefore one would
I'm not sure that
think that monetary policy may well be tighter.
that tells us that current monetary policy is perfect. It doesn't
tell me whether it's a little too tight or a little too loose or very
much, except that it tells me that if I were to leap over what tiny
bit of fence remains, that waiting might have something going for it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sounds like a leap to me.

President

Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. With regard to Orange County-type
developments, before that drove everything else off the newspapers, we
were getting a number of similar reports in our area. Cuyahoga County
lost $150 million, which they say is equivalent to a new football
stadium, so we have a team for sale. And it appears now that the
state held $900 million of stripped bonds that are deeply under water.
So, we are going to see significant reductions in waste, fraud, abuse,
and underemployed people on county and state payrolls! These people
will be going to work, fortunately, because they are going to find a
very good labor market.
I focused this time mostly on manufacturing. Manufacturing
employment in our District is almost 50 percent above the national
average; it's really the main part of the Fourth District economy.
With only one exception, manufacturers said that the NAM president
does not speak for them. Sometime people volunteered this to me;
sometime I sought out their views. If there is a NAIRU in the Fourth
Federal Reserve District, I would say it's a lot lower than it is
assumed to be for the nation because our unemployment rates are 4
percent or less in most of our metropolitan areas. And yet I still
don't sense any change in people's attitudes about what will happen to
inflation in the future. People talk about very tight labor markets.
I continue to hear the same stories about shortages of skilled and
unskilled workers, yet it doesn't seem to be getting built into
people's plans. They may be looking to that reservoir of previously
discouraged workers that was supposed to have existed, or the
disguised unemployed that we are supposed to have inherited from
earlier periods, or the otherwise underemployed people out there. But
if they exist, they live in other Districts and we are having to
import them; we have reversed the population flows and are getting
some in-migration. Our manufacturers talk about paying hiring bonuses
and performance bonuses based on having had a very good year, but they
are not building pay increases into their wage bases in order to
attract or to retain workers. One of the states, Kentucky, recently
suspended its program to attract businesses to the region because they
simply view their labor market as so tight that going out and trying
to steal companies from other regions of the country was not a very
profitable thing to be engaged in. The person who told me this was
very disappointed because he heads up that program and he was not sure
what he was going to be doing.

-20-

12/20/94

I talked to the CEO of one of the giant companies that mainly
supplies the motor vehicles industry, especially heavy trucks, and
also produces other equipment. With regard to his capital expenditure
plans for the longer run, whether for increasing capacity or making
productivity-enhancing investments, I asked him what assumptions he
made about future price increases. He said zero. He was very adamant
in saying that it would be irresponsible for any industrial leader in
America today to assume that they can plan on any price increases for
their output.
Instead, capital expenditure proposals are evaluated on
the basis of their ability to achieve the productivity increases to
match any cost increases in labor or other resources.
I thought this
was at least one bit of evidence that what we are trying to achieve-stability in the purchasing power of money--is beginning to take hold
in the minds of our business people.
Another industrial leader from a very large company that
supplies paints and other chemical products approached me saying that
we must have an immediate and very substantial increase in the federal
funds rate. And, of course, I was curious and asked him why he felt
that way. Was he concerned about inflation? He said absolutely not,
because he could not increase his prices.
In fact, he said that he
was trying to hold the line and resist pressure to reduce his prices
because of increased competition. But his costs were killing him and
the Fed needed to raise the funds rate in order to reduce those costs.
Small and large manufacturers in the District are doing very
well in the export markets, especially exports to Mexico and Canada.
District exports have posted strong increases in the last two or three
years, and companies that had never engaged at all or significantly in
these markets are now finding them very attractive and are doing quite
well.
I hear a lot of reports of plans to increase capacity in the
next year or two as well as continuing emphasis on labor-saving
investments.
Turning to the national economy, I can understand why people
who believe that the growth that we have had in 1994 is the result of
prior demand stimulus would feel that we ought to take that stimulus
out before it spills over into excess demand and therefore rising
prices.
It is a legitimate point of view. It is not clear to me why
we didn't recognize that excess demand earlier and therefore make a
better forecast for 1994 if we knew that that was what was going on.
Maybe hindsight provides the answer. But I still think that we ought
to consider an alternative interpretation of what we have been
experiencing this year and that is that it is the dividend for prior
restraint. We should have expected that policy actions to reduce
inflation and to build our credibility on the inflation rate would
produce the type of output increases that we have had. Therefore,
what has been going on this year is not the sort of thing that
necessarily spills over into rising prices and higher inflation in the
future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
In the third quarter, nominal GDP was up 6.7
percent from a year earlier, the largest year-over-year rise in five
years. More recently, nominal retail sales rose at a 15.1 percent
annual rate from July to November, the fastest four-month pace since
the spring of 1987. There are few signs yet that our monetary policy

12/20/94

-21-

actions have slowed the pace of spending. Since March, for example,
business loan growth has accelerated to an 11.1 percent rate, after
Nevertheless, in my view monetary policy has shifted
falling in 1993.
toward restraint. All monetary aggregates have shown relatively weak
growth since spring.
Inventory investment has been very strong this
year. In my view rapid inventory accumulation has been desired and is
likely to continue for a time. Despite rapid inventory accumulation
so far this year, the inventory-to-sales ratio has remained near the
lowest level since the early 1950s. According to a recent survey by
our staff, attempts in the Eighth District to build inventory,
especially of finished goods, have been unsuccessful simply because of
continuing strong sales growth. One major motor vehicle manufacturer
in the Eighth District reported that it held larger stocks than its
two domestic competitors simply because, in contrast to its rivals, it
Even
had the capacity to keep production closer to the pace of sales.
so, this firm has had difficulty in keeping its strongest selling
models in stock. Such observations matched the concern with respect
to the nation as a whole expressed in the National Association of
Purchasing Managers surveys in October and November.
In November, employment gains exceeded the robust average
monthly increases from January to October and were more than twice as
large as the average monthly rise in the civilian labor force.
Eighth
District unemployment fell to 4.7 percent in October, its lowest level
since August 1974. That's a level at which we have been hovering for
some time. On a comparably measured basis, the nation's unemployment
rate has fallen to its March 1989 level, which in turn was the lowest
since December 1973.
Notwithstanding this evidence of strength on the real side,
the positive reaction of the bond and other financial markets in
recent weeks is heartening. I hope this means that the markets now
believe that the long-term inflation rate will not accelerate from its
current level. Whether the nearly universal expectation that
inflation over the near term, or the long term for that matter, will
be 3 percent or more is acceptable is another question, as is whether
I am not at all
we act today in terms of any short-term actions.
averse to strong cyclical real growth if the thrust of our policy is
consistent with long-run price stability and we have credibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unfortunately, President Boehne had to
I'd like to ask
leave because of an emergency he had to attend to.
Rick Lang whether he could give us a brief survey of what is going on
in the Third District.
MR. LANG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Third District
economy continues to expand but at a more moderate pace than in the
nation as a whole. Employment levels in several areas of the District
still have not reached their pre-recession levels. Manufacturing
activity continues to be one of the strong points; its levels continue
to be high, although not as high as in earlier months. Retailers are
telling us that they are experiencing good holiday sales, especially
sales of durable goods.
Housing activity around the District remains mixed, with only
a few areas in the District showing signs of strength. There are some
signs of increases in nonresidential building activity, although this
is not translating into substantial gains in construction employment

-22-

12/20/94

at this point. Bank lending around the region is up but also not as
strongly as in the nation as a whole.
That is particularly true of
business lending. Price pressures continue to be evident in the
manufacturing sector, but they do not appear to be widespread around
the region. Also, although we do not have evidence of strong
pressures on wages in the region, we do hear of more cases of signing
bonuses being given to workers in some sectors of the District
economy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thanks very much.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'll try and stay
entirely on the right side of the fence by talking about fiscal
First, we are
policy!
[Laughter]
I have three observations to make:
now getting the first indications of the effects of the 1993 tax law
I
changes.
I have presented scoring stories to this group before.
want to stress that what we have are very preliminary indications, but
they are from both the macro aggregate level and from detailed micro
data that were published in Statistics of Income.
According to our staff estimates, if you look at a liability
model estimate of what taxpayers owed, in 1992 it was $498 billion and
in 1993 it was $522 billion. We had a net gain of $24 billion in
liabilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is for individuals?

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, I'm looking at the individuals' side here.
Personal income rose 4.3 percent between 1992 and 1993.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What was it without transfer payments?

MR. LINDSEY. Slightly below that--4.1 percent. But there
are offsetting factors.
I could go on for too long, but you don't
want me to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't!

MR. LINDSEY. The general approach to estimating, given the
adjustments the Chairman is talking about, would be to take per-taxreturn personal income. The elasticity of receipts with respect to
per-return personal income based on the index used for inflation is
1.0. The elasticity for real increases is about 1.5. The inflation
index for 1993 was 2.8 percent.
So we would expect, if nothing had
changed in the law, about a 5 percent overall increase in nominal
receipts or $25 billion. We got $24 billion, which doesn't leave any
room for revenue from the tax increase. Looked at from an alternative
point of view, the estimated revenue from the tax rate increase was
$15 billion. So, that would leave $9 billion left over, or an
increase of about 1.8 percent attributable to economic growth. So, we
would have to assume that receipts grew at only about 40 percent of
the rate of increase in nominal income, which is also implausible.
The micro data tell a very similar story. These are early tax return
estimates and every year the Statistics of Income publishes an early
compilation.
I would stress that the data are early. What I want to
contrast is, for the same type of sample, the top 763,000 taxpayers
which in 1992 were those making over $200,000. Overall AGI for those
taxpayers rose .4 percent versus 2-1/2 percent for other taxpayers.

12/20/94

-23-

But when you break down the composition of income you get a pattern
that I think strikingly suggests an enormous behavioral response. For
example, looking at Schedule C income, which is notoriously
susceptible to changes in tax rates, people making under $200,000 did
not have a bad year; they gained about 3 percent, but the rich people
did terribly. They had a decline of 43 percent in their reported
business income. And while corporate profits for C Corporations did
great in 1993, and partnership and S Corp profits for people making
under $200,000 rose 28 percent, those sorts of profits fell 25 percent
for people who were affected by the tax rate increase. The third
parameter that is probably most susceptible to tax rate behavioral
responses is charitable giving. Where overall charitable giving rose
about 3 percent, charitable giving by those making over $200,000 rose
41 percent. If we add up the dollar changes here, a $5.5 billion
decline in business income, a $14 billion decline in partnership
income, and $2.9 billion in extra charitable deductions, just looking
at those three factors we get a shortfall from 1992 levels of $22.3
billion that would have been taxed at an average rate of 38 percent.
That would give us a shortfall of $8.5 billion. In other words, more
than half of the tax increase was offset by behavioral responses. I
found it striking because both the micro and macro data point in the
same direction.
I think that that type of evidence plus evidence that has
accumulated over the last 15 years is going to lead to some modest
changes, and I want to emphasize the word "modest," in the scoring
process that Congress will use. But I do want to disagree--and I
rarely do--with Bob McTeer's observation. I think that we should keep
in mind a number of effects with regard to what is going to happen to
fiscal policy. In my mind the short-term effects of fiscal policy
will probably be contractionary. To explain why, first, I think the
dynamic will be to produce a near-term balanced change in the overall
scoring. There are two philosophical reasons why the new leadership
in the House should do that. First, Newt is a political philosopher,
and his basic strategy is to reverse the observation that all politics
is local, which is Tip O'Neill's approach, where you buy off the
taxpayers in your District by putting up a project and they don't care
about the national effect, meaning the tax implications. The election
was run on a reversal of that strategy. And so I think if you're
placing yourself in Newt's shoes as a political strategist, you want
both to pay off your constituents and punish the opposition. That
requires both tax cuts and spending increases.
In addition, I think the lesson of the iron triangle is not
lost, and there will be intentional efforts to try and weaken the
long-term effects of the relationship between the bureaucracy, Hill
staff, and the press by defunding it. So I think we will see that the
timing of spending reductions will be much quicker than anyone
anticipates. And they will be heavily oriented toward what in
Washington we call "reductions in force" and the rest of the country
calls "firings." They actually are not firings; they are buyouts.
So, here is why I'd like to elaborate on why we should keep in mind
that probably the net effect of what we are going to see is a fiscal
contraction. With a buyout you give the departing employee a lump sum
payment. That expands the government deficit. But the newly laid off
employee does not run out and spend his buyout immediately; in fact,
he's a little traumatized and will actually cut back on spending. So

12/20/94

-24-

there would be one example of where you'd get an increase in the
budget deficit which would not feed back into higher aggregate demand.
Second, of those prospective tax increases, I think two in
particular will happen. One is a child credit which actually will be
dribbled out over the course of the entire fiscal year and may not
even start until midyear. So you get $10 a week in your paycheck.
The timing of the median-dollar fiscal impetus will be much later than
the timing of the offsetting dollar of spending cuts. The other tax
cut, which is capital gains, I think has clear timing issues. More
important, I think there are issues for the effect on the marginal
propensity to consume that dollar, which I think is probably quite
low. So, I believe the net fiscal impetus that is going to come from
the budget changes on a timing basis is going to be quite negative for
1995 and 1996. Second, I think if we look at the marginal propensity
to consume issues again, the effect on demand of any fiscal change is
going to be rather small. We always taught that the balanced budget
multiplier was around 1 in a very simplified model or more precisely
that the effect of a spending cut is more dramatic than the effect of
a tax change.
There is a third reason why that's going to affect the
economy in a negative way, and that is that we are going to see I
think an intensely regional distribution of the spending changes,
mainly focused in the northern portions of the Fifth District! If you
want any indication of that, go for a tour of some of the nicer
sections of Upper Northwest section of Washington, and you will see
"For Sale" signs just about everywhere, although I think there were
local elections which may have affected that outcome as well as the
national elections. As in the case of defense spending cutbacks, I
think we are going to see a highly regionalized effect.
The third observation I'd have on the net impact is on the
regulatory side. I think that compared to the fiscal actions the
regulatory actions of the new Congress will be extremely dramatic.
Here I think the right model to think about is what happens to GDP
when you stop building a pyramid. I don't mean to imply that all of
our regulations are pyramids, but some have cost-benefit relations
which are not much better. When you stop building a pyramid, you lay
off workers and you have a negative effect on GDP. Those workers will
eventually find employment. Their real output will be higher, but
those real output gains will not be seen for two or three years. I
think we are going to see a major change in the regulatory apparatus,
and particularly in the mandating of the private sector and state and
local governments to spend money for federal regulatory purposes. The
net result, I think, will also be contractionary on the economy, at
least over the forecast horizon. Thank you.
percent!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.

Sounds like a 30-year bond rate of 5

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, in the spirit of "contain yourself
to what you see," what I see is what I've heard all morning--a very
strong economy where the risks are rather heavily skewed to the up
side. Let me take just a minute to mention two other matters. The
first, which has been alluded to a couple of times this morning, is
that there may be more substance than many of us think to this whole
notion that we have some kind of a new economy with a lower propensity

-25-

12/20/94

toward inflation. I am referring to this whole mix of arguments that
we may have a lower NAIRU, a new level of competition, world markets
with lots of capacity, much higher productivity, and probably less
significant wage pressures than one might expect with this level of
employment. I have had a lot of sympathy with that argument for a
long time and spoke to it several times at our meetings during the
spring. I don't much doubt that that has been present and is present
in the mix of the economy right now. I think it probably is a
significant reason why we have done as well as we have so far relative
to the amount of growth and the amount of inflation that we have
experienced. But I rather doubt that we can depend on that mix of
considerations to carry us very much higher in the level of capacity
utilization than we already are experiencing without having that mix
of considerations exhaust themselves with higher inflationary
pressures showing up.
The other thing I'd like to mention is that I am worried
about and puzzled by the formation of consumer debt.
I think there
has to be a serious downside risk there, either short term or long
term. Consumer debt is off the charts on the up side in relation to
consumer income or net worth, and its growth should slow. There are
precious few signs that it is slowing so far, but there is a shortterm possibility that what we are seeing now is that the consumer is
indeed shopping until he or she drops and that maybe the wallet will
close after Christmas. Inventories could start to build up quickly.
That is something to watch immediately after Christmas. If we don't
get some slowing in the near future, then I would worry that that is
going to imply some other types of problems further on down the line
that could perhaps be even more serious. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. Our discussion has demonstrated
the depth and the breadth and the resilience of the economy. These
are terms that we usually use for market conditions, but we could
certainly apply them to this expansion period. We are closing in now
on four years of economic expansion. Growth in three of those years
is now indicated to have been above potential in most parts of the
country. It almost seems that Orange County is the only place that
does not appear to be participating. A key question is similar to the
one that Governor Kelley just posed; that is, when are we going to see
stronger signs of a slowdown?
So far we are hearing and seeing
significant signs of momentum going into 1995.
I do think that the
monetary stimulus that extended from 1989 through the first part of
1994 is causing a good deal of the momentum, and I don't think we need
to put too fine a point on it.
Within that period we had 15 months of
a 3 percent federal funds rate that certainly has had an influence. I
do think that the so-called head winds died down sometime in 1993.
People became more comfortable with their balance sheets, and the
monetary policy ease started to show through significantly into the
economic system. As other people have said, these restructuring head
winds are now becoming tail winds. We are now reaping the benefits of
the earlier balance sheet restructuring which is providing a lot of
cash for both businesses and households to spend. Whereas we did have
a credit crunch in the banking sector, now we are seeing significant
willingness by banks to lend to both households and businesses. Both
business investment and construction spending, which had been a drag

12/20/94

-26-

on the economy, are now starting to contribute significantly to the
expansion.
Well, at some point it must stop.
I think that forecasters
have plenty of room to be humble as we end 1994.
It is at least
feasible that consumers could slam on the brakes early next year--when
they balance their checkbooks when they really start to assess how
much debt they have taken on. Maybe it will happen when they get the
latest repricing of their ARMs or when the wealth effects start to hit
as they get their year-end mutual fund statements.
I think people are
beginning to realize that the paycheck increases are not as great as
they have seen in the past. We may not have the strong year-end
bonuses in some areas that we have seen in past years. In short, I
think that the party for consumers is going to be over, but it is not
clear how far the current momentum is going to carry us forward from
here.
On the business side, I think that the tail winds actually
may be a bit stronger because of the productivity kick that we are
Eventually,
getting from re-engineering and technology investment.
monetary policy will start to bite harder as this pipeline effect
works its way through the economy. We have been given breathing space
with respect to final consumer price increases. We may have been
saved by the bumper grain crop that we have seen this year. Energy
prices backed off. We have had a mild autumn. Ironically, the labor
market is giving us some mixed signals. There has been a lot of
discussion around the table today about labor shortages, but also
discussion of the fact that we are not seeing big pressures in wage
markets. Jerry Jordan talked about some of the temporary measures
that are being taken to try to deal with these labor shortages that do
not affect the permanent wage structure.
I think that despite the
fact that we have a 5.6 percent unemployment rate, there is still some
considerable unrest in the labor markets. People have jobs, but they
don't necessarily have the jobs that they want or that they like.
Except in some skilled areas there may be more flexibility in the
labor market than we had thought.
I believe there is a willingness
now to move and change careers, and this willingness will be helpful
in containing wage pressures as we move forward. And certainly on the
benefits side, the health cost containment efforts have been helpful.
In sum, as we move into 1995 I, too, think we are going to
get a slowdown, but the question is when and how much. On the fiscal
side, I'm not as confident as Larry Lindsey in making predictions.
It
seems to me that everything is on the table in the Congress.
In this
contest of wills that we are about to see, I hope that the loser is
not deficit reduction.
On the market side, the financial markets really have
performed quite well given all of the shocks that we have experienced
in 1994, but I think there is more yet to come. We have seen quite an
orderly correction this year, but there may yet be some fallout. Joan
Lovett and, of course, Bob Parry talked at length about Orange County.
I don't think we have seen all of that play out. I don't think we
have yet seen all of the implications of the Bankers Trust situation
play out. When people get their year-end mark-to-market statements on
their mutual funds, there may well be some surprises.
I think many of
the counties may still be trying to figure out exactly where they
stand. So there may well be some shocks coming in 1995.
The point of

12/20/94

-27-

that, of course, is that there is considerable uncertainty as we go
into 1995.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, if the staff projection for the
fourth quarter is correct, we clearly have a more vibrant economy than
most of us had expected and the surprise is the lack of inflation
flares in the current figures. I am somewhat puzzled by the Greenbook
projection for the first quarter of 1995.
The abrupt GDP slowdown
seems to me to be counterintuitive. With the very high level of
capacity utilization and reduced slack in the labor markets, pressures
are building for price increases and higher wage demands when contract
negotiations begin next year. What I find puzzling is the widespread
existence of sales at significant discounts on every kind of
merchandise. Brooks Brothers has recently offered 40 percent off on
top-of-the-line goods, and the newspapers and catalogs are bursting
with ads for sales. Coming during the top selling season of the year,
these sales would seem to support the idea that price increases are
very difficult to make stick. To be sure, steel--operating at or
about 95 percent of capacity--has negotiated contracts for 1995
deliveries at higher prices. And that pattern will probably spread in
the near future to other industries that also are operating at high
levels of capacity. The momentum certainly seems to be there for
accelerating growth in the economy even though it is already burning
along at a rate well above potential. And as the night follows the
day, inflation is certain to be lurking. The height of the Greenspan
Wall prevents me from completing my prepared remarks at this time. I
will wait for the gate to open.
[Laughter]
SPEAKER(?).

The flood gate was it?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

A less-than-successful building project.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.

I've learned my lesson!

Yes, that is right!

That is really true.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I think the wall was extremely successful. I'm
I'm also going to be very brief since, coming
not going to breach it.
almost at the end, almost everything that I might have said--and its
opposite--has already been said!
[Laughter]
Let me take a few minutes to defend the conventionality of
the Greenbook forecast against some of the objections that were
raised. Although, as a small footnote, in thinking ahead about my
Humphrey-Hawkins forecast in February, my inclination would have been
to be a little higher on near-term growth--1995 growth--and maybe a
little higher on inflation. But these are small differences.
I want
to defend the Greenbook both in the particulars, the kind of outlook
that it is pushing--a rapid deceleration of growth and a small
increase in inflation--and also on the basic methodology of being
conventional. I think there is a lot to be said for, and very little
on the other side, the staff of the central bank to be extremely

12/20/94

-28-

conventional in its methodology and not buy on to hypotheses that have
very little empirical support, although 10 years later that might look
like a good idea. Usually it doesn't, but it might. Speaking as a
citizen and as a central banker, I'm glad to see the staff sticking to
the tried and at least not falsified methods!
[Laughter]
I agree with the Greenbook outlook that we probably have
pushed a bit past the NAIRU. There is a probability distribution
around this, of course, but the best guess is that the economy
probably has pushed a little past the NAIRU, or noninflationary
capacity. I also agree that it is quite reasonable to expect a very
considerable deceleration of growth in 1995 under current policy and
then a tiny bit more in 1996 if there is no further tightening. One
of the reasons--Susan Phillips and several people have mentioned it-the lagged effects of the
is something that is too easy to forget:
stimulative monetary policy that only ended in February 1994, and only
very slightly at that. It is even easier to forget the stimulative
effect of the bond market rally that peaked in price, troughed in
yield, only in October 1993. Everything we know about lags in
interest rates says that those two things--the previous Fed stance and
the bond market rally attributable to whatever you want to attribute
it to--should be powering the economy in 1994. I think the main
reason behind the standard forecasts' underestimates of 1994 was an
unwillingness to believe in interest rate effects. It is the same
kind of thing that is happening now; everyone is looking around and
asking where it is, not believing, and then all of a sudden it is
there. This has happened many, many times in the past, and I have no
doubt that it will happen in the future. And it probably is happening
right now. This is a second reason to expect a considerable
deceleration. We first of all have the petering out of the previous
expansionary effects of interest rates and, second, just the beginning
of the early stages of the kicking in of the contractionary phase of
monetary policy. As I think Mike indicated in answer to some
question, you should just now be beginning to see the effects of the
Fed's tightening in 1994. It is very hard at this point to see it in
the tea leaves, but history suggests that it is right around the
corner. So those are two fundamentals leading me to think we should
have a sharp deceleration in 1995--the wearing off of the previous
expansion and the kicking in of the tightening.
Finally, there is the inventory swing. I think the staff
outlook--I was about to say it is exactly right, but nobody can get it
exactly right. Nobody knows the timing of this, but it is an awfully
good bet that between the fourth quarter of 1994 and the fourth
quarter of 1995, the inventory swing alone will take something between
1/2 and a full percentage point off the growth rate. It would be
quite surprising if that didn't happen. So all that points to a
considerable slowdown in the economy even if there is no more
tightening of monetary policy, and somewhat more if there is. That is
as close to the fence as I'm going to come right now.
Let me just take two minutes on inflation. Many people are
surprised, and several people have remarked around this table, about
the modest rate of inflation given the rapid economic growth. I want
to say two things about that. First, this is not quite as surprising
as people seem to think. If we have overshot capacity, as Mike said,
we have overshot very, very recently and by very, very modest amounts.
And there are long lags. It would be surprising indeed if we already

-29-

12/20/94

saw a sharp increase in inflation from that. Simple evidence, which
says the same thing in a different way, is that the conventional
Phillips curves are fitting this episode extraordinarily well. They
have very small residuals. So, if there is a new economy due to
greater openness, a traumatized labor force, or whatever--all these
things are possible--the evidence for that is really not in the data.
And so I think the staff is wise to stay clear of it. That is, it
would be imprudent for us as central bankers to presume we are in a
new, substantially less inflationary world. On the other hand, the
recent news is good:
To the extent that the errors are coming in not
quite zero, they are coming in favorably. And while we would be
imprudent to jump hastily to a conclusion that we are in a new world,
we would be foolish to ignore the evidence as it comes in. And the
They have written down the inflation
Greenbook doesn't ignore it.
forecast a bit in reaction to the recent data. I think that is about
the right way to deal with it.
Finally, a last remark about inflation and in defense of the
staff:
Standard econometric estimates would say that a 1 percent
overshoot--1 percent as measured by the unemployment rate for an
entire year--would add about 1/2 percent to the inflation rate. Now,
it is correct that nobody should take these numbers as equivalent to
the gravitational constant in physics--never mind Einsteinian
amendments to that. We don't know these numbers nearly that well. On
the other hand, there is no particular reason to think that it is too
low rather than too high. It is the best guess, and even if you want
to view that 0.5 percent effect as saying 0.5 plus or minus 2
percentage points, which I think would be very much an exaggeration of
the errors, 0.5 is still as good a guess as you can make--except that,
if anything, the incoming evidence seems to be pointing to a little
less of an inflationary impact, not a little more, as I said a minute
ago.
So, the evidence is not overwhelming. But, if anything, it
would shade you toward less of an inflationary acceleration, not more.
So, there, I have defended you!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. My opinion concerning the strength and likely
future direction of the economy has changed just marginally since our
last meeting. Certainly, the evidence has continued to accumulate
that we have an economy with a very good head of steam. We see that
in the employment report, a significant rise in the help wanted index,
growing order backlogs, and frankly to my surprise in the Michigan
indexes of car, appliance, and house buying intentions which all
turned up after having fallen, in some cases substantially, in
November. So I must admit I'm surprised to see so little evidence of
a slowdown, although I continue to feel--as I stated last time--that
we are seeing in part the lagged effects of a prolonged period of low
interest rates, as Governor Blinder also noted.
There is certainly some risk that real growth will slow less
in 1995 than the Greenbook forecast now assumes and that we could
overshoot potential output in 1995 by more. Nevertheless, I'll just
continue to emphasize, as others and I have in the past, that our
previous actions have added a great deal of restraint to the pipeline.
Since our last meeting real interest rates have risen considerably,
and as Bill McDonough emphasized, real interest rates by various
measures are not low by historical standards. We have seen, finally,

12/20/94

-30-

a decline in the stock market, which will bring wealth effects on
consumer spending into play, and for once the dollar has been
appreciating--which re-enforces direct interest rate effects and plays
some moderating influence on the inflation forecast. In addition, of
course, as Mike has emphasized, inventory accumulation is bound to
slow and it seems possible to me that accelerator mechanisms can then
kick in to slow the economy significantly.
So, I see a number of changes in the pipeline that I expect
to work to cool off demand but with a very substantial lag. And
frankly at this stage I remain uncertain as to just where the economy
would be in 1996 with the 100 to 150 basis points increase that is
assumed in the Greenbook. I share the concern of a number of private
forecasters and of some of you that this degree of tightening in the
near term could slow demand growth and that we could end up producing
a boom/bust scenario. To avoid such an outcome, it seems to me that
the funds rate would have to fall rather quickly, by more than the
Greenbook assumes, once growth slows to trend, even with the economy
below the NAIRU.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Thank you.

Is coffee available?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's take our usual break.
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN.

[Statement--See Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
If not, why don't I
start as usual?
I'm impressed with the extent to which it is very
difficult to find any negative factors in the current outlook. You
can not find it in the order patterns, which are strong across the
board. There are very few firms outside the defense-related area or
long-term turkeys that are not doing exceptionally well.
[Laughter]
The Christmas selling season is, as always, difficult to read. The
trouble with the Christmas selling season is that the constant dollar
volume is really predetermined because retailers will sell what they
have and the only thing that is indeterminate is the price. But that
is quite relevant to how the system works when you get into the first
quarter. Looking strictly at the data as they stand at this stage, it
is very difficult to tell whether in this quarter the GDP growth rate
is 3 percent or 7 percent. We are making forecasts about how the
system is going to evolve. My own impression is that since it is
extraordinarily unlikely that all of these positive events will
continue without change for terribly long, one has to assume that this
expansion will start to ease off at some point. The only thing that I
think we have to be careful about is that the easing may be more
delayed than we suspect. And until we begin to see the process of
erosion in its early stages, we really have no basis for saying that
the expansion is slowing down. We are looking at history; we are
looking at relationships; but there are no significant demonstrable
imbalances in the system that basically say things have to change. We
are projecting that there will be a change, but that again is a
projection. As of the moment in the labor markets, initial claims
continue at quite low levels. The fairly strong pattern of C&I loans
suggests that inventory accumulation is still moving at a reasonably

12/20/94

-31-

strong pace and that is bolstered by the orders pattern, which
suggests that producers' durable goods are doing well. Remember, a
goodly part of inventories is supported by the capital goods and
construction markets even though we don't keep the data that way.
As best I can judge, profit margins are still on the firm
side and even though profit forecasts are beginning to look more
symmetrical rather than just continuously underestimated, the evidence
on the profits side is still quite positive. Prices, as a lot of you
have noted, are firming in the commercial real estate markets,
although my suspicion is that the nationwide figures may still be
eroding albeit at a much slower pace. I won't add much on
homebuilding; it is a puzzle but I think that if it doesn't start to
move down, then all of our historical relationships, all of our basic
data, are lacking in predictive value. I don't believe what is going
on in homebuilding, but we will find out eventually.
I think the interesting question is why wages are not
responding to what is a very rapidly tightening labor market. After
speaking to some labor leaders and others who talk to their members
and have a sense of this, I get the impression that long-term job
insecurities are quite pervasive especially with respect to the
portability of health insurance and pensions that make workers more
cautious about changing jobs. The layoff rates are very low; the
turnover rates are really quite low by American standards; and there
is a tendency among workers just to stick with what they have. The
effect of this, I suspect, is a major factor in holding wage increases
to a very sluggish pace considering all the evidence we have been
getting in recent months of labor market tightness. This is crucial
because so long as that is the case and productivity is positive, unit
costs are very well contained. Any endeavor to move final prices up
in that environment induces competitors to come in and try to steal a
firm's market share, which erodes the firm's pricing capability. So
long as we have some evident flexibility in the system, then prices
can not readily move. This doesn't necessarily mean that business
firms have to run out of capacity; obviously, it just starts to get a
little more costly or a little tight and we begin to get pressures.
But it is not clear from the anecdotal data and the macro data that we
have that these pressures are severe. I thought that the exercise
that was done for the Greenbook Part II, which separated where the
growth rates have been in manufacturing depending on which industries
were at high operating rates, is tending to suggest that there is more
flexibility in this system than our old conventional wisdom of
capacity use would indicate. There obviously has to be a limit
somewhere, and when we look back on this we may well find that we have
a system that is a lot more flexible than we presupposed.
This is also true, I think, with respect to monetary policy.
While it is certainly the case that we have what historically would
have been a not insubstantial amount of a policy impact by this time,
the simulations that the staff has done, including the fact that longterm interest rates moved up faster than the normal process would
imply, suggest that we are probably some 25 percent into the
cumulative effects of our policy tightening at this stage. That is
not a small number, and we are now seeing very little effect as a
consequence. On the contrary, what we are seeing is an easing of
credit terms in the banking sector and the old notion that we used to
have 30-40 years ago--that the central bank would tighten, short-term

12/20/94

-32-

interest rates would rise, bank credit would suddenly be crunched by
Regulation Q or some other factor, financing would be undercut, and
the economy would swoon--clearly is an historic relic and the
disintermediation that we used to see is just not there. On the
contrary, we are having difficulty getting banks to notice that
The interest rates on automobile installment
interest rates are up.
paper are really lagging. Everybody is trying to protect market
share, and this whole thing just doesn't seem to be coming together.
But it will.
It always does. And the question is essentially pretty
much when.
I think it is really worth recognizing that there is
something quite different about the timing of this recovery.
Ordinarily, a recovery has a much higher rate of growth in the early
stages and slows in the later stages. Probably what is happening here
is that we really didn't have the classic movement to a cyclical
recovery until well into the cycle, and we are probably now at
effectively the earlier stages in a geriatric sense as distinct from
the calendar. What this suggests is that we probably still have quite
significant momentum in the system, and it is not clear just when it
will ease off.
I wonder to what extent we can attribute all of this
Surely, we can attribute
to monetary policy and monetary policy lags.
some of it; there is no question that that is the case. But there is
an internal dynamic in the economy that is wholly independent of the
business cycle. I do think the issue that Jerry Jordan raised is an
interesting one, and even though it is very difficult to prove
statistically, it may well be that the fact that inflation is
relatively low may--despite all the discussions we have had about the
inadequacy of the evidence--be contributing to improved productivity.
I
If that is the case, we will get some greater growth in potential.
hope that one of these days I will be able to use one of these
statistics after the fact, and finally say I told you so [Laughter])
without struggling. I must say I'm a little concerned about the
continued ease in bank lending terms which I suspect is greater than
the numbers show.
I seriously wonder what our monetary actions from here on
will do to 1995 as well as to 1996.
I think it is true, as a number
of you have pointed out, that if we really look at the distributed
lags--the average performance historically of monetary policy--it is
very difficult to make the case that what we may do in the early
months of 1995 will have significant effects in calendar 1995 in real
I would only caution that if we get an unexpected breakout on
terms.
the up side in inflationary expectations, the distributed lag of
monetary policy will bunch up very quickly. We have to be careful
about that.
I do think the argument that most of the impact is
delayed is clearly a correct view, but I think we have to be careful
about the probability--even though it is low--of significant
aberrations that could have important negative effects.
All in all, if we decided that we needed to move the funds
rate up at this meeting, which I don't support I must say, I doubt
very much that that would have a negative effect on economic activity.
I think the economy's momentum is still quite strong.
I do worry,
however, with or without the Orange County turmoil and the usual endof-year problems, whether we would be taking undue risks in
endeavoring to tighten in this environment.
I think that the odds
that we are going to have to move shortly after the first of the year,

12/20/94

-33-

no later than our next meeting, are quite high. However, it is
conceivable that this expansion could fizzle out fairly quickly. I
frankly don't expect that, but I think we can't disregard that
possibility. Where I would come out at this stage is that I hope we
will be comfortable staying where we are for a while. I believe, as
Don Kohn pointed out, that we have time to make further adjustments if
need be, but because of the possibility that we might find it
necessary to move after the first of the year but before January 31, I
think it would be preferable to have an asymmetric directive. Vice
Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I support your
conclusion that alternative B with an asymmetric directive is
appropriate. As I remarked earlier, the degree of uncertainty about
the effect of existing monetary policy suggests waiting. Also, the
markets are very thin as Joan described earlier, and as Susan Phillips
suggested we could have some remaining effect of governmental actions
on Bankers Trust, which would create some uncertainty in markets.
Therefore, I think that to make a move that is not absolutely
necessary right at this time involves some degree of risk. It is
difficult to quantify and would be better if we avoided it. Why
asymmetric? We get enough data in the first half of the month-nonfarm payroll employment on the 6th of January, retail sales on the
13th, and industrial production on the 17th-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Industrial production we get much

earlier.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We do?

Yes, it is a Federal Reserve number!

In any
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The world gets it later.
case, I think what is important is not so much what we know but what
is known outside. It might very well be the case that by the middle
of the month, roughly, our strong views on price stability could be
questioned. And, therefore, we should have the capability of moving.
We can move in fact without an asymmetric directive, but I think that
we are better off with the asymmetric directive toward tightening.
Therefore, I believe that the combination of doing nothing today with
an asymmetric directive toward tightening is the appropriate mix.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, one argument against policy moves
at this time is this skittishness of the markets on the heels of the
Orange County mess. On the contrary, I think the markets have reacted
to the "Lemon" County and the Bankers Trust situations with great
poise and restraint.
In my opinion, the markets may be more dismayed
by a lack of further tightening now, particularly as they sense the
increased level of economic activity, the shrinking labor market
slack, high levels of capacity utilization, and consumer attitudes
that don't foretell much slowing of consumption. In the past, there
has been market speculation that we were behind the curve. The
November action countered that impression, and I worry that ignoring
the continued strength of economic activity even temporarily may
reignite concerns about our determination. At the risk of dubbing the
Fed as the Grinch who stole Christmas, it seems to me we need to snub

-34-

12/20/94

the brakes again without delay, and therefore I would prefer
alternative C symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I favor "B" asymmetric toward
tightening. As I mentioned before, the response of the financial
markets to our last move together with the slow growth of the
aggregates convinces me that we can afford to do nothing now and
observe the effects of our prior actions for a time. I must say,
though, that I'm not at all convinced that we have fully met the
current challenge especially if our goal, as I think it should be, is
price stability. Therefore, I think it is important that we give
serious consideration at the February meeting as to how we might
convey our long-term intentions in this regard. The question that we
had from Senator Riegle last July was indicative, I think, of the fact
that perhaps on the outside there was some confusion as to exactly
what we intended.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There has been some discussion that the
new Congress would establish such a legislative goal.
MR. MELZER. Yes. With regard to that issue, perhaps one
thing we ought to think about would be to provide some longer-run
inflation forecasts, say beyond 1995 or 1996, because, as an initial
step in considering legislation, I think one could say that monetary
policy is going to have its principal long-term impact on inflation.
Eventually, I would be inclined to establish long-run inflation or
price level objectives as some other central banks have done. Now
clearly this is going to require a lot of further work, and I'm
encouraged by the fact that the staff is looking into that issue. I
would hope that we might have something, at least to start on, that we
could talk about at the February meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree that this is
a good time for waiting. It was only 35 days ago that we raised the
fed funds rate by what was essentially a record amount.
The August
interest rate increase was only three months before that, and by all
historical standards ought not to be showing in the data as yet. That
is to say, 125 of the 250 basis points of tightening that we have done
up to now could not possibly be in the data at this point.
I think if
we were to move now it would imply some sense of alarm on our part,
some sense of urgency that things were going badly wrong. And like
you, I don't think things are going badly wrong. Things are looking
pretty good. Even the next FOMC meeting comes just 11 weeks after the
November 15 action, that is, less than a quarter. What is magic about
a quarter?
It is, of course, the magic number for a macro economist
who tends to look at the economy every quarter. It is a shame there
wasn't more spacing in there, but that is the way the FOMC calendar
falls.
So, I think you are almost surely right that it is wise to
wait until the next FOMC meeting unless something fairly startling
happens.
In that regard, I would prefer a symmetric directive. I
don't feel strongly enough about this to make a big deal of it, but I
have a predisposition to wait until the next FOMC meeting for a number
of reasons.
I wasn't persuaded by Bill's argument that if these data
that he mentioned come in strongly that we might not wish to wait what

12/20/94

-35-

basically amounts to only two more weeks.
If the Greenbook forecast
without the additional tightening is, say, 2.1 percent real growth in
1995, which we were discussing before, it is not so obvious that we
ought to take action to push it down lower than that. As I said
before, I suspect that the projection might be a little on the low
side; that without more tightening growth in 1995 might be higher than
that; and indeed that more tightening might be necessary. I for one
have an open mind about future increases in short rates.
Finally, I won't repeat my thermostat speech of the last
time, but I always keep in mind that the classic mistake of central
banks in almost all times and almost all countries is to overstay
either their tightening or their easing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. As we all know, the Greenbook is assuming that
the funds rate has to be pushed up another percentage point or perhaps
even more to keep inflation from breaking out. Obviously, we can't
know for sure at this stage whether that much tightening is going to
be needed, and indeed as you suggested, Mr. Chairman, things may work
out so that nothing more is needed. Still-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is a very low probability.

MR. BROADDUS.
I would think so, and I think it is certainly
a very high probability that we are going to have to do something
more. The question before us this morning is whether or not we need
to do some of that tightening today or whether we can put it off a
little longer. I think it is a very close call. My own preference at
this meeting would be to move the funds rate up 1/4 percentage point
to 5-3/4 percent. I realize the 1/4 point funds rate moves earlier in
the year had adverse reactions, and at that time some argued that
those moves were made under sensitive circumstances. However, the
situation is very different now. We only recently made a very strong
move, so I don't think that kind of reaction would be a problem at
this stage of the game.
I think the main argument for a relatively
modest further move today is that it would reinforce and lock in the
quite considerable credibility gains that the November tightening
appears to have produced, as I believe John LaWare suggested. I think
some reinforcement at this stage would be desirable given the very
strong recent data on both employment and spending. At the same time,
a 1/4 point move would be significantly more restrained than any of
our last three moves, and it would indicate that we recognize the need
for caution as we move closer to the cyclical peak. So, my preference
would be for a 1/4 percent increase.
I also would like to second Tom
Melzer's comments about the need to consider some sort of inflation
target, something to nail down our longer-term goals and objectives at
the February meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with those who say
that we need to take some action at some point. I think that that
should be now, not later. The best environment is to do it now while
sensitive to market concerns.
I happen to think Governor LaWare is
correct. By delaying we would risk having to do more later and having
more adverse effects, so I would prefer doing something now.

12/20/94

-36-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I think the main part of our problem right now
is inflation psychology. It certainly reflects the lack of a nominal
anchor. It suggests that it would be helpful to have a politically
supported mandate to attain and maintain a stable value of the dollar.
If somehow we could achieve the conditions of a true gold standard-without gold but the steady purchasing power of money in the minds of
people--over time it would make some of these short-term things that
we go through a lot easier to deal with. I also support Tom Melzer's
suggestion about having a discussion but also having a long-term
focus. That may sound like a minor change but one that may be
important in a communications sense because our long-term forecasts
are often taken as long-term inflation objectives. I still feel that
the numbers we put together for the Humphrey-Hawkins process should
not be people's predictions of what is going to happen with regard to
inflation, but rather a reflection of what we intend to try and
achieve by our monetary policy actions.
There is some good news about what seems to be a consensus
around the table that the rates of change of output and employment
this year are unsustainable. And as somebody said, unsustainable
things have a habit of ending. The question is whether it will end as
a result of a natural process in which whatever dynamics produced it
in the first place start to diminish so we get a deceleration in the
rate of change toward something that's more consistent with trend. Or
is it something that we have to take conscious policy actions to force
if it is not occurring naturally? I would resist the latter. To the
extent that the anticipated slowing in the growth of activity is
supposed to occur because of reductions in capital expenditures for
productivity-enhancing or capacity-increasing purposes, it is not to
be welcomed. It is implausible to me that investing less in capacity
and productivity lessens the chance of inflation. In fact, quite the
contrary; we should welcome having more people invest in capital
expenditure programs for capacity or productivity. So if you're going
to contemplate an action before the next meeting, with or without an
asymmetric directive, with or without a telephone call, I hope that
the numbers will be reviewed very carefully to determine whether what
we are seeing is a result of still diminished head winds and the
economy has a ways to go in a natural spontaneous process versus
something that is read in the marketplace as a spillover of excess
demand. And that is going to happen if it isn't carefully done. I
wouldn't dissent against an asymmetric directive, but I would be very
concerned if any action taken was interpreted in the marketplace as
anti-growth for the sake of it.
MR. MELZER. Jerry, just to clarify, I favor your objective
as well, but recognizing the practicalities of getting from where we
are to that in a relatively short period of time and the possibility
of a legislative mandate, I was suggesting that a long-term forecast
may be an intermediate step we could take on our own right away. But
I agree with you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We inevitably are going to have to be
discussing that because we are required to do projections of the
monetary aggregates.
MR. KOHN.

Just for 1996.

12/20/94

-37-

MR. MELZER.
possibility.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, I'm looking even further out as a
1995, excuse me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I want to associate myself fully with Governor
Blinder's views. My reasoning is similar. The first observation is
that I think the November move was extremely successful. Our decision
to go 75 basis points took off the market pressure in both the foreign
exchange market and the bond market.
I think had we moved 50 basis
points, we would be moving another 50 basis points today. So in that
sense we should be patting ourselves on the back for our last move.
And as a result I don't think we should move right now.
I have four reasons for not preferring an asymmetric
directive. The first has to do with data. Reporters often ask
whether we are waiting for information from the Christmas season to
decide what we are going to do. The right answer is that there is
absolutely nothing that we are going to do at this meeting that could
conceivably affect the Christmas season or vice versa. In fact, as
our discussion about lags has indicated, what we are talking about is
not even the first quarter; what we are talking about is late 1995 and
early 1996 with regard to the effect of our actions.
So, rather than
looking at current activity we have to use our crystal balls, which
admittedly are cloudy, and stare down the road. So, I'm not sure what
information is going to come out in January to cause us to change our
minds.
On the other hand, I do think that over the longer period we
are going to have information that will be useful. We will have more
information on where fiscal policy is headed and sooner than we
usually do.
In addition, we are going to have information on the
consumer. I think the anecdotal evidence on the consumer situation,
as Governor Kelley suggested, is that they appear to be tapped out.
In fact, when you talk to bankers, they are now issuing credit cards
to C and D class credits, and they are doing so profitably. I'm
saving this for the next meeting,'but when I look at the cash flow
situation of households, the only private sector support for this
spending in my mind is a buildup of consumer credit.
I think the
credit data bear that out.
So, I would rather delay for information
reasons--certainly not move in January, and I may even want to delay
at our next meeting on January 31-February 1.
The other issues have to do with our tactics in the market.
We have learned this year that moving at meetings gives us a much more
efficient tradeoff measured by the short-term move compared to the
long-term move. Generally, we have had flat or rallying markets on
moves at meetings. We have been unsuccessful when we moved
intermeeting, and I think that is another reason not to go asymmetric
and not to move intermeeting.
Finally, and I think this reinforces President Melzer's
point, we will have to consider our long-term intentions at our next
meeting and we will be making not only a tactical move but a strategic
move. And I think we should at the very least want to hold whatever
tactical moves we have until we know where we are going to go

-38-

12/20/94

strategically. So for those reasons I concur with Mr. Blinder and
urge symmetric "B."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, in my view the economy has picked
up more momentum since our last meeting, and the degree of tightness
Our analysis
in labor and product markets has risen even further.
agrees with the Greenbook that further tightening is needed in order
to prevent an increase in the inflation trend. Therefore, I would
prefer a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate. Frankly, I don't
see the problems of Orange County as a reason to hesitate in doing
what is best at this point for the national economy. Financial
futures markets expect a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate by
early January. Thus, I doubt that a policy move at this time would
cause much disruption. However, I can support your recommendation
since I interpret your comments as indicating that a change in policy
is quite likely by roughly the middle of January. If the tone of the
economic data does not change, I am concerned that further delay
beyond that point would lead to a deterioration of inflationary
expectations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, we believe that further tightening
is almost inevitable because of the unexpectedly rapid pace of the
expansion and the prospect of unsustainably robust growth continuing
in the future. However, in light of the unusually large action at the
November meeting, we recommend leaving the rate unchanged for the time
being, with the expectation that economic developments in the coming
weeks will confirm the need for an increase in the funds rate at the
January meeting, if not before.
So, I would agree with you on the
asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think that the case for not
moving today is quite persuasive. We did move aggressively just a few
weeks ago and I think we have moved aggressively throughout the year.
The cumulative moves are really quite significant. We need to
remember the lags in monetary policy and give some time for that to
work through the pipeline. In fact, I am not convinced that any great
further degree of tightening is necessary, but I have an open mind on
that score. Also, as I tried to indicate before, I think there is now
greater flexibility in the economy. At the risk of belaboring that
point, I think there is a plausible argument that would suggest that
the economy can support a greater degree of growth at the present time
without incurring inflationary pressures. Obviously, this is more
theory and argument than anything else, and as has been pointed out
this morning there is really not very much empirical evidence. Some
of the things that you cited with respect to the labor market I think
are appropriate and relevant here, so the burden of proof obviously is
on those who would suggest that this is a plausible theory, and I
think there is a risk in using it in terms of policy deliberation.
However, I do think it is important to keep this in mind as we go
forward because if this is in fact the case we run a risk on the other
side of seriously overdoing monetary policy actions.
For the moment,

-39-

12/20/94

I would support your recommendation. I would prefer a symmetric
directive, but I could support the asymmetric option as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, in appreciation for Governor
Blinder not giving his thermostat speech I'll forego giving my
inflationary teakettle speech!
[Laughter]
But I do think that given
the momentum that we observe that it is overwhelmingly likely that we
are going to need to go up at least some more; and it does seem to me
that once one becomes convinced of that, then it is desirable to do it
quite soon in the expectation that that is the best way to head off
having to do too much. That said, I think it certainly would be a
good idea to hold off until after the year-end pressures. At that
point, we ought to take another very hard look at it.
For today, I
certainly support your "B" asymmetric approach.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I also would support "B" asymmetric. I think
that we have more tightening to go, but I'm willing to wait until
early next year. As a general matter, I agree with Governor Kelley-if you are going to do it, earlier is better. But I think we have
been given some breathing room with the favorable CPI numbers.
It
would be useful to let us get past the end of the year and the yearend marking-to-market. That allows the markets a chance to settle
out. Ultimately, I think that more tightening is going to be
necessary. With all of the market and monetary restructuring that has
taken place, it is probably going to take larger swings in interest
rates to achieve monetary goals.
It is very difficult to generalize
from past experience when the pipeline is going to kick in fully. I
would like to see us give serious consideration to the longer-term
inflation targeting approach that a number of people have spoken
about; Tom Melzer started off the discussion of it today. But for
today, I think "B" asymmetric will serve us well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B to hold the
funds rate at 5-1/2 percent at this meeting, and I favor it for the
reasons suggested in the Bluebook. I also concur with the sentiments
expressed by Governors Blinder and Lindsey and President Forrestal.
I
think a wait-and-see strategy is reasonable, given the magnitude of
previous tightening and particularly given our uncertainty about
whether and how much the economy is likely to slow on its own and my
own uncertainty about how much additional tightening is going to be
needed. I would prefer a symmetric directive with a strong
presumption that we would wait until the next meeting in order to act.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

President McTeer.

I agree with your proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I'd favor "B" with a symmetric directive. I
favor "B" because I do think we have applied some restraint and,
given the lags, I think we ought to be patient and take some time to

12/20/94

-40-

see what effects, if any, they have. I favor a symmetric directive
for several reasons. Part of it is my normal antipathy to, or
discomfort with, asymmetric directives. But more fundamentally on
this occasion, I have trouble imagining what evidence we will get in
the next several weeks that is really going to help us address what I
consider to be one of the key questions: What is the economy going to
be like and what is the appropriate stance or policy actions that will
influence things later in 1995 and into 1996? It just doesn't seem
likely to me that we are going to learn anything in the next several
weeks that is going to help us very much in addressing those
questions. I may be wrong, but we can have a conference call if
significant new information does materialize. Beyond that, the
suggestion has been made, and I certainly agree with it, that there
are a number of fundamental longer-run policy issues that the
Committee should discuss and perhaps try to reach consensus on. I
noted a number of them in my recent communication. [Secretary's note:
A copy of Mr. Stern's letter to Chairman Greenspan, dated November 29,
1994, is appended.] And I think the one that is on the table already
about longer-run inflation objectives is a good place to start.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just to clarify: One of the events that
is not irrelevant is how the markets respond to what's happening.
MR. STERN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I think that that is probably the
most crucial "statistic" in a sense and really the only one that could
make a material difference in this period. I agree it is very hard to
find data with anything crucial. But I think that there is a very
important issue here, namely that we not allow our an erosion in our
credibility that we have built up and which has kept the cap on longterm interest rates. I must tell you, it is too subtle an issue for
any of us to predict. Let's get to President Minehan and then I have
a few things I'd like to say about this issue.
MS. MINEHAN. I have been concerned for some time about the
thermostat issue that Governor Blinder raised. We did quite a little
work prior to this meeting to assure ourselves that at least as far as
we could project, however deficient that projection might be, that the
amount of tightening that is already in the pipeline is not
sufficient. We came out pretty strongly, all of us in Boston, with
the conclusion that it is not sufficient. So for us, it is not a
question of "whether;" it is a question of "when." I would align
myself with the people who think that if it is not a question of
whether but a question of when, that sooner is better than later. In
that area I would align myself with Governor LaWare's remarks. Don
Kohn talked about the markets being fairly confident, but I think it
is important to remember that what the market giveth the market can
take away, too. And along the lines of what you said, Mr. Chairman, I
too would be concerned that we might lose the credibility that has
been hard won. I view the 75 basis points we did at the last meeting
in two ways: as a 50 basis point make-up for actions that I think we
should have taken earlier, and as 25 basis points into what we needed
to do at that meeting. So, I don't really regard that move as being
as strong as some other people do. All of that said, I'm very
cognizant of the probability that people who are closer to the markets
than we are in Boston have a view of the thin trading and whatever
that is perhaps better taken than ours. So I'd be willing to go "B,"

-41-

12/20/94

but I'd feel fairly strongly that asymmetric should be the tone
because I am concerned that we might see market movements, given the
strength of the underlying economic data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is an interesting result we are
getting. It is very clear that there is a heavy consensus for "B."
However, there is a very sharp split on symmetric versus asymmetric
unless we take the two members who have argued for an increase as
being on the asymmetric side--but we don't usually do it that way.
What I would like to do, though, is more pro forma and that is to
suggest the following as probably an appropriate way to come at this.
We are, as I think a number of us have discussed, in a crucial area as
to how we should behave. Given the discussion that we have had around
this table, I don't think it would be wise to move before the next
meeting without a conference call to be certain that everyone has a
say with respect to how they view what we are dealing with. I frankly
don't know whether or not such a call will be appropriate; it may well
be very clear during the period that it is not. But I don't think we
ought to move in the intermeeting period without having had a
Committee discussion. I would like to stay with the asymmetric
directive with "B" because it captures, marginally as I read it, the
view of the Committee. But it is pro forma and I would suggest that
the difference frankly between symmetric and asymmetric, as far as
action is concerned, probably is minuscule. So, I would like to put
"B" asymmetric on the table for a vote.
"In
MR. BERNARD. I am reading from page 14 of the Bluebook:
the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee
seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
MR. LINDSEY.
and slightly less?

Somewhat and slightly?

You said somewhat more

MR. BERNARD. I used somewhat with the "greater" restraint
and slightly with the "lesser."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

12/20/94

-42-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is January 31st and
February 1st, and luncheon is served.
END OF MEETING

