Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
December 30, 1994
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Broaddus
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Yellen

Messrs. Melzer, Ms. Minehan, and Mr. Oltman,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Promisel, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. T. Davis, Lang, Rosenblum, and Ms.
Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Fieleke, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
December 30, 1994
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The purpose of this conference call is
to discuss the Mexican situation in which we and the Treasury have
been fairly heavily involved during the last few days. The situation
is more unstable than I think we would have anticipated under a number
of different scenarios. Also, we were all quite surprised at the
extent of the peso depreciation following the initiation of the float.
The general presumption that a country can somehow have an exchange
rate that was being held down a little more than a year ago--a
situation in which the Mexican authorities were accumulating dollars
to hold down their exchange rate--only to find a year later that it's
off by 30 to 40 percent clearly cannot be described in terms of
fundamentals. Indeed, nothing of any great fundamental nature
apparently has occurred. We are obviously dealing with a highly
psychological issue and a very significant amount of international
financial volatility.
There are two aspects to how the Mexican government is going
to address this issue. One is by far the most important in all
respects, the speech by Mexico's president on Monday night describing
what changes the Mexican government intends to implement to approach
this particular problem. I will shortly call on Charlie Siegman to
outline some of the issues that we are aware of.
The second aspect,
which is something that we are involved with and I want to discuss
further, relates to the currency stabilization fund that is being set
up.

The crucial question at this stage is whether the speech on
Monday will be sufficiently effective to make the issue of a currency
stabilization fund moot. The former Minister of Finance, Jaime Serra,
came here with Miguel Mancera, the central bank governor, and
Guillermo Ortiz who, although we didn't know it at the time, was about
to replace Mr. Serra as the Minister of Finance.
I guess if we had
thought about it, we would have suspected that it was somewhat unusual
for Mr. Ortiz to be part of the group, but in retrospect the reason is
clear. They came here largely to put forward their views of what
should be done, and we spent several hours with them. They left us
with pieces of paper, and I think we had a rather fruitful discussion.
I will leave it to Charlie to indicate the particular elements of the
program they were suggesting.
My concern in all of this is that a nominal speech on Monday
night could very well lay an egg, and I would say we would have fairly
significant currency turmoil on the following morning largely because
the so-called tesobonos they had created had cumulated to a much
larger amount than I had thought.
One of the more interesting
statistics made available to us was that the outstanding maturities of
tesobonos, which are issued in pesos but linked to the exchange rate,
now cumulate to about $30 billion equivalent. They are running off at

12/30/94

-2-

a rate of $700 to $900 million a week and are effectively dollardenominated securities. Consequently, there is significant erosion
there and a major problem in the making unless something fundamental
is done because the existing quantity of reserves at the Bank of
Mexico, which we have not been able to fully tie down, is somewhere
between $4 and $5 billion. We don't know if any of that is
I assume that Bill
encumbered, though we are trying to find out.
McDonough is going to tell us the answer.
Is that correct, Bill?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

We have an answer by this time,

yes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Hopefully, we'll get some judgment on
what those actual numbers are.
I would assume that the dollar
reserves are virtually all there, but I think it's important for us to
find out. The general tone of the meeting, attended on our side by
Bill McDonough, myself, Governor Blinder, and Charlie Siegman and
Larry Promisel from our staff, was quite cordial, a little nervousmaking. Specifically, there were indications from Governor Mancera
that he had been particularly concerned about the tesobono issue. The
increasingly important and fundamental question is how they have
handled it.
Yesterday on the phone, I raised the issue with Governor
Mancera of whether the speech on Monday could have some favorable
surprises for international financial markets. This would be
equivalent to what we succeeded in doing with our 75 basis point move
in mid-November, which created significant credibility for this
institution because it was slightly more than what the market had
expected. If President Zedillo's speech on Monday has a few important
surprises, I think it may well turn this whole thing around because
the weak underlying economic structure that prevailed in 1982 when the
Mexican economy last fell into a swoon clearly is not there. The
outline of what went on at that meeting is useful, but the details of
their recommendations are more interesting. Before Charlie explains
that,

I hope to fill you in on what is involved here. Charlie, why don't
you give us a rundown of what is in their package as of now.
MR. SIEGMAN. I'll try to be brief and outline the main
elements of what they regard as a fairly austere program to restore
confidence both in domestic and international markets. They are still
developing their program in preparation for the speech, although
elements have already been revealed in various public statements.
They are aiming for a sizable reduction in the current account from a
$31 billion current account deficit before the whole episode of the
breakup of the exchange rate regime to a $14 billion current account
target. They aim to achieve that through-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's the current account deficit target.

MR. SIEGMAN. Yes, the target is to reduce the current
account deficit to $14 billion. The policy program that they are
considering proposes splitting it, with approximately half derived
from exchange rate and wage policy adjustments and half through fiscal

12/30/94

adjustment by reductions in real outlays. With this program, they are
prepared to accept a very sizable reduction in their growth prospects
for 1995. They also expect that because of the changed environment of
the exchange rate in particular, inflation will have to rise, but
they'd like to contain the rise. They have outlined a set of
macroeconomic policies primarily on the fiscal side to lower the
fiscal deficit, although from our analysis there's room for further
tightening that would help a lot. They will also try to announce a
variety of structural changes in the economy, including various
aspects of privatization, opening their market more to various forms
of competition, and what they regard as confidence-building measures.
Although their target objectives are pretty ambitious--to halve the
current account deficit within one year and to contain the inflation
pass-through--one important feature is to try to create an image that
would contrast with past Latin American devaluations, in particular
where there were large fiscal deficits combined with loose monetary
policy and the pass-through was very rapid and full and had a
spiraling effect. They are trying to avoid the price increase spiral,
hoping it will only be a level adjustment that will enable them to
move to a better economic environment. Whether they succeed or not
will depend on the final outcome of their program. That's the broad
outline.
One final comment to be made is that the market's view of the
evolution of this problem attributes a lot to the way the new
Administration has handled it. They are seen as having made plenty of
errors, but they started by taking on a very difficult problem where
the economy was out of equilibrium. Something had to burst sooner or
later and adjustments had to be made. Unfortunately, it came with a
dramatic impact. The other point is that they have the dilemma of
trying to satisfy two audiences: the domestic audience--relating to
the "pacto" to provide assurance that it can be sustained after the
adjustments are absorbed--and the external markets. The elements that
are necessary or desirable for the external markets are not always the
things that the domestic political situation may absorb. This is not
to excuse them from holding on and persevering, but they have this
double audience dilemma which will affect their final policy decision.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's pretty clear that if they don't
address the international financial audience primarily, the second
audience will be hurt more than anybody. The second issue that arises
here is that of the currency stabilization fund. There seems to be a
view in the market that these funds work and that the availability of
backup resources is taken in some way as a measure of the capability
of the government to sustain its currency. I seriously wonder whether
the market or the people out there have got this right. It is pretty
clear that if at this stage the Mexicans were to run into a severe set
of pressures on the peso market and were intervening heavily using,
for example, not only what's left of their reserves but to an extent
drawing on the existing swap lines, a problem would very rapidly
arise. The Mexicans would build up external dollar-denominated debt
and raise the probability of their being unable to meet their
obligations. Restraint on the movement of capital or on free exchange
rates would very rapidly and cumulatively occur, which would
exacerbate the selling. In a sense, this process involves a vicious
circle unless the sum of the currency stabilization fund is of an
extraordinarily large magnitude such that a country can exhaust all of

12/30/94

-4-

the potential foreign claims and indeed domestic claims that want to
move out of the domestic currency very readily.

I'd like to
call on Bill McDonough who has been involved in those conversations,
to give an
outline of how that went. Bill.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It might
be helpful for the Committee to see why we decided it would be
appropriate to bring the non-NAFTA BIS countries in. As late as the
meeting on Monday that the Chairman described when the Mexicans came
to Washington, we had evaluated the situation as one in which we
should try as much as possible to have the new Mexico, as we call it,
not look like the old Mexico of 1982. What has made the new Mexico
new was a very good set of domestic financial economic policies with
the exception of an exchange rate policy that had resulted in a
progressively overvalued currency. Therefore, we thought that the
support that was already existent in the swap facility of $6 billion
from the United States jointly and equally funded by the Treasury and
the Federal Reserve plus a $1 billion Canadian line, which is equal to
$0.7 billion U.S., would be adequate and sufficient in bringing in
players from the past such as the BIS as a source of pesos. However,
as this week has progressed, it became very clear that the marketplace
needed some additional source of psychological strength, even though I
could not agree more with the Chairman that the market's view about
how much this outside support really contributes tends to be
exaggerated.

12/30/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There is a case to be made for a significant amount of
Congressionally appropriated funds to buy down a very large part of
these tesobonos, which is effectively foreign aid. But it's a type of
foreign aid that probably would be rather wise for us to engage in.
At the moment, I don't see anything remotely like that emerging on the
scene. I suspect, however, that it might become a major political
issue if we find that the currency turmoil does not simmer down. I
might also add that there is a commercial banking package that is
being initiated by
specifically, and it looks to
be several billion dollars in size or at least that is what they are
talking about. I don't know at this stage what type of collateral or
other arrangements are being contemplated, but from what I have heard,
it includes some U.S. banks and Deutschebank as well. That is the
general thrust of everything that I think is going on. Charlie?

-6-

12/30/94

MR. SIEGMAN. I have one technical point that was being
proposed as a supplement to the current framework arrangement. The
swap would be temporary, that's underlined, and would have a
termination date. Whereas the current $3 billion swap facility is an
ongoing one subject to annual renewal, this one would be a
supplementary one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What maturity?

MR. SIEGMAN. They're talking about one year at most.
the Treasury may even consider a shorter amount of time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But

So this--

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Could I interrupt for a second, Mr.
Chairman?
I think it would be more consistent with our conversations
with the Mexicans to date if we made this supplementary portion 90
days with a possible extension of 90 days rather than a year.
MR. SIEGMAN. That's possible. That sounds right. The
Treasury is groping over the duration because it would be 90 days of
drawing ability perhaps-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

In hypothetical terms.

MR. SIEGMAN. --hypothetically for the drawing facility and
repayments of 180 days.
It has to be in existence longer because it
has to be repaid on time in technical terms.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
for 90 days plus 90 days.
MR. SIEGMAN.

They'd have the facility available

Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. If they draw on the 179th day and
then they have 90 days, there is a possibility of rolling over the
drawing for another 90 days. You could wind up to about 359 days.
But all our conversations so far have been that the facility would be
available for 90 days plus 90 days.
MR. SIEGMAN.

Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

I think we ought to stick with

that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, I--

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
been talking about.

We're giving them more than we've

MR. SIEGMAN. President McDonough is exactly right. The
access to the facility would be limited to a very short time period,
but the concept of a facility on the books would technically have to
extend for up to one year. We have had two precedents for this.
In
1982 and 1989 under different circumstances, we enlarged temporarily
our existing swap of $700 million with Mexico by adding a
supplementary facility of $325 million in 1982 and a supplementary

12/30/94

facility of $125 million in 1989.
has been done.

This would not be the first time it

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I hate to continue a
technical debate, but the terms of the facility remain in place until
the final repayment is made. But if you say that the facility is
available for a year, then we're talking about a potential year and a
half. That is six months longer than anything that we have been
encouraged to believe. We can fix that up.
MR. SIEGMAN.

We can fix that up.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Committee.
MR. SIEGMAN.

I think we may be confusing the

I think there's no disagreement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think this is a technical issue
based on previous actions on the part of this Committee, and we will
just stay with standard practice on the assumption that the Committee
Peter Fisher, could you bring us up
goes along with this initiative.
to date on what's been going on in the peso markets today?
MR. FISHER. Yes, I'd be happy to. Today the peso has traded
between 5 and 5.20.
It's original devaluation, for point of
reference, was to a level of 4, and the weakest level was 5.85.
In
the last couple of days, it has strengthened to a high of about 4.75.
That really was on quite a bit of leakage of expectations for what the
official package would be and what the Mexican government policies
would be.
It is back down now around the 5 to 5.20 level. I should
say that the peso market for most of this week has been
extraordinarily thin. There's an exchange rate suspended in the air.
Indicative prices move a great deal more than actual volume. Those
who were trying to sell in the initial wake of the action, the
original devaluation and then float, realized how narrow the door was
and how little money was coming in on the other side. They have more
or less suspended any attempts to sell or get out of the pesos.
Earlier this week they had a tesobono auction in which $750 million
worth of peso instruments were coming due; they redeemed only $28
million of this amount.
It was simply an auction that nobody came to.
Their overnight rate today is about 30 percent, and at one point this
week, the Bank of Mexico had to raise its overdraft penalty
substantially to make sure that it was still an effective penalty over
the market rate.
They have an auction on Tuesday coming up for value
next Thursday. They have $650 million worth of tesobonos running off
next week and they hope to auction $500 million on Tuesday. I think
that is what they total this week. The worst indication we had was
the one-month dollar/peso auction volatility at a level of 150
percent.
It was 40 percent following the initial devaluation and 6
percent two months ago, to give you a sense of the thinness of a
market that has no one on the other side. There are high hopes in the
market that the other side will materialize with the new year. One of
the risks next week is not only the expectation of official action,
but the extent of expectations of a deeper two-way market, which may
or may not materialize.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
here?

Are there any questions for anybody

12/30/94

MR. LINDSEY. Alan, this is Larry Lindsey. I just was
wondering if we have any estimates of how much the current devaluation
will shrink their current account deficit.
MR. SIEGMAN. The estimates that we have, using conventional
relationships and based on the level of imports to Mexico, are that
for a 30 percent devaluation, imports would fall approximately $30
billion over three years. On the export side, a 30 percent
devaluation would approximately increase non-oil exports by $18
billion from the current level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They would swing to a large trade

surplus.
MR. SIEGMAN. Yes, a large trade surplus. And the current
account would be similarly affected. Now, that's all dependent on
other associated policies they adopt in order to get that impact such
as the degree of reduction in real output. Our analysts looked at the
program that the Mexicans presented and thought that the turnaround,
with all the feedback effects that the Mexicans were proposing from
$30 billion or so to $14 billion, was realistic for the current
account.
SPEAKER(?).

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SIEGMAN.

Other questions?

And that was based on 4.50 exchange rate.

MR. PARRY. This is Bob Parry. Two questions. The first one
is whether Canada is doing anything more on this.
Secondly, the
amounts I think you said were 6 to 9, right? We'd be going from $6
billion to $9 billion?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's correct.

MR. PARRY. If we are looking for the symbolic effects, why
wasn't a number like 10 chosen in which case, we'd have 10 here and 5
in Europe? I'm just curious.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
9 was the right number
MR. PARRY.

Basically, because Treasury thought that

Thank you.

I think I understand it better now.

MR. SIEGMAN.
We have not spoken to the Canadians yet and are waiting
until we know what the FOMC decides.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I thought we would approach the
Canadians after this meeting.

MR. PARRY.
MR. LAWARE.

Okay, thank you.
This is John LaWare.

12/30/94

Unless they are willing to flesh that out in the speech on
Monday, it doesn't seem to me that the markets are going to be
reassured at all. Alan, you referred to favorable surprises. None of
what Charlie was talking about sounded very surprising to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Precisely.

the basic purpose was to
recommend to Messrs. Ortiz and Mancera to include in the speech a
series of issues that we would interpret to be something of a surprise
and that the markets would not expect. We were focusing largely on
the fiscal area. At the moment, there is a drafting group at the
Treasury and the Fed trying to put together a listing of that sort to
make available to the Mexicans.
MR. LAWARE.
I see, thank you.
indicated that you did have some idea

Bill McDonough, I think you

Could you clarify that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Really?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

MR. LAWARE.

I share that view, Alan.

One more question, Alan.

-10-

12/30/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. LAWARE.
MS. MINEHAN.
said, Alan.

Thank you.
This is Cathy.

Just to clarify what you just

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN. Right. Coming to the broader issues of what
they are going to do in Mexico:
Did you get a sense that they had
confidence in the kinds of agreements that I gather they're working on
with labor unions and others within the economy to put the kind of lid
on wages and prices that they may need to control inflation?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It's difficult to say, Cathy. They
clearly were fessing up to a significant decline in real wages as a
consequence of the program that they are initiating.
MS. MINEHAN.

Thanks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They did not convey, at least as best I
could judge, a view that they would run into trouble on that. Now,
they obviously have to be nervous about it, but they did not convey
that to us.
MS. MINEHAN. Given that at least a torch for this fire was
income inequality in one of the areas in Mexico, you've got to wonder
about austerity programs that are only going to exacerbate that
potentially in other regions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is no question that that has to be
a very major conflicting factor in their judgment.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, this is Al Broaddus. Could I
ask when the additional swap facility will be announced?
Is that
going to be announced after the speech on Monday?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Assuming we get all of this put
together, I would assume that that would be in the speech.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, they definitely do
plan to include in the speech, as we understand it, anything that they
have available in the way of international support, though probably
not in a lot of detail. Assuming they don't get leaked in the
meantime, the details would be more likely in the form of a briefing

12/30/94

-11-

by the new finance minister probably right after the speech or the
next morning.
MS. MINEHAN. This is Cathy again. Peter Fisher, in your
assessment of where the peso is, given all the information that has
been in the Times and The Wall Street Journal about the negotiations
and in some detail and given the announcement of the resigning of one
finance minister and another taking over, it sounds as though--now,
maybe it's just because the markets are so thin--none of that has
produced the kind of stabilizing, improving impact that you would have
expected.
MR. FISHER.
I think actually a little bit on the contrary.
The peso has gotten all the way down to 5.85-MS. MINEHAN.

All right.

MR. FISHER. --and bounced back to 4.75 on all that leakage.
I think it would be doing well to trade through next Tuesday around
the 5 level. Now one would hope to see it do better than that but
fear that it could be worse.
One would rather see it firm to 4, 4.50
on the news next week; that would be ideal. If it stayed at these
levels, I think that would still be pretty good news.
MS. MINEHAN. A lot of what we heard today had been heard by
the relevant people well before today.
MR. FISHER. Yes, the markets were discounting a lot of it
yesterday and some of it the day before.
MS. MINEHAN.

All right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions from anybody?

MR. MELZER. Alan, just quickly, this is Tom Melzer. In
terms of the relevant size, with this supplementary amount we are
agreeing to I guess $4-1/2 billion, which is somewhere in the area of
the permanent lines for Japan and Germany. I don't know what the
precedent is for supplementary lines, whether there are any
precedential issues.
I put a lot of weight on what was said earlier
about our ability to demand adequate collateralization and that
obviously is the key point in terms of protecting ourselves here. But
are there any inferences from precedents for what we might be creating
for the future?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You know in one respect, Tom,

The thing
that's going to come out of all of this, I think, is an increasing
awareness of the problems that will befall developing countries that
endeavor to obtain reflected credibility by locking into an exchange
rate and trying to hold it.
One of the reasons for considerable
concern in this instance, as you all know, is that Argentina has put
it into its constitution. The problems that emerge as a consequence
of that are not readily resolved by swap agreements. My own
impression of where we will be going later on with all of this is

-12-

12/30/94

probably to review the whole concept. Now, I don't think that that's
immediate or necessary at the moment. But I do think that we have to
figure out what purpose all of these arrangements should be designed
to serve.
MR. MELZER.

Thank you.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, this is Al Broaddus.
I would
certainly agree with the last point you made. Let me just say that I
have the same concern that I've had with this kind of proposal in the
past. Specifically, I'm worried because even if we get this package-we get the speech and we have the enlarged facility--it is not at all
clear to me, and I'm sure it is not at all clear to anyone, that it is
going to do the job. If that were our only choice, that would be
something we could swallow, but what worries me is we are a party to
it. We are now adding to our Federal Reserve commitment and I am
worried about that from the standpoint of our credibility. So my view
on this is very similar to my view on earlier proposals.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Are there any other questions or

comments?
MR. BLINDER. This is Alan Blinder speaking. I would like to
ask Peter:
Do you know a ballpark figure for the trading volume on
the worst day--I forget which day it was--when Mexico burned through
$4 or $5 billion of reserves?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Probably $4 or $5 billion.

MR. FISHER. I'm sorry, but I don't have a precise notion of
the overall trading volume the day they lost $4 billion in reserves.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My own impression is that it was $3.5
billion in volume. The peso was moving so fast that half of it was
lost without any transactions.
MS. MINEHAN. I'm sorry to keep jumping in here with other
questions, but there was some reference in the Times this morning to
the Treasury using the Exchange Stabilization Fund instead of going to
Congress to ask for more direct foreign aid. Is that likely to be a
major issue when Congress gets back and are we likely--not that it
would be a reason to not do this--to come under some pressure as well
from Congress for the use of our facility?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The basic reason why I insist that we do
not commit ourselves to uncollateralized exposure is precisely that,
Cathy. I think that if the Treasury were to choose to do that, that
is their call, they are part of the Administration. But ultimately, I
have a suspicion that we may see Congressionally appropriated funds
involved here.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes, it's important enough I would think.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments or questions?
would like someone to move on the $1-1/2 billion supplementary
facility.
SPEAKER(?).

Move it.

I

12/30/94

-13-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. YELLEN.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We better call the roll because I know
we have at least one dissent.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Broaddus
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Parry
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much everybody. I hope
that we do not have to have a post-mortem of the negative type in the
next few days in trying to explain what has gone wrong over and above
everything else. But we will certainly endeavor to keep everyone
informed as to what we are learning. We will either do it through
individual conversations with the members of the FOMC or, if it's more
convenient, in another session such as this.
I wish you all a happy New Year and will see you all in the
new year.
END OF SESSION

