Prefatory Note
This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
February 3-4, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Thursday, February 3, 1994, at 2:30 p.m. and was
continued on Friday, February 4, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips

1
Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, Melzer, Oltman, and
Syron, Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, R. Davis, Goodfriend,
Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, Stockton,
and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

1.

Attended Thursday session only.

2
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of
Internatinal Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Reinhart, Section Chief, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Rosine, Senior Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Ms. Krieger, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

2.
3.

Attended Thursday session only.
Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
February 3-4, 1994
February 3, 1994--Afternoon session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As you know, this is our organizational
meeting and always in such meetings we have the election of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman. I turn to our senior Board member to
offer nominations.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have the high honor and distinct
privilege to nominate officers to serve until the election of their
successors at the first meeting of the Committee after December 31,
1994.
For Chairman of the Committee I nominate Alan Greenspan and for
Vice Chairman, William J. McDonough.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

MR. KELLEY.

Thank you.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

I move the nominations cease.

MR. KELLEY. You're a little slow but thank you!
moved and seconded and the nominations have ceased.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
happens now?
MR. KELLEY.

MR. KELLEY.
SEVERAL.

The nominations have ceased and what

I guess we vote.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's been

All in favor--do I do that?

Yes, please carry on.

All in favor say "Aye."

Aye.

MR. KELLEY. Opposed? Mr. Chairman, it unanimously passes.
Congratulations on your election to another term as Chairman of the
FOMC, and congratulations, Mr. Vice Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thank you, Governor.
It's always a
wonder how the democratic process works in this organization. I think
we want to go next to filling the staff officer positions and I call
on our distinguished Deputy Secretary.
MR. BERNARD.
Secretary and Economist, Donald Kohn;
Deputy Secretary, Normand Bernard;
Assistant Secretaries, Joseph Coyne and Gary Gillum;
General Counsel, J. Virgil Mattingly;
Deputy General Counsel, Ernest Patrikis;
Economists, Michael Prell and Edwin Truman.
Associate Economists from the Board of Governors:
David Lindsey;
Larry Promisel;
Charles Siegman;
Thomas Simpson; and

2/3-4/94

-2-

David Stockton.
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Jack Beebe, proposed by President Parry;
John Davis, proposed by President Jordan;
Richard Davis, proposed by President McDonough;
Marvin Goodfriend, proposed by President Broaddus; and
Sheila Tschinkel, proposed by President Forrestal.
That's the list, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Are there any objections to
that listing of officers? If not, I will assume that they have been
selected by the Committee.
Before we go further, let me just indicate that we have a
problem that emerges as a consequence of our meeting on a Thursday and
Friday as distinct from the middle of the week. I don't know what we
will eventually decide tomorrow, but it's clear that we may decide to
take some action with respect to rates. Should that be the case, we
are caught in a position where under our normal procedures we would be
going into the weekend with a very important decision having been made
and without public disclosure thereof. So, what I would intend to do
at the end of our session today is to discuss contingency plans in the
event that we decide tomorrow actually to move toward tightening. If
that policy issue has to be resolved, we clearly have to do it in the
morning, which means we would have to reverse our agenda and first
discuss the regular short-term policy issues that we usually discuss
and leave the long-term target issues as the second policy item on the
agenda. In the event that we choose to do nothing, all we'll do is
create a minor difference in the order we usually handle things. But
I think it's probably a worthwhile precaution in the event that we
decide to do something. Until we actually see how it evolves tomorrow
we won't know for sure, but I think the point at issue here is that we
not be in a position where we are restricted in taking action because
of concerns about security. So, later this afternoon I would like to
discuss a hypothetical case of what we might do even though it might
take a few minutes to do so and it may not prove to be necessary. But
it's probably a worthwhile precaution.
Let's move on now to item 2, which is the selection of a
Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the System Open
Market Account; this is traditionally New York and I'd like somebody
to make such a motion.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Similarly, we need
to select the Manager for Domestic Operations and the Manager for
Foreign Operations. Our incumbents are of course respectively Joan
Lovett and Peter Fisher. I would ask whether there are any objections
to their selection with the understanding that the decision made by
this Committee is still subject to agreement of the directors of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. So, would somebody like to move
that?

2/3-4/94

SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

Item 4 is the regular review of the Authorization for
Domestic Open Market Operations. That authorization has been
circulated and if there are no comments, I will ask whether there are
any objections. Hearing none, I assume that there are no problems
there.
Next, we have the review of:
(1) the Authorization for
Foreign Currency Operations; (2) the Foreign Currency Directive, and
(3) the Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency
Operations, including a review of the "warehousing" authority
incorporated in the Authorization and in the Directive. Copies of all
of these have been sent out to the Committee, and I believe that Mr.
Truman dispatched a memorandum on the warehousing issue a few days
ago. Are there any questions or comments on those particular issues?
Yes?
MR. JORDAN.

All those issues including the "warehousing"?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JORDAN.

Yes.

I have some comments on that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure, please go ahead.

MR. JORDAN. Warehousing is a loan by the central bank to the
Treasury. That issue is one that's general not only to this central
bank but to central banks around the world. Central banks around the
world are moving toward more arms length dealings with Ministries of
Finance. Certainly, the "accord" between the Federal Reserve and the
U.S. Treasury over 40 years ago had that in mind. As I understand it,
warehousing was proposed by Secretary Bill Simon in a letter to
Chairman Burns about a week or so before the Ford Administration left
office, and I can't for the life of me imagine why he did that. I
haven't asked him yet, but I am going to ask him what was he thinking
when he did that. Subsequently, in 1979, there was legislation
providing for temporary lending in effect by the Reserve Banks to the
Treasury because of so-called liquidity problems having to do with
debt ceiling limitations and all of that. That authority was
controversial at the time; it lasted for only two years. It was
decided that it was a bad idea and Congress let it lapse. Yet
warehousing continues as a practice, or at least the authority is
still on the books for us to make a loan to the Treasury Department
when it was generally agreed going back 80 years that that should
happen only under very, very exceptional circumstances. I would take
the latter to involve conditions warranting a full discussion by this
Committee. So I think it's not appropriate for us to have a standing
authority for a line of credit for the Treasury to get us to lend to
them up to $5 billion. And I think we should not authorize this.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I call on Ted Truman.

2/3-4/94

MR. TRUMAN. Well, let me deal with the historical issue
first. The reason why Secretary Simon proposed this arrangement in
1977 was to establish a mechanism that would allow the United States
to participate in the arrangement

As I remember, the arrangement was in effect for a period
of a year or two. It was a joint operation that had been negotiated
by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. The System was very much
involved, but the Treasury was also very much involved and the
arrangement was linked to
The warehousing agreement was very much in that context.
It was very well thought out; it wasn't a casual action. The
warehousing facility had existed before that time, but it had been
more ad hoc. It had existed in similar circumstances in the late
1960s when there also was a special arrangement
The issue of whether warehousing is a loan is obviously a
question primarily for the lawyers. This Committee faced that issue
in 1990. There was one group who felt that it was a loan and should
be regarded as a loan. The lawyers have informed me that it should
not be considered a loan. It is a market transaction that's carried
off at market rates. Although people can disagree with that
interpretation, that has been the interpretation of this Committee to
date. That is a matter of public record. That's the majority
interpretation of the Committee, and it hasn't been challenged by the
majority of Congress or even a substantial minority of Congress.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further issues or discussion
relative to the three items I mentioned? If not, let's take a single
vote on all. Would somebody like to move their approval?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

So move.

All in favor say "Aye."

Aye.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JORDAN.

Opposed?

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, the "Ayes" have it. The next item
on the agenda is updating the Managers' titles in the Committee's
Rules of Organization and other documents. A memorandum from Mr.
Gillum was distributed a week or so ago. Any questions?
MR. LINDSEY.

Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

-5-

2/3-4/94

MR. LINDSEY. I'm sorry, there was a resounding silence on
the last vote. I think that may reflect the fact--frankly, I didn't
understand the issue and that's why I didn't say anything. I think we
had two "Yeses" and one "No."
While I agree it passed, could we at
least have some kind of document laying out the pros and cons?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Was that sent?

MR. TRUMAN. Not the pros and cons.
the history was circulated earlier.

A document summarizing

MR. LINDSEY. Well, I suppose what I really want to hear is-I'm asking Jerry Jordan--you said we had a letter outlining what
Secretary Simon said. At some point, perhaps next year, I'd-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure, certainly. Ted, why don't you
arrange to distribute some information on this? Actually, we've been
over this a number of times over the years, and it's an open dispute;
there has not been unanimity in this Committee on this. Jerry Jordan
has raised these issues before. Perhaps it would be useful to get a
set of documents that would cover this, and Jerry you could possibly
add a piece of paper to that package.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we can recirculate the documents. The
documentation was circulated to the Committee in 1990; not all of you
were here then.
MR. LINDSEY.

I was not here in 1990.

MR. TRUMAN. We'd be glad to recirculate that document to the
Committee, and we will remind you of it next year when the topic comes
up.
MR. LINDSEY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay? On updating the managers' titles,
is there any question on that?
Is there any objection to it?
If not,
I will assume it's passed. We now move to our regular pre HumphreyHawkins meeting and I will ask somebody to move the approval of the
minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting of December 21.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
Peter Fisher on foreign currency operations.
MR. FISHER.

We'll now move to

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
intervention?
[Laughter]

Do we have to authorize the oral

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?
on to Joan Lovett and the Domestic Desk.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

If not, let's move

[Statement--see

President Forrestal.

2/3-4/94

MR. FORRESTAL.

Joan, do you have an "add need" tomorrow as

well?
MS. LOVETT. For the entire period that begins today--which
is the first day of the maintenance period--both the New York and
Board staffs estimate a need to add something under $1 billion for the
full period. The distribution of those reserves in the first couple
days of the period is such that today is sort of straddling "flat" if
you will. Tomorrow is flat to a modest deficiency, although I have to
say there's some difference of opinion about the estimates of the
Treasury balance, and that difference of opinion is $3 billion between
us and the Treasury. If we are right, there will be a modest
deficiency tomorrow; and if the Treasury is right, there will be a
more considerable surplus.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Syron.

MR. SYRON. Joan, just on that point. This apparently will
be germane to the discussion that appropriately we will be having
later about how we announce one way or the other. What does the
market think we are going to do tomorrow?
Is there any perception of
the need to stay flat? What would they think we would do if we were
staying neutral?
MS. LOVETT.
In the market it will depend on where the
federal funds rate is.
I guess people will assume that if the funds
rate were firm we would signal something through inaction--by not
providing reserves. However, I think most of them feel that our
preference would be to signal something through an assertive action
and therefore a funds rate anywhere in the range of 3 or 3-1/8 percent
would evoke a draining action on our part.
I think that is how people
would see something like that conveyed. We are coming off a period
where there has been some uncertainty in the reserve numbers. About a
week or two ago, the market might even have viewed this maintenance
period that we are going into today as a drain period. But given all
the variabilities, they might see this as what I would call a modest
add. So, for us to drain reserves within the right federal funds
context would get the message across, presuming funds are trading at
the appropriate level for us to do that.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Would we conclude correctly, Joan,
that as far as you can see today, if the Committee decided that action
should be taken tomorrow, the technical condition of the market is
such that it would not create a problem for us?
MS. LOVETT. I think that's correct as far as the technical
condition of the money market in terms of getting the right
Yes, I think that's correct.
constellation of rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions? If not, would somebody
like to move to ratify the actions taken by the Domestic Desk?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Second.

So move.

Is there a second?

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I think we can now
move on to the Chart Show and Messrs. Prell and Hooper.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Peter and I will be
referring to the chart package that's been placed in front of you.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. HOOPER.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to note that revisions, if any,
on the forecasts that everyone submitted should be sent to Mike Prell
by the close of business next Friday, February 11. Questions?
MR. LINDSEY. I have two questions. The first has to do with
personal income numbers. Do you have a breakdown for personal income,
a forecast by source of income?
MR. PRELL. Yes. I wouldn't want to put too fine a point on
any of the numbers, but we do go through a reasonably detailed
exercise.
MR. LINDSEY.

Could I get a copy of that breakdown?

MR. PRELL. You're trying to get inside the factory here.
certainly will share with you our major numbers.
MR. LINDSEY.

Horrors!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I

[Laughter]

This is known as the statistical sausage

factory!
MR. PRELL. I think one has to recognize that, when we get
down to these levels of detail, there are potentially a whole lot of
offsetting factors and we don't necessarily have strong convictions.
MR. LINDSEY. I realize that you need more details to develop
forecasts. I'm not going to hold you ex post to the forecast, believe
me, but I do want to have some sense particularly about whether the
functional distribution of income is going to change from 1993 in your
forecast. And that's why I'd appreciate more details.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Interest and dividends versus wages and

salaries?
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes, and small business income.

MR. PRELL. I can share with the entire Committee in broad
terms our expectations in this regard. In personal income growth, we
have a substantial step-up in regular salary disbursements. Nonfarm
proprietors' income is expected to rise somewhat more than in 1993,
but it's not a dramatic change. Wage and salary disbursements are
muddled by all that income shifted into 1992 out of the first quarter
of 1993. I would caution everyone that our expectation is that once
again sometime during this year there will be a revision of the
fourth-quarter income figures that will show at least some shifting
from the first quarter. Otherwise, we have a significant pickup in
dividend income. We've already seen some upward movement in that
category in recent quarters; in fact, quite rapid in recent quarters.

2/3-4/94

-8-

Also, we have an acceleration in personal interest income. Again, we
are beginning to see, as the rates have bottomed out, some firming in
that category. Otherwise, transfer payments will increase pretty much
the same as last year.
MR. LINDSEY. What you've told me is that everything is going
up.
I believe that is true.
I would just appreciate seeing the data
expressed as relative increases at some point.
My other question was on housing. I had a consumer group
allege that a third of all new single-family housing starts are
manufactured homes.
MR. PRELL.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. PRELL.

Beats me.

I just don't know.

Are trailers part of that?
That's not in manufactured homes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not mobile homes; this is housing
that is prefabricated at the factory.
MR. LINDSEY.

goes on;

Prefabricated?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, a lot of that type of construction
I don't know what the number is.

MR. SYRON.
in which case--

They may be including prefabs plus mobile homes,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think usually when they talk about
manufactured homes they talk about the fact that they build the
various structures in a factory and bring them on site for assembly.
The trouble with the concept is that it varies in so many different
instances as to what degree of prefabrication goes on.
MR. SYRON. This prefabrication total has to be awfully high.
You see these structures coming in on the trucks-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

If it's a third, it has to be far more--

That seems high.

MR. PRELL. Well, if they were including mobile homes, then
that might be a quite plausible number. Mobile homes run a quarter of
a million a year, so if you tacked on 100,000 or 200,000 houses as
prefabs or whatever, that third would be easily attainable.
I just
don't know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You are quite right.
if they include mobile homes.
MR. PRELL.

It is attainable

I'll try to get more precise data.

MR. LINDSEY. The other question I had was on the homeownership rate. If you take out seniors, the homeownership rate declines
more precipitously than it does here. But suppose you also took out
two-adult households? You mentioned the role of demographics in here.

2/3-4/94

Knowing the home maintenance that's involved, I couldn't imagine doing
it by myself. I wonder if that adjustment would change your
conclusions about a rebound in homeownership?
MR. PRELL. Well, I've never seen figures broken out that
way.
I've seen it by age groups. Are you suggesting that there is a
financial impediment to-It's more a time impediment or a hassle

MR. LINDSEY.
impediment.
MR. PRELL.

No, I don't have any real insight.
Do you know if data exist?

MR. LINDSEY.

MR. PRELL.
I've not seen them, but there are lots of data in
this area; perhaps they have them at the Bureau of the Census.
MR. LINDSEY. I call the phrase "two-adult" households as
opposed to "single-adult" households--homeownership by two-adult
households.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There may be information in the housing
census on those owning their homes.
In the housing census, okay.

MR. LINDSEY.

MR. PRELL. Well, I suspect that somehow there's a cell
buried in the data that could address-SPEAKER(?).

There is a cell in the sample.

MR. LINDSEY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
for the January CPI change?
MR. PRELL.

I think we have about .3 percent for January.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. STOCKTON.
MR. PRELL.

What estimate are you using internally

And the core?

It's .4 percent for the total CPI.

And .3 percent for the core.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's .4 for the total and .3 for the

core?
MR. PRELL. Yes. Again, there's some uncertainty relating to
the seasonal adjustment factors. The latest word we received just a
day or two ago is rather encouraging on how aggressive they may be in
solving this problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
ago.

That seemed to be the case about 10 days

-10-

2/3-4/94

MR. PRELL. Well, we thought they were going to go a long
way. They may go even further, so that the seasonal adjustment
problem will be largely eradicated.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. You were talking about the influence of the
length of the workweek on the growth in employment. I have a
recollection that when I read Part II of the Greenbook, it said that
the workweek in manufacturing had reached a post-World-War-II high of
41.7 hours. Is it conceivable that the length of the workweek may
actually fall--so that we might get an even stronger rate of
employment growth? It seems as though as an extreme point we might
just envision that employers, though they have been very reluctant to
hire workers, may do so if they believe that economic growth is going
to continue, and they may actually try to shorten the workweek.
MR. PRELL. We thought that a couple of tenths ago! The
tendency has been remarkable here. I guess the conventional wisdom
might be that at some point workers get tired of putting in that much
overtime on a persisting basis. They like it for a while because
their paychecks are padded, which makes up for the lean times.
MR. PARRY. It's rather impressive when the length of the
workweek is at a postwar peak.
MR. PRELL. The incentives at this point look very strong for
an employer. The additional worker means a batch of fixed-cost fringe
benefits plus the perceived costs of hiring and possibly firing,
including legal expenses. Then on top of that they fear that some
medical insurance costs might be imposed that they don't face now.
Our expectation is that the workweek is probably going to remain quite
high. But there's certainly a risk that it will shift back some and
that we will see more of a slant toward employment growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, just two technical questions. On this
elusive business of potential, there's obviously no clear answer, but
do you have any feel for where the likelihood of an error is on the
potential? We are getting to really fine points here, but if you were
going to guess, is the risk that your point estimate on potential is
too pessimistic or too optimistic?
MR. PRELL. I don't see a very obvious asymmetry in the
risks. I might note that the CBO, using different techniques to some
degree, arrived at the same numerical conclusion as our point
estimate--2.4 percent. I think in the Bluebook there was, as I
recall, some reference to possible risks that one could perceive. One
possibility on the positive side is that the productivity trend is
even stronger than we've anticipated, but offsetting that is the
languishing labor force participation. As I noted, whether we're
going to get even the modest growth in the labor force that we've
anticipated is a question mark. So, I can point to risks on both
sides and I think we feel comfortable that this is a workable basis
for forecasting over the intermediate term.

2/3-4/94

-11-

MR. SYRON. I know you said that when one tries to explain
price performance, one can do it with the traditional model pretty
much without taking the external sector into account in a different
way than it has traditionally been done through the import and export
channels. So, you don't think there's very much to this issue of
whether there is excess capacity overseas? Your view is that capacity
utilization numbers broadly can be looked at now in the same way as
they could be looked at before?
MR. HOOPER. With a proviso that as the economy has become
more open, these normal channels that are put in the model become more
important.
MR. SYRON.

Right.

MR. HOOPER. Certainly, import prices have a greater effect
as the share of imports has grown over time. I think the share has
come close to doubling over the last 25 years. But in addition to the
effects of import prices on aggregate demand, there's really not much
comparative evidence although we've really only begun to look
carefully at the statistical evidence there.
MR. PRELL. President Syron, I want to turn this around
slightly and emphasize that we see significant external impacts on the
domestic inflation. Our econometric models do incorporate import
prices through the aggregate demand channel. Weak economies abroad
mean demand for our exports is weak. Other things equal, that tends
to damp activity and inflation here. So we think they're very
important channels, as Peter was emphasizing. If you look at those
two factors, that pretty much captures it as best we can judge.
MR. SYRON. Well, that's right. You are capturing the
external capacity utilization effect through those channels.
MR. PRELL.
MR. SYRON.
that--thank you.

Right.
But I was just wondering whether independent of

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mike, on the unemployment rate, the new and the
old series, am I correct that our rule of thumb is that the new will
run about 1/2 percentage point higher?
MR. PRELL. Well, two things are going to happen with
tomorrow's numbers. One is the introduction of the new survey of
households. Looking at the sample that they used and comparing it to
the official unemployment rate, the experience of the past year would
suggest that it was almost .5 different. On top of that, these
adjustments to the census introduce enlargements in the labor force
and unemployment that add almost a tenth to the unemployment rate.
So, between the two of them the difference is somewhere between .5 and
.6. For the purpose of our solicitation of your forecasts, we
suggested a number that was rounded to .6. But this is, as I said, a
very uncertain matter. When they move to the full-size survey and
there's more experience, we may find that the implicit differential
may narrow. And we'll never really have a very clear idea of whether

2/3-4/94

-12-

we have that nailed down after the fact because they won't be
continuing a large parallel survey against the old questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I want to get some guidance on how to interpret
the last table. You made assumptions about policy without any
indication of the appropriateness of that policy.
MR. PRELL. Except that we try to be sensitive to the
objectives of the Committee, and so we are swayed. The reason that we
put the interest rate increase in, as I noted, was that we thought
that at a minimum you folks had expressed a view that the inflation
trend should be pointed down; we just have it pointed barely down.
MR. JORDAN. Okay, well that's helpful. For '94 for instance
compared to '93--from the very preliminary numbers we have for '93-you have nominal GDP increasing a little faster, actually a lot, but
the CPI a little faster. Based on your chart on page 8, I understand
your core rate of inflation for '94 would be slightly below this 3.3
percent that you have in here and then for '95 you have a deceleration
of nominal GDP, real output, and the CPI--again with the core rate
being slightly below. Our objective for each year's inflation is to
be below the previous year. Of course, in the last two years ex-food
and energy the rate has been above that for the previous year; you've
got it slightly above, so we're back to the 3.1 percent. Then when I
look at the submissions from the Committee members, I'm puzzled
because in the memo we got from Gary Gillum our instructions were that
the projections for 1994 and 1995 should be based on the assumption of
what in our judgment would be an appropriate monetary policy. Then I
see projections of nominal GDP this year with a range up to 7-1/2
percent, a CPI up to 4 percent, and nominal GDP for 1995 with a range
up to 6-3/4 and the CPI up to 4-1/2 percent. I have to interpret that
as being a submission based on somebody's assumption of what an
appropriate monetary policy would produce. Is that your
interpretation?
MR. PRELL. That was the instruction that went out to the
Committee members, and I thought I would not try to read the minds of
the Committee. But let me just say-MR. JORDAN.

But you said you did read the minds--

MR. PRELL. Well, one possibility I can imagine is that
Committee members may feel that there will be developments in food or
energy prices that may obscure an underlying trend and that the
underlying trend is better than these numbers may suggest. But I
don't know, and I didn't interrogate each person to find out exactly
what his or her objective function is and what special factors may
have played a role in these numbers.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman and President Jordan, I'll be
addressing this issue a little bit in my own briefing when we talk
about whether the 1995 forecasts should be submitted to the Congress
at this time. I think your point, President Jordan, is well taken in
the sense that there would be a temptation to interpret the 1995
results as what the Committee members on average desire to happen.
Although the lags of policy are long, one assumes that they're not so

2/3-4/94

-13-

long that you couldn't take some actions in early 1994 that would move
you a good ways toward where you wanted to be in 1995--given the
constraints of where you are starting and the underlying structure of
the economy, which give you sort of a policy frontier as to the best
you can do.
MR. PRELL. We didn't look at these numbers before we
completed our forecast; in fact, we didn't have many of them before we
completed the forecast. When I looked at them a day or so ago, I said
our assumption that the Committee might consider a baseline with just
a slight down tilt in the inflation rate relevant to their discussion
didn't seem to run head on into the forecasts you submitted. So, I
felt more comforted than anything else by this in terms of whether we
were presenting to you a forecast that was generally in the ballpark
you were thinking about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Normally in an economic expansion, developments
in the real sector are mirrored at least to some extent in the
financial side. And this report is relatively thin on the financial
side. Yet, we tend to explain rising interest rates in an expansion
by rising demand for credit, loan demand, and that sort of thing. Is
the lack of very much on the financial side simply a continuation of
all the dislocations and distortions that we find there, or is this
going to be an expansion without very much of an increase in
commercial loan demand, or what is the complication?
MR. PRELL. Well, our expectation is that as the financing
gap of the nonfinancial corporate sector widens, as I indicated, there
will be an increased need for credit by business firms and a
considerable segment of that will be satisfied in the shorter-term
markets, including bank loans. We have only a rather moderate
increase in bank credit. You have a flow of funds forecast that
portrays these flows. In the household sector we're anticipating, as
I said, that the growth in borrowing will exceed the growth in income.
We are anticipating that consumer credit will continue to grow fairly
rapidly in the near term, but that it will trail off a bit as the
intensity of demand for durables wanes. Mortgage credit will continue
to grow apace, in line with our forecast of residential construction
activity. Otherwise, we have the Federal government's borrowing
requirements tailing off with the deficit, and State and local
governments continue to borrow significant amounts of funds to support
the investment that I referred to. So, overall, we have debt growth
running pretty much in line with nominal income.
We don't see great strains developing over the next two years
in this scenario. We do see real interest rates increasing slightly,
but at the long end we have nominal rates coming down a little in the
near term and then backing up slightly and in general remaining close
to their recent levels. This is a rather mild experience compared to
prior cycles. Maybe that calls into question whether we've got this
right, but we do see fiscal policy in an unusual contractionary mode.
That's one factor here, and it will be a while before the external
sector is exerting a lot of positive force on the economy. And with
the pent-up demands probably relatively limited coming out of a mild
recession, we think we'll work our way through those pretty rapidly;
we've already gotten to a period of high-level housing activity. We

2/3-4/94

-14-

don't think we're going to have to see sizable increases in interest
rates in order to keep the economy on a growth path that is consistent
with some slight downward pressure on inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

I answered my own question, so I withdraw.

MR. LAWARE.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Yes!

MS. PHILLIPS.

You gave the right answer?
[Laughter]

At least the one you wanted!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. With respect to the issue Don Kohn just raised:
Is it a given that in the February Humphrey-Hawkins report we give the
forecast for the next year and are we required to do that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, we are not required to do so and I
think that at some point we've got to decide whether in fact we will
do that.
MR. KEEHN.
to do 1995.

I move that we do this year only unless we have

MR. PRELL.
discussion.

Well, this was intended to be a topic for

MR. MCTEER.

Maybe do last year!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that question?
MR. KOHN.

[Laughter]

Don, when are we scheduled to discuss

With the long-term ranges.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
term ranges.

So we can decide after we do the long-

MR. KOHN. Well, I was going to include it as part of my
briefing and it's up to you after that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The answer to your question is that we
have not been required to do that. But the issue, as Don may have
indicated, is largely an endeavor to respond to the Senate Banking
Committee's question of whether the M2 targets are ceasing to be
useful.
If they are, the Banking Committee is looking for a vehicle
which would enable them to make judgments about what it is we are
doing, which is an appropriate question on their part. One endeavor
to respond to that is to go out another year in our forecasts; that's
the main reason that's in here for Committee consideration. This has,
however, been put together tentatively pending the discussion by the
Committee of whether we want to do this. But should the Committee
decide to do so, if we didn't have it in the report, then we'd be in
trouble.

2/3-4/94

-15-

MR. PRELL. I think simply having the numbers may give some
additional context to the discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for the gentlemen?
If not, would somebody like to start our roundtable? President Keehn.
MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the national
economy, in terms of growth at least for this year our forecast is
really very close to the staff forecast, especially for the main
sectors involved, and any difference is really not worth talking
about. Our overall CPI forecast is a little lower than the Board
staff's; part of that I think is due to seasonal adjustment factors.
Offsetting this, our core rate of inflation is just a little higher
than the staff forecast, so there is a little difference in our
expectations with regard to energy prices.
With regard to the District, the level of activity and I
think the general tone of things and the underlying strengths are
better now than they were at the time of the last meeting. And
despite the really miserable weather that we've been having in the
Midwest, so far I don't sense any dropoff in the level of underlying
activity this year of the magnitude that we had last year.
Admittedly, it's early to be coming to this conclusion, but certainly
in the Midwest we've not had the same kind of dropoff.
The auto business, of course, continues to lead the way.
Production schedules for the first quarter--it's hard to believe these
numbers--have been set some 15 percent higher than the levels of last
year or little more than that, and of course last year was a strong
comparative period. So the first-quarter production is going to be
very, very heavy. And in fact for some models, manufacturers are now
experiencing some capacity constraints.
The outlook for the heavy truck business has been improving.
Producers are raising their forecasts some 5 to 10 percent above last
year's sales and production levels, and again last year was a pretty
good year. And related to this, the truck-trailer business is
reported by one company to be absolutely on fire. The shortage of
truck shipping capacity is now a decided problem. Shippers have
become concerned and are pushing the large companies to add to their
equipment and also to hire more drivers.
Despite the adverse growing conditions last year in the ag
sector, farm incomes were good. Certainly farm attitudes coming into
the new year are positive, and this is reflected in continued strength
in the production and sales of ag equipment. The production schedules
for one large manufacturer have been raised some 16 percent above
their earlier expectations for this year.
Retail sales are surprisingly strong. Christmas, of course,
was just terrific. Sales limitations, at least for some stores,
resulted from the inability of suppliers to deliver and not from
resistance from customers. Again, despite the miserable weather, we
really have not seen as adverse an effect on retail sales as we might
have expected. And to state the obvious, sales of snow shovels and
batteries have been phenomenal!

2/3-4/94

-16-

In talks with representatives of various companies, I thought
I'd mention three differences from what I noted the last time. First,
despite higher sales levels--and I think Mike Prell had a chart that
demonstrates this--inventories remain under very, very tight control.
One large manufacturer reported that this is the first time in the
history of their company that they've had a significant increase in
production and sales and yet have not had an increase in inventories.
They are obviously managing their inventories very carefully. But
they are managing them on an absolute basis and not on a relative
basis. Second, while the now almost macho "I'm not hiring any more
employees" statements continue to prevail, this time there were two
heavy manufacturers who said they are adding employees and this is a
sharp shift from their earlier "not ever" statements. Third, I'm
sensing some price pressures out there, and I think it's more now than
just steel. Several contacts reported that the prices for their
purchased products are edging up just a little. Also, in terms of
their prices, though marketplace pressures remain competitive, they
said they have been able to raise some prices and those increases are
sticking. That is by no means prevalent nor are the increases large,
but at the margin a subtle change seems to be occurring. So, I think
the outlook here is a little different than it has been.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, while economic activity is healthy
in most of the Twelfth District, weakness in California persists.
Payroll employment, usually what we consider to be the most reliable
short-term indicator of economic activity for a state, continues to
decline. However, there is a growing body of evidence that suggests
the California economy is finally bottoming out. Following earlier
losses, real retail sales have stabilized during the past year or so
and construction employment seems to have bottomed out as well. We're
also starting to see some encouraging signs in the housing sector,
although it's still too early in our view to tell whether this is the
beginning of a true housing recovery. For example, the number of home
sales has been rising for the past several months and there was a
surge in sales in the month of December. The number of home permits
also has risen in the last two months, although it is still very low
by historical standards. However, when we looked at what other
forecasters are saying about the California economy, no one expects
any significant improvement during the near term. Most forecasters
expect the California economy to be flat during the first half of this
year with only very minimal growth during the second half of the year.
Preliminary damage estimates from the earthquake put the
property losses at $15 to $30 billion, depending on who is making the
estimates. This makes it one of the worst U.S. natural disasters on
record. Still, the quake probably will not change significantly the
overall pace of economic activity in the Los Angeles area. In the San
Francisco area after the Loma Prieta Earthquake, earthquake-related
reductions in business activity were largely offset by demolition,
construction, and engineering activity associated with rebuilding.
President Clinton has asked Congress to authorize $9.5 billion for
earthquake relief and the California government ultimately will
contribute to the rebuilding efforts as well. It's a little difficult
to estimate how much money will be coming from the state, but the
experience we had with the 7.1 Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989 suggests
that it will cost the state between $1 and $2 billion.

-17-

2/3-4/94

If I can now turn to the national economy, the strong growth
in the second half of last year certainly, as we all know, has
narrowed the gap between actual and potential GDP and has brought
unemployment down close to most estimates of the natural rate. We're
basically in agreement with the Greenbook forecast for real GDP growth
in the neighborhood of 3 percent for 1994 which, of course, would
narrow the gap further. I was struck when Mike Prell referred to the
stubbornness of wage inflation in Chart 8. Growth in the employment
cost index as was indicated by that chart has been stuck at 3-1/2
percent for quite a while. At current interest rates, it seems as
though we would not be able to expect any further progress in bringing
inflation down in 1994 and clearly not in 1995.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Little has changed in the Eleventh District
economy since our last meeting. Growth remains in the range of
moderate to strong and employment growth is strongest in the
construction and durable manufacturing sectors. For context, job
growth has been positive for the last 11 quarters and for 26 of the
past 27 quarters. To echo Si a little bit, we do have some reports of
labor shortages, particularly in the trucking industries and in some
construction trades. There is also some evidence of upward pressure
on construction prices, but the low level of interest rates seems to
have offset that in keeping housing affordable and fostering robust
housing performance in the District.
Regarding the national economy, we're very close to the
Greenbook projections; we're just a little stronger on real growth, I
believe, but less on inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, conditions are
legitimately better in our District. The region's economy shows
genuine improvement; I think it's cumulating. The only state that's
an exception to that is Connecticut. Manufacturing--particularly in
durables, products that are tied to autos and capital goods--looks
pretty strong. Exports are still soft, however, and medical equipment
is one area where you might expect this.

Producers of medical

equipment indicate that low ticket items are still doing all right,
but that MRI machine orders, for example, are off about a third, which
may be a good thing in the long run. Retailing is more mixed, but
again it follows the national pattern with autos and high-tech goods
being better and some retailers in soft goods feeling that things are
relatively weak. The residential real estate market is, I would say,
very strong. In fact, realtors tell us that in certain price
categories in the low end of the market inventories are getting quite
thin now. For New England, given the time of year, there's a lot of
construction activity going on that hasn't been reflected in prices
very much yet. But we will have tight labor conditions in the
building trades this spring, particularly since there are so many
roofs to be replaced, ceilings to be put back in, and other repairs
made necessary as a result of the cold weather. Other than that,
there is some improvement in employment. Prices generally are well
behaved except for items that Si mentioned--shovels and salt, where
prices can be over $1 a pound for salt.

-18-

2/3-4/94

As far as the U.S. economy goes, we tend to agree quite a lot
with the Greenbook, but I must say we're somewhat more optimistic
about this 1994-1995 period. We expect output to be somewhat stronger
in 1994, though not enormously so, which is also reflected in some
greater attenuation in the unemployment rate.
We also are slightly
more optimistic on prices, but that is because at least in the short
run I think we're more optimistic on potential.
Well, that's where we
are.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
The tone in the District is positive, and I
would say tentatively optimistic, going out for the balance of the
year.
Except for commercial real estate, most sectors and areas of
the District are growing, and the growth appears to be self-feeding,
although the District is still growing more slowly than the nation as
a whole.
One of the indicators I use is how vociferously business
I was visiting with a group of 20 or 25 business
people complain.
people in central Pennsylvania a couple of weeks ago and didn't hear
any complaints.
It was hard to keep them focused on talking about the
There is a sense that an increase in interest rates is
economy.
almost a foregone conclusion, all of which I interpret to mean that
things are going well and they just don't want to talk about it very
much.
It's that Pennsylvania Dutch reticence, I think, on their part.
There still is a reluctance to hire, but hiring is going on
nonetheless in many parts of the District.
I, too, have picked up a
hint of perhaps a little more in the way of price increases-particularly in prices paid by business firms.
It's not a lot, but
there wasn't much of a hint a few months ago.
As for the nation as a whole, I think the momentum of last
year has spilled over.
I don't think the type of slowdown we saw a
year ago is very likely. The 3 percent growth rate or thereabouts
My sense is that if there is any asymmetry in
seems about right.
terms of the risks to the forecast, it is probably that the economy
I have no
may grow faster rather than slower than that 3 percent.
real quarrel with the rest of the staff's forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, the moderate expansion that we've been
experiencing appears to be continuing in our District.
Looking at
some of the sectors, retail sales have been quite good since Christmas
with the exception of apparel and particularly women's apparel that
Retailers are
required a lot of heavy discounting over the holidays.
generally keeping their inventories quite lean; they are waiting for
indications of continued consumer interest before they build up their
spring inventory lines.
If sales don't taper off, many of them are
going to find themselves with stocks that are actually too low.
Tourism is fairly healthy around the District with the
exception of Miami, which is still suffering from bad publicity.
In
production, our latest survey would indicate that compared to last
month things are looking quite good currently as are expectations for
six months from now; that's with respect to production, volume of
In the mining
shipments, volume of orders, and the backlog of orders.
sector, the rig count is up to 119; that's up two dozen from a year
ago and that's almost exclusively in the natural gas area.

2/3-4/94

-19-

In the real estate area, residential construction is quite
strong. Reports of possible overbuilding have completely vanished,
lumber prices are now adjusted for in many construction contracts, and
sub-contractors are still in short supply. Multifamily housing is
also improving and occupancy rates are edging somewhat higher. But
new development is practically nonexistent at this point. On the
commercial side, I think we've probably hit the bottom and vacancy
rates are beginning to fall a little. But, again, new development is
almost always build-to-suit with no speculative development apparent
at all.
On the employment side, the Sixth District widened slightly
its lead in employment growth over the nation in the fourth quarter
with strength in construction, services, trade, and government. Job
losses in manufacturing have stopped almost completely and some gains
are evident, particularly on the durables side. I might mention port
activity; it's apparent at least in New Orleans and perhaps in some of
the other ports around the District that NAFTA is beginning to have a
positive effect already.
On the price side, for the first time in a long time our
directors have talked a little about seeing some price increases.
This was basically in concrete and lumber, so it's evident at this
point only in housing and construction more generally. Where there is
import competition, prices seem to be feeling no pressure. But I
thought it was interesting that we got those reports for the first
time in many, many months. I would say that the sentiment in the
District is really quite good and what's interesting to me is that
there no longer is this expectation that growth will be very robust.
There is now a recognition that growth is going to be more moderate
and perhaps more stable over the period.
With respect to the national economy, we don't really have
any differences with the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District continues to grow at
a very steady pace on the whole. Within the District, though--as I
mentioned I think in November and I'll say it again today--there is a
little more of a boom-like atmosphere in the western and the northern
portions. There is very strong housing and a shortage of labor in
that industry. Manufacturing is doing better, especially in the
nondurable goods area. The slow areas are energy, except for natural
gas, which of course is a little more on a roll right now. Also, we
think we will have modest activity in the agricultural sector because
of the floods and the effects from that.
At the national level, our view is that inflation may run a
little higher than in the Greenbook forecast for a couple of reasons.
Our GDP projection is a little stronger than the Greenbook's,
especially in the second half of the year. But also we have estimated
a little lower unemployment rate and we have a little higher, I guess,
natural rate of unemployment in our thinking than the Greenbook and
that is generating added price pressures as we see it in our
projections. I would add to that on the other side a point that may
be of interest in terms of the amount of liquidity that is in the
system. In talking with some fund managers, it seems to us that an

-20-

2/3-4/94

attitude is developing--almost a bandwagon effect--in terms of the
flows of some of these funds into investment opportunities they are
seeing. We are hearing a lot of this going on--emerging markets and
those sorts of things--from these fund managers, and we take note of
that.
I think it is having some impact on attitudes in the economy.
That, Mr. Chairman, is how it looks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting I talked a
little about the differences between the rich and the poor, and I
focused primarily on how taxes would affect the rich and how that
might affect our forecast. I got some compliments, so at the risk of
discouraging all praise, I thought I'd try it again and this time
focus on the other end of the spectrum--the bottom 99 percent of which
I am clearly a part. The thesis here is that demographically
different people have different tolerances for borrowing. The two
groups that I have separated out were individuals over 65, who are
unlikely to incur additional debt for life-cycle reasons, and those in
the top 1 percent in terms of income, which is roughly people making
over about $225,000.
I would imagine that debt may be a convenience
for them but it is not subject to their economics. The data that I
have come from a number of sources. Generally, they are from the P60
series the Labor Department puts out and also some tax data.
The first chart in my handout, which I think was distributed,
shows that we have a trend that has developed over time where the
share of income going to the old has risen since the end of World War
II; it has more than doubled. And the share of income going to these
two groups, the old and the rich, has just about doubled.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Netted out or what?

Netted out--taking out the old rich.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So, it's the old plus the young rich.

MR. LINDSEY.
It's the old plus the young rich. Actually,
the way I did it was the rich plus the poor old.
[Laughter]
That's
because getting the data was a bit easier that way.
MR. LAWARE.
instead of the old?
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. KELLEY.

Could you call us the "no longer really young"
John, you're not in this group!
You've got to get politically correct!

MR. LINDSEY. That's right. Well, we struggled with that
labeling. I started with the "middle-aged middle class" and that
didn't sound too good. So, we ended up calling it those likely to
borrow of the non-rich, non-old.
The next chart shows the debt service adjusted for Chart 1
which is the rise in the income share of the old and the rich. The
bottom line with the triangles on it shows the regular series that is
presented by the staff and the top line shows the adjusted series.
The adjustment seems to make some difference, particularly in recent

2/3-4/94

-21-

trends. If you apply debt service to those of us who actually have to
borrow, it's quite high. The same is true on the debt outstanding
share, on the next chart, which again assumes that debt is being borne
by those who have to borrow. It's now up to 110 percent of disposable
income, whereas the more standard measure puts it around 75 percent.
So, I would say that those who actually have to borrow to expand their
spending are probably more constrained than the data that we've looked
I might say that these are not publication-quality
at indicate.
analyses, but what I did to see if my thesis worked was to try
approaching it from an entirely different angle. So, rather than use
P60 data, my next approach was to go to the NIPA data and see if that
showed the same effects based on a functional distribution of income.
The first thing that's important to realize is that the NIPA
data do not mean income earners actually get the money. I convince
myself of that every year when I do my taxes, when I also compile for
my wife a breakdown of our income and where it was spent.
I find that
useful because I always tell her we never have any money but we end up
managing to spend lots of it and she never believes me.
So I present
the actual breakdown and she is forced to concede the facts. The
interesting point that I want to make here is that not all NIPA income
is actually spendable by households, and that's particularly true with
regard to interest and dividends. For example, the income that
accrued on your 401K plan is counted as interest and dividend income
to you, but you really can't get at it. And that actually is a very
important phenomenon in the economy. So, I broke down the NIPA income
into a number of areas. Cash income--excuse me the chart says "cash"
but it should say wages--wages are basically all paid in cash. Only
about 8 percent is received by the rich and 3 percent by the non-rich
elderly. So, 89 percent is received by those of us who are likely to
borrow. Of interest income, only about 45 percent actually finds its
way to the households where it can be spent. And the way I got this
number was to look at the ratio of what is reported on tax returns to
what is reported in NIPA. The tax return data probably are fairly
reliable at the moment, since paying institutions are now required to
put out a statement for everything over $10.
So, only about 45
percent of interest in the economy actually is received by households.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me, the Commerce Department does
break that down into imputed interest and dividends--interest imputed
at random from the cash flows, so they are using the same data.
MR. LINDSEY. They are using the same data, yes.
I had to
get the income for the elderly too, so I had to go back and look at
tax return data where people used an exemption for those over 65; that
flagged the returns to be used in the tabulation. It turns out that
only about 14 percent of total NIPA interest is actually received by
people likely to borrow. The same is essentially true of dividends-16 percent--and of small business income at 27 percent.
The income
retained by small businesses includes such things as inventory
appreciation, capital consumption allowances, what have you, which
while income really can't be eaten or used to pay a credit card bill.
That's why the distinction is here. The reason I think that's
important is that what we're seeing is a big change in the functional
distribution of income away from wages, particularly in the last two
years. For a comparison period, I took the change in personal income
from 1983 to 1988 which was of course the heyday of Reaganomics when
we all know workers were being stomped on by the capitalists who were

2/3-4/94

-22-

in power! Still, in spite of that, 56 percent of all the increase in
personal income was paid in the form of wages. If you turn to the
last chart, of the increase in personal income in 1992 and 1993 only
47 percent was paid in wages. During 1993 that fell to 38 percent.
And even during the fourth quarter of 1993, when everyone was saying
how good the economy was and optimism was rising, only 38.4 percent of
the increase in personal income actually was in the form of wages.
So, the way I would talk about the last three charts is that the nonrich, non-old live paycheck to paycheck, quite literally. That's
where all their income comes from. Remember, virtually none of the
capital income or business income goes to them. They have to live on
their wages and that wage share is also declining. So, whether you
look at the aggregate numbers from NIPA or at the aggregate numbers
from the P60 series, the middle-class, middle-aged people who are
borrowing are really getting their income squeezed. What that would
suggest to me is that unless the trends change and employment picks
up, the capacity of households to take on ever more debt is going to
have to stop at some point, and perhaps sooner than we think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. My report is going to be pretty bland after
that, but developments since the December meeting have simply
reinforced my view that the economy is moving ahead nationally at a
good clip. Also, the recent national data show that the economy
finished 1993 on a high note, and it seems clearly to have entered the
current year with a lot of momentum.
In our District our directors and other business contacts
report that economic activity is continuing to strengthen and improve
pretty much across the board. There may be a little more strength in
the southern part of the District--in the Carolinas--where
manufacturing is dominant and a little less in the northern part of
our region where defense and other government activity is more
dominant. But, clearly, the District is in good shape overall. In
their comments at all three of our board meetings in January several
of our directors described conditions in their respective local areas
as booming. Even the Charleston, South Carolina area, for example,
which has been hard hit by naval cutbacks is described as doing
reasonably well under the circumstances. This is not to say that
everybody in our District is happy about the present and optimistic
about the future, but I think it's fairly accurate to say that the
overall tone of the information we're getting is about as good as it
ever gets on average in this business. The outlook and attitudes
toward at least the near-term future among most of our business people
are pretty optimistic. I don't think they are expecting any
significant slowing in activity. The severe winter weather in recent
weeks has been disruptive, to put it gently, and it may have
suppressed activity a little. But I think much of that loss is
expected to be temporary and made up in the months ahead. Also, most
people around here don't deal with the sub-zero temperatures very
well, so plumbers and body shops have been doing quite well lately
along with cab drivers and electric utilities and franchises that
deliver pizza!
As far as the national situation is concerned, the Greenbook
projections for 1994 certainly seem reasonable to us, not that they
need our blessing, but they impress us as fully defensible. We are a

2/3-4/94

-23-

little stronger on real GDP growth and a little lower on inflation.
Our projections have GDP growth at 3.2 percent and a CPI of 2.9
percent.
I would say that the risk of error on those numbers--I'm not
sure my staff would agree with me on this--is probably tilted to the
up side.
I don't want to jump the gun on the policy discussion again,
but I do need to say just by way of explaining-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]
MR. KOHN(?).

Wait a second, what do you mean?

He read the memo!

MR. BROADDUS. Yes, I did read the memo. Just by way of
explaining our projections and in particular our projection that
inflation may be about 1/2 point lower than the Greenbook is
expecting:
We base that projection on an assumption that the
Committee will move quite quickly to do whatever it needs to do to
keep actual inflation under control and keep inflationary pressures
from rising significantly in the months ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's pretty good!

[Laughter]

MR. BROADDUS. I ought to stop there. But just one final
statement:
I really think the System's anti-inflationary stance has
done a great deal to increase our credibility in recent years, and in
terms of the forecast I think it's quite likely that that will give us
a better breakdown of nominal GDP between real growth and inflation if
we follow through.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Business conditions in
the District remain quite positive and the strength is widespread both
by sectors of the economy and geographically. I'm certainly hearing
fewer comments of concern about the future or about the fragility of
the current expansion; that has diminished. One aspect of the economy
that I have commented on before and I'll just reiterate briefly is
that we have had steady employment growth and we have low unemployment

rates in most of the District states now. That tends not to be
remarkable in heavily agricultural states, but we have low
unemployment rates in most of the major metropolitan areas as well,
And we are
which I think is a more significant way of looking at it.
hearing a variety of reports of labor shortages now--not at the
unskilled end of the labor market, but at levels above that clearly
there are growing reports of labor shortages.
That does not seem to
have translated into discernible wage pressures yet. But that seems
to me almost inevitable. At some point along the line here one of the
reactions is going to have to be some wage pressures both to attract,
but maybe more importantly to retain, some of the workers who are in
short supply.
With regard to the national economy, in looking at the
Greenbook and listening to Mike Prell's comments, I took the staff
forecast to be a sort of "more of the same only less so" forecast.
What I mean by that is that the economy grew over the second half of
the year somewhere between 4 and 4-1/2 percent in real terms. If we

2/3-4/94

-24-

get away from disturbances because of the weather and auto schedules
and so on, I conclude that we're going into 1994 with a good deal of
momentum, more momentum probably than the Greenbook forecast seems to
incorporate. So I feel pretty good about the state of the economy,
but that also implies that at least under current circumstances we're
not going to bend inflation down further from here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. In spite of my own doubts about the matter, I
consistently run into the expectation throughout our District that
eventually it will thaw out!
It's an the area of the country where
severe winter weather seems to have absolutely no negative effect on
people's mood and outlook.
We also hear the stories of shortages of certain classes of
labor and the difficulty of hiring. Some of our major manufacturing
areas are reporting under 4 percent unemployment. I hear the same
expressions of reluctance to hire that others apparently still are
hearing although Ohio, for instance--whatever the credibility of the
data--showed a 3-1/2 percent increase in employment last year. So,
they "reluctantly" hired a lot of people. The last time I saw both
these kinds of numbers and this rather pervasive mood of "everything's
okay and getting better" was when I lived in southern California
during the roaring boom in the latter 1980s before the bust. Si has
already mentioned a lot of the region-specific and the sector-specific
developments that also relate to our area. I'm not going to go
through those in detail. One thing that I could add on the motor
vehicles side, after calling around to various plants in the District,
is that they are estimating that the weather reduced production by
some 60,000 to 70,000 vehicles in the quarter and not all of that will
be made up. Industry contacts tell us that some of the plants, by
running overtime, can make up lost output by the end of March; others
are telling us that their production schedule for the quarter was
already such that they are not going to be able to make it up; they
view these as permanent losses in production. Some of the plants were
shut down totally for as much as four days. All of the lenders in the
District are talking about very strong credit demands--commercial,
consumer, and residential. I haven't heard any reference to the
notion of a credit crunch in some time now.
On the national side, my forecast is that the numbers for the
last two years will be revised substantially and that once we get that
revision three or four years from now and look back on the period, a
lot of these intra-year patterns will go away. A smoothing process
will indicate that we didn't have a weak first half last year and a
boom in the second half, but more or less that the economy in the last
couple of years has grown somewhere in the 3 to 4 percent range, and
that won't look quite so odd. When I look at year-ago expectations
about 1993 and then look at the numbers that we had on balance,
abstracting from the intra-year pattern, real output growth was about
what was expected a year ago and the CPI came in about as was
expected. Yet during the course of the year, the numbers for 1994
generally continued to show an upward revision for inflation. And now
the numbers for 1995--we've only had a couple of forecasts that go out
to 1995--are already showing higher numbers. In fact, the numbers we
now have for 1995 are higher than the numbers we had for 1994 a year
ago; 1993 similarly was progressively moved up. So, it's a pattern

-25-

2/3-4/94

that implies becoming accustomed to accepting no further progress on
inflation, and I find that very disturbing. If those numbers are
accurately based on current policy or the assumption about what policy
will be, then I think the conclusion would have to be one of two
things:
Either we have changed our objectives with regard to
inflation or we have to change our policies. Otherwise we're going to
send the wrong message to people who look at these numbers to gauge
the Committee's real intent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Our outlook for real growth next year is
somewhat more optimistic than that of the Greenbook, but in the case
of inflation our outlook is considerably more pessimistic. Nearly all
of the macroeconomic indicators have become increasingly favorable and
point to a strong and sustainable expansion. But the down side of
this, of course, is that both capacity utilization and unemployment
are approaching levels that raise concerns about how long the economy
will stay in the disinflationary mode. In addition, recoveries in the
economies of U.S. trading partners as indicated in the Chart Show's
alternative scenario might also generate demand pressures that would
lead to price increases.
Like the national economy, our District economy continues to
improve and in some sense has been outperforming the national economy,
at least in terms of employment growth. Many firms have reported
increases in sales and employment.
In fact, in at least two parts of
the District that I've heard about recently, northwest Arkansas and
northeast Mississippi, labor shortages have curtailed industrial
expansion. District retailers report good-to-strong sales of most
types of merchandise during the holiday and post-holiday periods.
Single-family home building is unseasonably strong in many parts of
the District, largely because builders are scrambling to start and
finish projects that were delayed in the latter half of 1993 because
of wet weather. After several years of stagnation, multifamily
housing construction appears to be on the upswing, as apartment
occupancy rates and rental rates edge up. And as is the case
nationally, sales of new and existing homes have been relatively
strong lately and average selling prices continue to rise. In
agriculture, soybean stocks nationally are down 49 percent from last
year and corn stocks are down 62 percent. The stocks/use ratios for
these crops are only 7.6 percent and 10.4 percent respectively, which
are the lowest levels we've seen since the mid-1970s.
So, clearly, in
those areas we are quite vulnerable to any kind of weather shocks.
One final comment:
Loan demand both nationally and at the District
level seems to have increased. At a number of our large District
banks, we have reports of a significant increase in all major
categories of loans during the last two months of the year relative to
the previous two months.
Let me just end up with some comments about inflation. We
project that the CPI will move up sharply in 1994 and will be even
higher in 1995.
Indeed, there may be some early warning signs that
the economy's disinflationary course has already come to an end. When
its volatile food and energy components are removed, the CPI rose at a
3.4 percent rate during the last three months of 1993, up
significantly from the 2.4 percent rate of increase during the
previous six months. The CRB futures price index is up by nearly 13

2/3-4/94

-26-

percent from its level a year ago despite a very significant decline
in energy prices. An even sharper increase is seen in the Board's
experimental commodity price index when the food and crude oil
components are omitted.
In addition, long-term interest rates have risen somewhat
from their October 1993 lows.
In our view, measured either by the
growth rates of M1 and reserves or the ex post real federal funds
rate, the stance of monetary policy has been very expansionary for
about the last three years, and we weigh this sustained stance of
monetary policy heavily in making our forecast of longer-run inflation
trends.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, my sense of the course of events
is in flux. As far as the strength of the economy goes, I had been
thinking up through the time of the last meeting that we were indeed
going to have a strong fourth quarter but that we would be looking at
some substantial moderation after that. The fourth quarter now does
appear to have come in meaningfully stronger than I had thought and
that seems to be accompanied by considerably more momentum than I had
anticipated. The new data that we've been receiving recently look
quite strong to me. The purchasing managers' report across all of its
components looks strong--in new orders, the deliveries stretching out,
and the prices paid. We also got very strong housing numbers and very
strong new orders data. In short, the new data suggest to me that the
economy has more momentum than I would have thought; and in fact it
strikes me that it wouldn't take a whole lot for me to begin to use
the word that I've heard a couple of times in this go-around--an
emerging "boom."
There are a couple of concerns that worry me. Number one is
that consumer debt seems to be accelerating, and this is at a time
when the ratio of consumer debt to worth is still at an all-time high.
The debt service rate came
It never came off; it just flattened out.
down with lower interest rates but not the level of absolute debt.
And if we get a surge from here, we are going to be setting all kinds
of new records for the ratio of debt to income. That is of particular
concern as it would relate to the data that Larry Lindsey gave us a
while ago. That's pretty worrisome in my mind. Also, we seem to me
to be experiencing a rather euphoric stock market; it's up 11 percent
in the last four months and 6 percent since our last meeting, for
goodness sake! These kinds of developments give me concern that we
could possibly be heading for something that might look distressingly
like a bust somewhere down the road.
On the inflation side, if we look at things with a fairly
long-term view, they still look pretty good. But like Tom Melzer--I
had written down in my notes a couple of things he just mentioned--I
have concerns. Number one is that fourth-quarter CPI of 3.4 percent,
which looks a bit ominous. Also, in a world full of capacity, just
about all of the commodity price indexes that I've had access to, both
domestic and international, seem to have a rather persistent upward
drift. I certainly wouldn't try to say that an inflationary surge is
upon us or is inevitable.
But as John Wayne used to say in his Indian
[Laughter]
movies, "There's dust on the horizon!"

2/3-4/94

-27-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, it seems to me that the fundamentals of
housing, autos, capacity utilization, new orders, inventory levels,
and increased loan activity of banks are all pointing toward continued
growth, even stronger growth than we previously expected. But the tax
shock and the health care uncertainties are still unknown and
unmeasured and are probably the governors which will keep the economic
engine from running amuck. Perhaps even corporate re-engineering is
now ho-hum, at least for those not getting the heave-ho.
[Laughter]
Inflationary pressures may currently be masked and the resulting
euphoria in the financial markets probably has bloated stock and bond
prices beyond rational values. That may be built more on profit
expectations than on actual profit performance. In short, I think we
are now in a period where the expansionary forces in the economy seem
to be emerging as the reasons for caution rather than the
contractionary forces that I had reasoned were fundamental before.
Moderate growth seems to be the consensus forecast, but the
possibility of inflationary behavior triggered by inflationary
expectations in terms of anticipatory price increases rather than
demand-driven price increases creates for me a mood for caution.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. The sustainability of the recovery
certainly seems considerably more assured now. Leading the way are
housing, autos, durables, clearly reflected in the IP index. People
are spending and they're dissaving to do so. Inventories are lean so
there probably will be no surprises on the supply side. Productivity
improvements can still provide opportunities for competitiveness and
growth. I think most encouraging has been consumer and business
confidence; even the earthquake and the cold didn't provide much
disruption. So there is less chance that we're going to have another
fading spell, and I don't think that this recovery now can be
considered as fragile as it was a year ago. At the same time, strong
financial markets are continuing to provide financing, and banks are
better positioned to contribute. We are even making some progress on
the debt side. The risks and structural adjustments facing the
economy are still there, but I think it's fair to say that no new
insurmountable ones are appearing.

People may have gotten a bit

tired, as John LaWare mentioned, of talking about corporate
restructuring and defense restructuring, and the pace of balance sheet
restructuring appears to have slackened. On the international front,
there's some glimmer that the economies of our major trading partners
are beginning to bottom out, so we may see some improvement there.
The labor market is still showing some signs of stress due to the
layoffs and re-engineering, resulting in part-time and temporary
employment and downward mobility. On the fiscal policy side, I think
the focus on the deficit may well contain many of the new initiatives;
even the health care proposals now appear to be open to negotiations.
So, I think there's a bit less to fear there, and there were no great
surprises in the form of major new expensive initiatives in the State
of the Union message.
On the inflation front, the recent numbers certainly look
good, particularly the PPI and the deflator, and I think the Committee
should be very pleased with that. Progress on the underlying rate of
inflation, while it may still be feasible, certainly is going to be at

2/3-4/94

-28-

a reduced pace at best. I'm a bit concerned, though, that we are
likely to hit a stone wall over the next few months with respect to
inflation, given the problem with the seasonals, obviously, and shortterm supply distortions. Many of those were mentioned around the
table with respect to labor shortages and supply shortages in areas
where demand is particularly strong. We may well start to see
commodity price increases working their way into the PPI and CPI. I
think that we're now seeing some major risks on the inflation front.
Certainly, the Greenbook acknowledged the food price increases and the
risks with respect to the upcoming harvest, which Tom Melzer mentioned
in particular. On the energy front, it's hard for me to see that we
should be depending on a cartel to keep the CPI in check. And, of
course, precious metals' prices have been elevated. Certainly, the
money numbers are difficult to read but I agree with those around the
table today who mentioned that credit has picked up, so I think all of
these things highlight the risk we now see on the inflation front.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Well, after some extended period of
a very flat regional economy, economic activity in the Second District
has actually been improving at a moderate pace for about the last
three or four months. The December establishment survey showed modest
job gains in New York State, New York City, and New Jersey. Over the
October-December period, personal income tax collections, which as you
know are an advance indicator of personal income, were growing at a
moderate to strong pace. The cold weather conditions seemed to have
delayed some output, but our sources feel that it is not any worse
than that. The inability of consumers to get to the sales taking
place in January slowed down some of the activity at the retail level,
but again our sources feel that retailers can recoup that over the
President's Day weekend, assuming the weather is decent then. I think
what's particularly good about the District is that, despite the fact
that we have the corporate giants like IBM, Citibank, and Kodak
downsizing, New York State gained 15,000 jobs from November to
December. That's the third consecutive month that we had some job
gains in the area. New York City also had some growth in jobs as did
our part, the northern part, of New Jersey.
With regard to the national forecast, we are rather similar
to the Greenbook with some exceptions. We have stronger real growth
in the second half of 1994. Some of that comes, as does somewhat
stronger growth in 1995, from our view that residential construction
will be somewhat higher than the staff forecast has indicated. That's
an area in which there are some capacity constraints, so it could be
an additional cause of some inflationary pressures. In general, we
think the gap between actual and potential GDP is now quite small, and
certainly that which remains will be used up in the course of 1994
with our forecast, the Greenbook's, or any of those we've heard around
the table. Consequently, with the unemployment rate coming down to
what we think is a reasonable estimate of the NAIRU--in the low 6
percent area--we do have to be considerably concerned about inflation.
And our inflation forecast is, in fact, somewhat higher than that of
the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

We've completed the general

discussion that we usually have on the first day of Humphrey-Hawkins
meetings.
As I mentioned earlier, we're going to reverse the schedule

2/3-4/94

-29-

tomorrow to deal with the short-term monetary policy questions first
and then go to the long-term ranges.
The question I want to raise
this evening before we close is one that has been tugging at me for
This really gets to the issue that when we
the last number of weeks.
move in this particular context, which of course will be the first
time we have moved since September 1992, we are going to have to make
It's more the equivalent of a discount rate
our action very visible.
move than the incremental federal funds rate changes that we have been
embarking on for quite a long period of time. I am particularly
concerned that if we choose to move tomorrow, we make certain that
there is no ambiguity about our move. My understanding of the
technical conditions in the funds market is that it looks as though
the funds rate will probably be edging above 3 percent, and in the
circumstances a draining action will be unambiguous to the
professionals.
But I'm not sure that more widespread recognition will
come out very quickly; it will sort of dribble out. Under ordinary
circumstances, that is not only fine but desirable. One of the things
that we have argued, and I would continue to argue, is that there is a
distinction between a discount rate and a federal funds rate action in
the sense that we don't want an announcement effect ordinarily on the
funds rate. It gives us a much more calibrated instrument.
But a
federal funds change in this particular instance is a discount rate
change, as far as the Federal Reserve System is concerned. I'm very
strongly inclined to make it clear that we are doing this but to find
a way to do it that does not set a precedent.
I understand that that is not at all easy to do, but if we
are going to make changes as to how we structure our Minutes and our
announcements and responses to various developments, we need a lot of
time in this Committee to discuss the pros and cons. There really are
lots of pros and cons, of which I think we are all aware. But we are
going to have to deal with this issue in conjunction with the question
of transcripts and tapes and all of the other disclosure issues.
One
of the reasons that I thought it was not desirable to discuss it at
this meeting is that there is clearly a time problem. There also will
be a lot of significant, useful evidence for us in our deliberations
when we see how everyone responds to our releasing the last four
transcripts of 1988 meetings when they are done. We'll get a much
better sense of the reactions.
So, I'm caught in this particular
situation where I would feel very uncomfortable if when we make a

move--whether it's tomorrow or next month--we do not make it very
clear that we are moving. The only issue on the table tonight is that
if we decide to move tomorrow--and that we will get to when we resume
the meeting at 9:00 tomorrow morning--I would very much like to have
the permission of the Committee to announce that we're doing it and to
state that the announcement is an extraordinary event. The major
reason would be that it's a Friday and we rarely meet on Fridays.
This is a very unusual circumstance. So I'd like the permission of
the Committee to try to formulate a couple of sentences which state
(1) that we have moved, assuming we do that, and (2) that this
announcement of the move is not precedential. We will try to find a
way to say what is special about this particular day and this
particular event. So, I open it up for everyone's comments.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot sympathy with what you
suggest, and it strikes me that there's another information-gathering
advantage--

2/3-4/94

-30-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me, could I just make one final
comment before you go on? While I myself, as you know, have been
strongly opposed in the past--and I have testified against announcing
when we are making a move since it does reduce our flexibility--that
issue is still on the table and it's a much broader issue. The issue
of whether something is precedential or not is under our control. We
don't have to announce our policy moves; there's nothing forcing us to
do so, and I cannot believe that there will be legislation requiring
that. So, the issue is not whether if we do something, we will be
forced to do it again. I think we can avoid that. We may decide for
reasons other than basic policy to continue, but I see no reason for
such an announcement to be a precedent nor do I see any likelihood of
legislation requiring that because the thrust of what's been happening
on the Hill doesn't strike me as leading in that direction. Anyway,
sorry for the interruption. Go ahead, Mr. Syron.
MR. SYRON. All I was saying is this: Just as you thought,
appropriately, that it's worth seeing when we put out the transcripts
what the reaction is going to be, we'll also get information if we
follow this course from what the reaction is to it. There will be
information in terms of market and Congressional reactions, and so
forth. If essentially we tell the financial markets what our policy
is at 11:23 of the morning after our meeting--if it is really the case
that by our market operations we generally do that--I have a lot of
sympathy for doing it more explicitly the evening before. My own view
is that by doing this once we will get some information on reactions
and we may find out what its weight is. My own forecast would be that
this would pull the teeth in a longer-term sense, which we are not
resolving now, on a lot of these issues about disclosure. I know
these issues wouldn't all go away, but the essential information is
what the final score of the game is. The rest of it is akin to
finding out what play Emmitt Smith was asked to run on third down. So
I think there is a lot to be gained from this without locking us into
a longer-term arrangement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Si.

MR. KEEHN. I'm not quite clear on the precedential side of
this. Are you saying this would be an announcement that we have
tightened without a discount rate change or with a discount rate
change?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KEEHN.

The answer is no discount rate action.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But the point here is that when we move
the discount rate, we're hitting a "gong." What I'm saying is that
the first time we move the funds rate after this extended period, we
are hitting a "gong."

MR. KEEHN.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And I think we ought to stand up and hit

it.
MR. KEEHN.

I agree with that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Other comments?

Bob.

2/3-4/94

-31-

MR. PARRY. I would very much support issuing a statement.
I
think it's very important that the statement exactly coincide with our
taking action in the market and not be either before or after taking
action. I also feel that we ought to have a discussion as quickly as
is feasible about the desirability of similar statements in the future
because I think some of us believe there is some advantage to doing it
on a continued basis. Perhaps we could deal with this issue
explicitly in the not-too-distant future along with the other issues
that you mentioned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
as part of the next meeting.
MR. PARRY.

You don't mean in a special meeting but

Yes, but I really think that there is an urgency.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bob Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I understand your rationale.
I'd just like to express a couple of concerns, and you've hit on them
already. One is with respect to the process and the other is
substance. It strikes me that this is a very major change in the way
we are operating and we haven't had very much time to reflect on this.
As Bob Parry just indicated, I think it is essential that we do have
that discussion as soon as we can. My more serious concern is whether
we can keep this non-precedential. I have a real concern that there's
a risk that we're going to be pushed by pressures--not necessarily
legislation but other pressures--to make this an ongoing operating
procedure. If that's the case, I think we would lose some
flexibility. The other thing that occurs to me is that if we are
forced by this action to do it on a regular basis, the discount rate
is going to lose its effectiveness and along with that the
effectiveness of our directors.
So, those are concerns that I think
we need to reflect on, if indeed our announcement does for some reason
become a precedent. However, having said that, if we can draft a
statement that clearly indicates this is not a precedent but a onetime event because of the peculiar circumstances, then I would support
your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I thought your Congressional testimony last
Monday was well constructed and made the points that you needed to
make in the right way. I was initially quite discouraged with the
wire service stories as they came out, which seemed totally to miss
the point you were trying to convey. But then the stories that came
out in some of the major dailies restored my confidence that maybe
we're making a little progress in conveying our views. I thought both
the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal--or at least one of the
Wall Street Journal pieces--treated it as we would have hoped. Based
on what you said there and the way that went, I would trust that you
wouldn't be saying that "the Committee tightened," using that kind of
jargon but rather that because of the nature of the change being
contemplated--and it doesn't matter whether it's tomorrow or at the
March or May meeting--the next move is undoubtedly going to be in an
upward direction on interest rates. And it's not just that it would
be the first change since September 1992; it's the first change upward
in some five years. Without repeating all the discussion that we had
in December about the importance of a rate increase being clearly

-32-

2/3-4/94

understood as being an action of the Committee, the rationale for it
as a growth-sustaining move is extremely important. Only by putting
out a statement can we get that message out there, or at least make an
effort to say that this is not an anti-growth move but one that is
designed to enhance the longevity of this expansion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was actually the closing paragraph
in my testimony. Tom Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I understand the sensitivity of
this. I have a hard time understanding how this would not be
precedential.
If we say it is desirable to announce this time because
it makes sense and we've got this issue of a Friday and so forth, I
think it will be difficult from a credibility point of view to argue
against announcing in the future should we want to make that argument.
Even if we have to start our meeting earlier tomorrow, I'm wondering
if we cannot position ourselves to know whether we want to take an
action tomorrow, and then do so. Then, as the questions come in, we
can validate that we did in fact take an action so that we're not
making a statement which sets a precedent. I think we are going to
set a precedent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I certainly agree that there is a
risk involved, but I disagree that we can be forced to do it for other
than legislative reasons.
MR. HOENIG. Well, we may not be forced but I think the
credibility of our position will be compromised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're saying there are different types
For example, in 1979 there was a major change. Chairman
of changes.
Volcker and his staff went out and had a big press conference. There
are certain individual events where periodically the Federal Reserve
has made special statements; I'm merely stipulating that this is one
of them. Frankly, with the exception of the stock market crash in
October 1987, it's the first one since I've been here. But let's
assume, for example, that we decide to move tomorrow and we make an
announcement, and then we decide to move again, say, four weeks later.
I don't see any reason why a statement would be appropriate at that
later time.
MR. HOENIG.
you're saying.

I'm uneasy about that, but I understand what

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, I'm not naive enough to believe
that it doesn't create precedential issues when we do things that are
different. But I think the question is can we control it, and in my
judgment we can. Tom Melzer.
MR. MELZER. On the precedent point, Alan, I would just say
that another point to consider here is the Treasury funding next week.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. MELZER. If we wanted another rationale, namely that
there be no confusion in the marketplace, that might be another.

-33-

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think that is one of the possible
points for discussion. Joan wants to think about that.
MR. MELZER.
Okay. Well, there is at least one audience out
there that wouldn't like to hear that.
I think there is a risk of a
headline along the lines of "In an unprecedented move, the Fed
announced..., saying it wasn't setting a precedent."
But where I come
out is that in the climate we're in and in view of this inflection
point after five years, as Jerry Jordan pointed out, these are unique
circumstances. And openness, given what we've been through in general
during this period, is probably a pretty good course. I think how
much is said is important. I personally would favor saying, "The Fed
decided to increase the degree of reserve restraint" and that would be
about it.
It would trouble me if we got into expectations about where
the funds rate would trade.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me read what Don Kohn handed me
before.
"The Federal Reserve announced today a slight increase in the
degree of pressure on reserve positions."
MR. MELZER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then he went on and said, "This action
is expected to be associated with a small increase in short-term money
market rates."
MR. MELZER. I think that's all right.
should be giving a target range, though.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.
MR. KOHN.

I don't think we

You mean the actual number?

Yes.

No, that is not our intent.

MR. MELZER. That has been advocated at times in other
discussions here. Also, if we're announcing a decision--and this
would be a legal question--are we obligated to say anything about the
vote, for example?
I'm not sure. Again, I'd prefer just to say what
the action was.
It's a decision of the Committee, but if we get into
disclosing the vote, that begins to set other types of precedents that
could be relevant when we get to the point of deciding this issue on a
permanent basis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, the main issue here is that, as
far as I'm concerned, I would like us to stand up and be counted. We
are the central bank and we are making a major move.
MR. MELZER.

Right, I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And to do it in an ambiguous manner I

think is unbecoming of this institution.
MR. MELZER. No, I didn't mean to suggest otherwise. I agree
we should do that, but the point I was raising is that there may be a
legal question. If we have announced a decision, does it follow that
we have to disclose the vote?

-34-

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't see why.

Is

Virgil Mattingly

here?
MR. SYRON. No, there's no legal question. The Chairman
before in Humphrey-Hawkins testimony has said something about policy
and what the Committee has done without announcing a vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct, isn't it? Were we to
come out and make a statement that the Committee made a decision, are
we obligated to stipulate what the vote is?

them.

In

MR. MATTINGLY. If somebody asked, you would have to tell
other words, it would be subject to disclosure.
MR. SYRON.

issue is:
vote?

Why?

MR. MATTINGLY. The Freedom of Information Act. The legal
Why is it confidential? What's confidential about the

MR. BOEHNE.

It's confidential now.

MR. MATTINGLY.
MR.

SYRON.

Yes, but if you disclose the action--

Then you'd have to disclose the vote?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
You know, there is an interesting
difference here. The difference is that if we are asked after the
action has been disclosed. That's-SPEAKER(?).

Very different.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you may be right; there may be a
legal question of disclosure.
So long as we don't disclose it and do
so only in response to a question-MR.

MELZER.

MR. COYNE.

Of course,

we might not get asked.

Oh, believe me, you will get asked!

[Laughter]

MR. MELZER. Alan, the reason I'm bringing it up--and this is
more relevant to the discussion we're going to have down the road--is
that if we go this way, the effect of that is to place the minority
rather than the majority in the limelight in terms of who the press
might be interested in talking to, which might not be optimal. Just
one other point: I agree with Bob Parry. I agreed with deferring the
discussion of our recordkeeping issues and so forth, but I think we
should get to that promptly.
From my point of view, if we could get
to that at the next meeting, that would be highly desirable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don't see any reason why we shouldn't
be able to get to it.
We should have enough reaction at the next
meeting from the 1988 transcripts that we should know.
MR. SYRON.

The mini-series will be out!

2/3-4/94

-35-

MR. KEEHN. Committees could do mortal damage to press
releases, but I really wonder if we want to use the term "small
increase" rather than just "increase."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

I would stay with small.

We're not writing a press release.

MR. SYRON. We're not writing a press release and if we don't
say "small," people will think we've made the announcement because
it's a 1/2 point or 3/4 point increase or something like that.
MR. LAWARE.

It sounds like we've made a policy decision

already!
MR. LINDSEY.

I think that's a little premature.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I make the following request? I'm
not asking the Committee to make a statement. I'm asking the
Committee to give me the authority to make the statement so that in
effect it's one step removed. As announcements go, it's very short.
MR. KEEHN.

I was going to take a word out!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I'm supportive of what you want to do.
I think
this is one of those special times, and I think we have to be careful
that we don't become captive to our own procedures when we are called
upon to do something. There is a precedent for our making these kinds
of announcements for special occasions. They don't happen very often,
but I believe this is one of those times.
While clearly the precedent
is there, and we'd all be naive to think that this doesn't tilt the
scales in that direction, there is also a risk in not disclosing
tomorrow. If there were a premature leak or any confusion or
misunderstanding about any action taken tomorrow, it seems to me that
that would be far more costly than whatever the precedential risk is
in going forward with this as you suggest.
I agree with you that it
ought to be your statement as the Chairman rather than an announcement
of the Committee. I sympathize with your desire to make it short.
However, I think it is good to get the right focus on this, and I
liked the way you ended your testimony on Monday about putting this in
the context of being pro sustainable growth rather than fostering this
notion that we are against growth. I would urge you in the statement
to hark back to your testimony on Monday; I have forgotten the precise
wording in the last sentence or two in the last paragraph but I
thought that captured the essence of what we're doing very well. At
the risk of this statement being a little longer than you may want,
I'd just put in that last paragraph--or the last couple of sentences-from your testimony.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Susan.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I actually had two questions.
1988 transcripts to be released?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Donald Kohn.

When are the

-36-

2/3-4/94

MR. KOHN. We've done a few of them; Norm, where are we?
Let's toss the ball back down there.
MS. PHILLIPS.

I feel like I'm in a tennis match here!

MR. BERNARD.

We have about three of them just about done.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Really?

The last three of 1988?

No.

MR. BERNARD. The first two and the last one.
November has been started.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
completed?
MR. BERNARD.

Work on

When do you guess 1988 will be

The third week of February.

MR. KOHN. Then they have to go through an international and
legal redaction process. But I think it's reasonable to-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Our next meeting is March when?

The 22nd.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
of response time.

Yes, I think we need two to three weeks

MR. BOEHNE.

Right.

What if we put out part of the year?

SPEAKER(?).

The first six months?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know we could put out--you see, the
problem is that in the middle of 1988 there are garbled transcripts;
The taping system broke down.
MR. BOEHNE.

Why is it that life can never be simple?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

There are 18 minutes of tape missing!

So it's not next week that these are coming

out?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

No.

It's probably going to be at least a month or

so?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Maybe; probably about a month. If it's
more than a month, I think we may want to reconsider getting out
whatever we've completed because we can certainly do the last three
That's the most recent. In fact, in a sense that's
meetings in 1988.
where our obligation is; the most recent is really the most important

2/3-4/94

-37-

in that respect as we move back. I think there will be a lot of
interest in the stock market crash discussion.
MR. KOHN.

That would be the end of 1987.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. PARRY. A point of clarification related to what Ed
Boehne said:
It seems to me that it would be beneficial if your
Is that what you were
statement were made on behalf of the FOMC.
thinking?
It didn't sound that way to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that's a good idea.
MR. PARRY.
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. SYRON.

I would not do that.

I don't think

You don't?
"Chairman Greenspan said today."
Yes, that's exactly right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, if we decide to do it on a
permanent basis, then it's a Committee issue. But marginally it's of
a less precedential nature if I do it.
MR. BOEHNE.

If it doesn't work, the Committee could fire the

Chairman!
MR. PARRY.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, maybe we ought to bring that issue
up before that vote!
[Laughter]
MS. PHILLIPS. I wanted to ask Joan, or Bill from your former
capacity, what do you think the market reaction would be?
MS. LOVETT. Well, it certainly would remove any ambiguity
about the move.
[Laughter]
People don't have to guess about the size
of the move and that kind of thing; I guess if there's a pro, that's
the positive outcome. In terms of setting a precedent, I think it
very much depends on the wording that's used.
MS. PHILLIPS.
Is this going to be helpful, do you think, or
not helpful in terms of the market absorbing what is occurring?
MS. LOVETT.
MR. PARRY.

I think that it can't be harmful.
Another word for "minimal."

MS. LOVETT. No, it tells everybody what's happening and it
leaves no room for ambiguity, and if it's phrased the way you are
suggesting, it's not setting a stage for people to have expectations
of an announcement every time there is a policy change going forward.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you completely. I
think that it's right for you to make the statement because you have
the authority. The Committee is not establishing a precedent; we
always can fire you. And you are making the judgment that this is an

2/3-4/94

-38-

instance where you want to speak. In fact, I would go so far as to
suggest, although you know what we want--we've already said it--that
we not dictate to you what you're going to say because it should be
only your statement. That way there is absolutely no precedent; you
are simply acting as Chairman of this Committee.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I very much support what Governor
Lindsey just said. I think this is something that we absolutely must
do because of the importance of this. As Jerry Jordan said, this
would be the first time that we've increased--if we do so--interest
rates since 1989.
And, therefore, it is something that we should step
forth and state.
I believe as Larry said that you should be doing it
in your words. We might have to think rather carefully about the
precise timing of the Desk's action in relationship to any
announcement that may be made tomorrow. I'd be very worried if the
Desk's action were first. Then we would be giving some essential
market insiders an opportunity to move on it before the general public
was informed. So, if you can't do it simultaneously, I would favor
any statement by you coming out marginally ahead of that time, but
definitely not behind it.
MR. MELZER.
MR. SYRON.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. BOEHNE.
something like that?

I think simultaneous is risky, frankly.
I agree with that.
That's right.
Why don't you put it out at 11:00 a.m. or
Is 11:30 a.m. when you conduct your operations?

MS. LOVETT.

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE.

If you did it by 11 a.m.--

MS. LOVETT. It's very risky sometimes to try to time things
down to the wire and hope that people pick up the press releases.
MR. COYNE.
wires to get it on.

I think it just takes a couple of minutes for the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Gary.

MR. STERN. I'm comfortable with what you are proposing.
I
happen to agree with those who think this will turn out to be
precedential and from my perspective that's fine because I think we've
been in an awkward situation where we have kind of acknowledged that
people in the markets get the news and the signal immediately, but for
those who are not close to the markets the news kind of dribbles out
depending on how quickly they read the financial press or consult
other sources of information. But I mention that now only to
reemphasize the point that Bob Parry and Tom Melzer made, which is
that we really do need to come to grips with this whole host of issues
about what records we keep and what we disclose and when we disclose
it, and so on and so forth.

-39-

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
other words.
MR. STERN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.
discussion.

You mean they are all related issues in

It's all one package.

And I think we better get on with that

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, the former Mullins Subcommittee,
whatever it is now, is to meet on this issue tomorrow after the FOMC
meeting, so I don't think there's any reason why the Subcommittee
can't put the finishing touches on whatever recommendations it is
going to make in the very near term and get them out to the members.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, Ed Boehne really made my point.
There are certainly risks of doing this and they have been well stated
here.
But there are risks of not doing this.
If there were any
confusion tomorrow going into the weekend or this thing gets played
out in the New York Times on Saturday and Sunday or on CNN, I think we
would have a real mess. I certainly also agree that this should be
your statement and you ought to say whatever you're comfortable with.
My feeling is it ought to be as brief as possible. I don't think you
need to say a lot; if we do it, this is not going to be an unexpected
move. If there is an effort to defend it or explain it in any detail,
then I think it would exacerbate the problem of precedent before we
try to figure out what we're going to do in the longer run. I also
support Gary Stern and Tom Melzer and Bob Parry on the need to decide
as quickly as possible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The purpose of accepting the Joint
Economic Committee's invitation to testify before this meeting was
precisely to move ahead of the curve on potential explanations in the
event they were required of us.
In a sense that statement was, as far
as I can judge, the basis of what we've been doing.
MR. SYRON.

You can reference your JEC statement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, I possibly could.

President

McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Just for the record, Mr. Chairman, I agree with
your suggestion and all of its details. I personally wouldn't mind
seeing it become a precedent.
I've argued before that quick release
of the decision is much more desirable than verbatim minutes or
transcripts, and I think that quick release of the decision might take
off some pressure for early release in these other areas.
I know
that's something to be discussed later and I agree with your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

question.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a very important
It's had a very good airing, and I don't have anything to

2/3-4/94

-40-

add to what has been said.
recommendation.

I fully support your request and

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else want to raise an issue
or question? Well, why don't we adjourn this evening.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Don.

MR. KOHN. You asked me to remind you to remind the Committee
of the highly confidential nature of the subjects being discussed, and
the fact that you would take drastic measures if something were
leaked.
MR. PARRY.

Nobody would want that!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just reiterate basically what Don
said. If we end up tomorrow morning with anything in the newspapers,
one way or the other, or any public indication of what it is we've
discussed today in any respect, I think it will do very grave damage
to this institution. And the Wall Street Journal the Post, and the
Times all, of course, know that we are meeting; they know it's a
crucial meeting. There will be all sorts of endeavors to get some
information, directly, indirectly, or otherwise. I just beseech you
to be as careful as you possibly can and not even tell your doorman
where you've been!
MR. MCTEER. Maybe you could just have some jam and
hamburgers sent in; we could spend the night here.
MR. BOEHNE.

Jam and hamburgers?

Hopefully not!

[Meeting recessed]

2/3-4/94

-41-

February 4, 1994--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike Prell has some information for us
on the employment statistics.
MR. PRELL. Earlier this morning I had a brief discussion
with a senior official at the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The
civilian unemployment rate for January was reported at 6.7 percent
under the new survey. They have two econometric models that they are
using to try to give people some guidance about how the month-to-month
movements in the unemployment rate might have looked if the new survey
had been in place in December or if the old survey had remained in
effect in January. On the basis of their model of what the old survey
would have done, they estimate that the unemployment rate would have
dropped 0.1 percent in January. Their model of what the new survey
would have done is that it would have dropped 0.3 percent. There is a
considerable range; the household series is clearly subject to a lot
of uncertainty. There was a huge increase, 1.3 million, in the
household employment total. As I indicated, there are both the change
in the new monthly survey plus an adjustment for a Census update
involved here. A rough guess is that, if you took out those two
special effects, the month-to-month change might have been in the area
of 150,000 or maybe a little higher, but that is a very crude guess at
this point. The labor force participation rate was 66.7; it had been
66.3 in December. One might have expected an upward movement from the
change in the survey of 1/2 percent or more. And so on that basis it
looks as if the labor force participation rate might have dropped and
contributed to that decline in the unemployment rate, all other things
equal. Again, this is very difficult to read. The nonfarm payroll
increase was 62,000--72,000 for private industry--well below market
expectations and below what we had been expecting for the near term.
Manufacturing was up 26,000 but construction was down 3,000 and
private service-producing industries had an increase of 51,000. There
were no large revisions to the prior couple of months.
The Labor Department believes that weather had a serious
effect on the payroll increases, particularly in construction. They
noted that in parts of the country that we wouldn't expect to be much
affected by weather at this time of the year, construction was up,
whereas in parts of the north central and eastern regions, where the
weather ordinarily is very cold, they found that construction was
down. They also pointed to weakness in a number of other industry
groups that they think might have been affected by weather, such as
recreational amusement, and they mentioned that some colleges
evidently had to cancel athletic events. In their minds all these
things evidently contributed to the low increase in payroll
employment. Now, this may also have affected the mix of full-time and
part-time employment for the month. The average workweek is estimated
to have risen to 34.8 hours, a relatively very high workweek, from the
34.5 hours figure in December; that was revised down from 34.6 hours.
This does look fluky; we've seen ticks up to this level sometimes
revised away a bit and in other cases just reversed. So this rise may
prove ephemeral. The index for the overall increase in production
hours went from 125.2 to 126.3 reflecting that workweek increase.
Actually, the way the arithmetic goes, they report the hours, then
derive the average workweek. But that's the better part of a

2/3-4/94

-42-

percentage point.
had anticipated.

That's a much stronger start on the quarter than we

Overall, taking all of these things into account, my reading
of this would be that there are signs that perhaps the outlook is a
bit stronger than we had anticipated in the Greenbook and would
probably imply our leaning more toward raising our first-quarter GDP
forecast rather than lowering it. Given the very strong car sales
that were reported yesterday, that gives some greater credibility to
the production schedules for February and March. That output will be
needed to keep inventories from being utterly depleted even if sales
don't maintain their January pace. That, too, argues for some upside
risk to the 4 percent GDP forecast we made.
One final note on average hourly earnings: They were up .7
in January. Again, this may have been affected seriously by the shift
in the industry mix and more importantly in all likelihood the shift
in terms of part-time/full-time employment and so on. So, I don't
think one would want to read that number too closely either, but it
certainly does look as if it's on the firm side of our expectations
for the start of the quarter.
MR. BOEHNE.

How are financial markets interpreting that?

MS. LOVETT. Initially, the market moved up by almost a point
at the long end--at the 30-year mark--as the headline news on the
nonfarm number came across the wire. There has been some backing away
from that. The market is still up; it was up about 3/8 to 1/2 when we
came in here. It may be that market participants are trying to read
through some of the underlying data in terms of hours and so forth.
So, it's lost some of its initial gain, but it is still up
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just go get the latest report.
[Secretary's note: Chairman Greenspan left the meeting very briefly
at this point.]
MR. KOHN. The other interesting aspect was that bill rates
went down 3 or 4 basis points and the funds rate, which had opened at
3-1/8 to 3-3/16, went down to 3 to 3-1/16 and remained there. So in
some sense at least the certainty of firming today was taken out by
the employment numbers. Now, maybe as the bond market and everyone
else reassesses them, the adjustment will be reversed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

The long end is now down 3/32.

They got to the last page of the release!

MR. PRELL. I was just handed Commissioner Abrahams's
statement and she indicates here that "weather appears to have played
a major role in the relatively small rise in payroll employment
between December and January. The reference week for the survey was
the week before the California earthquake and the East coast snow and
ice storms; the extreme cold over much of the nation during the
reference week held down employment. Indeed, the weakness in the
payroll survey was quite concentrated in weather-sensitive industries
in January, while other industries continued the pattern of moderate
growth that has prevailed for some time." And then she goes on to
provide detail for some of these industries. I guess the person I

2/3-4/94

-43-

talked to at BLS was reading from this or had written this!
One other
point I might make is that, looking at the manufacturing data, the
workweek remained at its recent high level.
The workweek employment
increase was in motor vehicles; outside of motor vehicles there wasn't
any gain. But overall this looks consistent with a moderate increase
in industrial production. That's even allowing for what we think
would have been some loss during the month from the freeze and the
earthquake. I think the industrial production picture for January is
at least as strong as we anticipated when we prepared the Greenbook
forecast.
MR. FORRESTAL.
I didn't quite catch what you said about the
old survey; is that down 0.1 for the month of January?
MR. PRELL. The econometric model that they have used would
have predicted that. If I'm looking at the right place in the press
release, it says:
"Another tool that we are providing analysts is our
model of what the January 1994 unemployment rate would have been under
the old methods based on the historical relationships between
employment, the unemployment rate, and other economic indicators: that
rate is 6.3 percent."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

to 126.3.

Any further questions for Mike?

Yes.

MR. LINDSEY. I notice that the hours were way up, from 125.2
Is that the basis of your higher GDP forecast?

MR. PRELL. Well, that's the key element in my judgment that
would probably raise the forecast. But these numbers are all being
affected by weather; evidently, we're going to have to sort through
the data to get a more refined assessment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you take those hours that were given
and you assume that the average workweek didn't change, payroll
employment goes up about 700,000.
MR. KOHN.
I just got a market update. The long end is now
off 5/32, which puts it about 2/32 below what I had written down at
8:29 and 59 seconds a.m. [Laughter]
But the funds rate is still at
3-1/16; bill rates are still down 4 basis points. We took a reading
on the fed funds futures market at 8:55 a.m. and that suggested, at
least at that time, a substantial lessening of expectations about
Federal Reserve action. For example, the one month ahead futures rate
went from 3.26 at the close last night to 3.19 at 8:55 a.m. this
morning.
MR. FORRESTAL.

What about the dollar?

MR. FISHER.
It came off. Yesterday, it moved up against the
mark and was 173ish to 174ish; it lost all of that first thing today
and it's creeping back up to 173.63 on the latest reading that I have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, any further questions for Mike?
If not, let me call on Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN. This is the short-run policy part of the meeting.
[Statement--see Appendix.]

2/3-4/94

-44-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me get
started. Much of what I would usually say I stated in my testimony on
Monday before the Joint Economic Committee, and I won't belabor any of
that. The one issue that I didn't raise, except in a very minor way,
is what I consider to be potentially dangerous upside problems in the
inventory area. In looking at inventory/sales ratios, we tend to
combine wholesale, retail, and manufacturing at book value levels and
put them in constant dollars. The interesting question that this
procedure raises is, does this appropriately capture what is going on?
And my answer to that is "no." The reason the answer is no is that
what basically determines the relationship of orders, production,
consumption, and the like are units of inventory. So, if you were to
take the wholesale and retail inventory data, whose inventory/sales
ratios are trending upward much more than in manufacturing, strip out
the markups to put them back to factory level values and adjust the
manufacturing data to factory level values, which is essentially a
markup, what you effectively do is very significantly re-weight those
three major components. But since manufacturing has been going down,
it all of a sudden has a big impact on the total. Even when you strip
out work-in-process, what you get in terms of gross days' supply is a
decline that is much more abrupt than the official numbers.
Now, the one thing we know about forecasting is that when
inventories go to zero, the rate of change cannot remain negative!
There are models, incidentally, that don't necessarily have that
constraint! But the reason I raise this question is that we're seeing
a very tranquil inventory situation. The use of just-in-time
inventory management is becoming increasingly evident. The lead times
on the deliveries of materials ordered are flat and low. There has
been some minor increase in the delays of deliveries, which is usually
a sign of some tightening. But we have a very interesting problem
here: How far down can inventory/sales ratios continue to go?
The forecast that we saw yesterday in the Chart Show showed a
gradual flattening out. The truth of the matter is that I don't know
how they did it, but I know what they don't know. And what they don't
know is what's going to happen to that particular ratio. If we begin
to get any evidence of either a pickup in materials costs--and an
anticipatory element is involved--or any evidence of a tightening of
lead times on deliveries, which occurs when the operating rates begin
to move up, purchasing managers will start to increase their inventory
requirements. It is apocryphal that everyone's inventories now, in
today's computer regimes, are only in transit and that nobody has
anything. That may be partly true, but it can't be wholly true
because there's still a huge amount of inventories sitting in various
places. Everyone may say that emergency stocks in the system right
now are probably at the lowest level in history and the reason is the
computer technology. But what I'm trying to get at here is that if
there's one element of tranquility in our forecast, which was
gradually lulling us into considerable complacency, it's on the
inventory side. That's basically what concerns me and what very
readily could end up as the problem if suddenly we find that instead
of slipping back to 3 percent GPD growth, or 2-1/2 percent or
something like that, the numbers stay up there. And the reason they
would stay up there is the same reason they've always stayed up in a
business cycle expansion--that inventory accumulation turns
inventory/sales ratios higher, and that's ultimately a source of

2/3-4/94

business cycle instability.
history associated with it.

-45-

That is a fact which has a great deal of

I am still puzzled by the fact that the balance sheets do not
seem to be restraining activity by as much as I thought they would,
considering the fact that they have not yet fully adjusted, if I may
put it that way. Clearly, balance sheet relationships are not back to
those typical of the mid-1980s and I always presumed that the desired
relationships would be more conservative, considering what we went
through. That hypothesis is hard to hold in the context of what's
going on in purchasing and new orders, and I must say especially the
January motor vehicles sales figure that came out yesterday, which was
quite a surprise. The chain store retail sales figures were weak,
weaker than expected. However, the correlation that exists between
those data and total retail sales is very low, and I'm not even sure
the sign is right. So really, those data don't tell us anything. The
motor vehicle sales are inputs into the GDP; they are real; they
involve full coverage; and they do not present any statistical
problems of great moment.
So, I concluded, as far as policy is concerned, that we are
at the point where we finally have to start moving toward a somewhat
less accommodative path. I think we have had an extraordinarily
successful run in restoring balance to a disturbed economic system.
We haven't raised interest rates in five years, which is in itself
almost unimaginable, especially in the context of strong economic
conditions and historically low inflation. I must also say that the
presumption that inflation is quiescent is getting to be a slightly
shabby notion. We are seeing things like the purchasing managers'
reports in January, which showed not a big spike in prices, but some
spike. Listening to our roundtable discussion yesterday, I was
impressed by the fact that labor shortages still were mentioned--not
as a big deal but in a number of different areas--and that several of
you cited some evidence that price increases are holding. So, while
we may not find it in the broader price indexes, there was at least an
inkling that the presumption that inflationary indicators are all
quiescent is, as I said, sort of fraying at the seams. I don't know
what to make of this 0.7 increase in average hourly earnings. I took
a look at the details; it's basically in the services area;
manufacturing is up 0.3 on straight-time earnings and 0.1 on average.
That is consistent with part-timers going out of the system, given
that their average rate is considerably below that of full-time
workers. There may not be much there but, as Mike said, the
presumption that inflation is staying down is very hard to maintain.
That doesn't necessarily mean anything; I suspect productivity is
probably doing better than we would expect and hence unit labor costs
are not going up all that much.
In any event, I would put on the table my preference that at
this meeting we move up 25 basis points. But if that's not the view
of the Committee, I would urge that we at least go asymmetric. Vice
Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe
very strongly that we should firm policy and that we should do so
today and announce it today in the manner described in our late
afternoon conversation yesterday. Let me give some of the reasons
that drive me to this conclusion. We are very near potential GDP and

2/3-4/94

-46-

all of our forecasts, whether they are fine-tunings of the Greenbook
or right on it, say that we will reach full potential this year. That
would mean that labor market pressures should show up relatively soon
on a more generalized basis, and as the Chairman just described, they
already are showing up in some areas of skilled labor. I agree that
an inventory cycle could well be at hand, especially in certain areas
where there are resource constraints already--those involving
residential construction, automobiles and light trucks, and home
durable goods.
Therefore, it seems to me that the question is not so much
whether we should tighten but by how much. And rather than comment on
the alternatives of an asymmetric directive and a move of 25 basis
points, let me evaluate my own view of whether the move should be 25
or 50 basis points. Why would one think that a firming of 50 basis
points might be appropriate? Well, it might be deemed to be closer to
a true adjustment away from what by our forecast is now excessive
accommodation. However, I think there are two downside aspects to a
50 basis point firming. First of all, it could be interpreted--and in
my own view would be interpreted by a fair number of market
participants--as a one-time fix, a one-time adjustment which would be
followed by a "Fed-on-hold" period. Secondly, I think it could be
deemed, especially in light of some of the discussion in this town and
others, a macho response, and I've always thought macho responses
confused brains and bravado. A 25 basis point move, on the other
hand, I believe would send the right signal in the sense that the
Federal Reserve, the central bank, is being watchful, as it should be.
And we would be moving earlier in the economic cycle than the Fed has
done historically and, therefore, we are doing our job even better
than in the past. I think it would be interpreted as the first of a
series of moves and thus would be deemed, in my view, to be a stronger
signal than a 50 basis point increase--if the 50 basis point increase
were seen, as I believe it would be, as a one-time adjustment to be
followed by the "Fed on hold."
So, I support the recommendation of
the Chairman that we tighten. My own preference is for a 25 basis
point firming today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Well, as I stated yesterday, Alan, the stance of
monetary policy has in my view been very expansionary for the last two
or three years. Accordingly, as I've also mentioned, the St. Louis
Bank expects that the CPI will move up sharply in 1994 and will move
Indeed, as you mentioned, there may be some
even higher in 1995.
early warning signs that the economy's disinflationary course has
already come to an end. It is my view that we should act now to
reduce the growth rate of reserves and M1 and signal this change with
a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate target. I favor
50 basis points rather than a more modest amount at this juncture for
the following reasons:
(1) I think the stage has been well set for a
change in policy; (2) in my view we are late in acting; (3) too small
a policy shift may not convince markets of our resolve to keep
inflation low; and (4) I suspect that each successive action could
become more difficult to take. That's my view on policy.
Let me make just one other suggestion with respect to the
language in the directive where we describe economic and financial
conditions. I would suggest that we include in that some mention of

-47-

2/3-4/94

the behavior of M1, the adjusted monetary base and/or reserves over
the last year. I think that that may mitigate against some incorrect
interpretation of relatively weak M2 and M3 growth and what some might
think that implies with respect to the thrust of monetary policy.
That's all I have, Alan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. For some time, just viewing things from my
District, I have started to get the feeling that it's not a case of
worrying about head winds but rather of building tail winds. And
after listening to the discussion yesterday, it sounds to me as if
that's true to some extent around most of the country now. For any of
you who have ever tried either to pilot a light aircraft or sail a
sailboat, you know that trying to steer with a tail wind is much more
difficult and much more dangerous than with a head wind. And if we
let tail winds build up, where we wind up on the course is more
problematic. So, I think an adjustment now is appropriate. I would
come down on the side of 50 basis points even though Bill McDonough's
argument about that being viewed as a one-time adjustment followed by
the "Fed on hold" is interesting. The other side of that would be
that 25 basis points would be viewed clearly as the first of a series
of moves. And if the market quickly built in pricing and expectations
of the next 25 basis point move, then the equilibrium rate would move
at least as much as our move, implying de facto that we eased
conditions relative to where the market is if it's ahead of us. I
don't know what the timing might be as to market expectations, but if
it's a fairly short horizon--maybe no further out than the next FOMC
meeting--we may find that 25 was not enough to restrain reserve growth
and that we would have been better going 50, or will need to give them
the other 25 fairly quickly. I would also support Tom Melzer's
suggestion about references to reserves and narrow money measures as
contributing to why we think a move is appropriate at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me raise a question. I thought
about 50 basis points, or I thought about it in the sense of trying to
move the rate to where we want to put it and then sticking with it.
But I think it may be very helpful to have anticipations in the market
now that we are going to move rates higher because it will subdue
speculation in the stock market; at this particular stage having
expectations hanging in the market that we may move again, and move
reasonably soon, could have a very useful effect. If it is in any way
contemplated that we have moved and are going to stop, that could
create the type of erosion in the economy that I've watched over the
past decades, which is precisely what we don't want. If we have the
capability of having a Sword of Damocles over the market we can
prevent it from running away. If somebody suggested 50 basis points
and then another 50 and then another 50, that's an argument I
understand and it's not inconsistent with my position. What I'm a
little concerned about is that a number people might expect that
that's in fact what we are trying to do. If we're going to move, I
would not mind moving again at the next meeting or the meeting after
that, for example. That depends on the evolution of events, frankly.
In order to simmer down this process, I think we should just very
gradually tighten into it if the evidence suggests that that is where
we should be going. On the question of whether it will become more
difficult to tighten, I presume that that means there are nonmonetary-policy reasons for that, and I think this Committee has

2/3-4/94

-48-

indicated no inclination to be affected by that.
believe we will be.

I have no reason to

MR. JORDAN. Would your preference be for 25 basis points and
symmetric language or 25 coupled with asymmetric?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good question. At this stage I
would tend to stay with symmetric if for no other reason than whatever
it is we do the first time out, I think we send a very important
message. If the economy continues to run ahead of our expectations, I
would for the next move go asymmetric.
MR. JORDAN. Well, just to follow up: My own preference is
always going to be for symmetry, and what I would like to see done
would be to do 25 now but with an understanding that there may be a
conference call if conditions seem to warrant another 25 even before
the March meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't think we have to have an
understanding. That's an ongoing issue and I wouldn't want to imply
that that's not always the case because I think it is. President
Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. As far as the economy goes, this is as good as
it gets in terms of convincing evidence to move. There always are
uncertainties; there always are reasons why we shouldn't make a
change. But what I see is a self-feeding expansion and I think
capacity and price pressures are not all that far away. So, as far as
the economy goes, I think we need to move. On the credibility side,
there's a time to talk, a time for speculation, and a time to act.
We've talked, we've had speculation, and I think now is the time to
act.
I came into this meeting somewhat undecided between a 1/2 and
a 1/4 point rate increase. I think there are some good reasons for a
1/2 point move. It is more difficult to tighten than to ease, at
least it has been historically. So there is an advantage to getting
the job done with fewer moves rather than more. Historically, there
is also the tendency to get behind the curve rather than stay ahead of
it. And I think a larger move does compensate for that risk. On the
other hand, I do think that a 1/2 point move may be just too strong at
this point. There is a risk that we could appear too eager. I've
seen this Committee operate in the 1970s; I've seen it operate in the
1980s and the 1990s; frankly, my confidence in our willingness and
ability to move promptly, to move as needed, is high enough that I
think that a 1/4 point move makes sense. I also buy the notion that
it is important for the market to anticipate further moves. I think
we need to be forthcoming when that is called for. So, while history
and the risks do weigh heavily on my mind, on balance I come out in
favor of a 1/4 point move and I support the symmetrical directive. I
think we really need full Committee support on this action; and to
reiterate my point of yesterday, I think we ought to make this
announcement sometime before Joan Lovett would normally go into the
market today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

2/3-4/94

-49-

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I certainly think that the time
has come to move and that we need to take action today. If we don't
move, we would put our credibility seriously at risk because there's
no question really that we need to move. If we don't, I think we will
fall way behind the curve. In terms of the amount, my preference
would be for a 1/2 point move. At this stage of the game, given the
signs of strength in the economy and the evidence of some nascent
upward price pressures in at least some places like the purchasing
managers data, I worry that if we just do a 1/4 point at this juncture
it's going to be seen as a rather timid move. I think there's some
risk that even after making that move, pretty shortly we will still be
behind the curve. A 1/2 point move, in contrast, would be a decisive
move. It would help us get out in front of this thing as it develops
and would strengthen our position. And I guess I have a little
difficulty understanding the argument that that's going to create an
expectation that we are not going to move again for some time. I
believe those expectations would be determined by unfolding events.
Also, it's worth noting that if we were to move the funds rate to
3-1/2 percent on a nominal basis, the real funds rate would still be
quite low and one could still make an argument that policy even then
would be quite accommodative. So, I think the case for a 1/2 point
increase is not a weak one, and that would be my preference, although
I could accept the 1/4 point increase.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this decision is not altogether
clear-cut in my mind. As a matter of fact, I view it as a difficult
decision. I would just like to interject the argument for waiting a
little, and that argument would revolve around the uncertainty in the
economy. We certainly had a demand surge in the fourth quarter and it
would appear that that is going to continue to some extent. However,
there is always the question before us as to whether that level of
activity is going to continue. And I think the uncertainty is
engendered by the income/debt ratios that we see, the uncertainties
surrounding the economies of our trading partners, the question of
whether capacity utilization rates given global competition are as
meaningful as they were, and the possible effects of fiscal policy-including the uncertainty surrounding the health plan which could be
announced, I suppose, before our next meeting. So, I think all of
those things do present the case for staying where we are for the
moment and waiting. I just want to make sure that we don't lose sight
of those arguments. But I did indicate that it's a close call in my
own mind, and on balance I think the arguments are more persuasive on
the other side by some marginal degree. So I would support moving at
this meeting. The credibility of the central bank is a very, very
important element at this time, and I think we will gain credibility
by moving now even though there might be some marginal risk that we
might have to reverse course. Clearly, there are signs that inflation
is heating up a little, and we have to be vigilant about that. So, I
would support your recommendation. I would go for 25 basis points
because I think the gradual approach is better at this point, and I
would support a symmetric directive.
On the question of inflation, I would just put something on
the table, not for discussion now but as something that perhaps we
ought to think about. And that is that I, for one, am not really
clear what our objective is with respect to inflation. We talk about

-50-

2/3-4/94

price stability and lower inflation and inflation being quiescent and
so on, but I don't know what our level of tolerance is, what we find
acceptable as a Committee for inflation. Now, I know we don't want to
designate a point reference of 2.6 percent or something like that, but
I wonder if perhaps we ought not at some point think about and have
some discussion about where we really want to be in terms of
inflation. Is it zero or is it somewhere between 2 and 3 percent or
exactly what are we aiming for?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
sort of thing.
MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. SYRON.

And which price index are we using, that

Yes.

And over what time period.

MR. FORRESTAL. I throw that out as a suggestion for the
Committee to think about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I agree it's certainly the time to move. I
have three thoughts on why I would prefer a move of 1/2 point over 1/4
point. First, the staff in yesterday's presentation said that to
maintain not price stability but constant inflation we have to raise
interest rates 150 basis points by mid-1995. We have to make a choice
as to whether we want to move six times in the next year and a half or
three times. My answer is that I have a strong preference for three
times.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Suppose they are wrong?

MR. LINDSEY. Well, if anything, I think the risks are that
we are going to have do more than 150 basis points to lower the level
of inflation. I think the bias of the Committee is that if possible
we want to bring inflation down a little more. Furthermore, the staff
noted today that GDP momentum seems stronger than they thought when
they came up with the 150 basis point estimate. So, based on what
we've learned since they did their forecast, it seems that the risks
are on the up side, and that would suggest even more actions to
tighten. I appreciated very much Bill McDonough's analysis of the
"Fed on hold" versus the first in a series of moves. If I think about
it this way, though, what we are out to do is to minimize the effect
on long-term growth, for a given amount of disinflation. If we go a
1/4 point, we are telling the markets that this is the first in a
series and we're going to be raising rates over a long period of time.
That would seem to me to be a signal that over an extended period of
time the average short-term rate is going to be higher than it would
be if we did it quickly. And since what affects long-term growth is
equity prices and long-term bond prices, a slow gradual move--because
it means on average higher long-term rates for a longer period--would
be more damaging to growth. So that would be another reason, I think,
to move suddenly.
Finally, I don't have any personal memories of it although I
was alive at the time, the most successful Fed move against inflation,
as I recall from what I read of history, was back in 1966. At first
the data showed a recession then, but that recession was revised away.

2/3-4/94

-51-

The Fed was able to overcome an inflationary condition by a short,
sudden rise in interest rates. The downturn was actually not a
downturn but simply a slowing in the rate of growth that lasted at
most six months and it brought the country another two years of high
rates of economic expansion. I think the 1966 model is really what we
want to emulate today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Let me just interject.

You want to correct my sense of history?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The history was that the Fed took the 10
percent surcharge as fiscal deflation and didn't act. The Fed was
wrong and had to act more rapidly in order to offset that, so I think
that was not a period when the Fed excelled in policymaking.
MR. LINDSEY. But the 10 percent surcharge wasn't enacted
until 1968 and didn't take full effect until 1969.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but there was the expectation that
there would be fiscal drag, and I think the Fed responded to that.
That's not a major issue; I don't want to prolong the discussion but I
happened to be reading about that episode recently.
MR. LINDSEY. Okay. In any case, if we have to do 150 basis
points or more, I think the greatest "bang for the buck," with minimum
harm to long-term growth, would be to move 50 basis points today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I think yesterday's discussion and
this morning's indicate that we really need to take action now. As
for the amount, there is an economic case for doing 50 basis points
now and I think it would in the longer term give us a more stable
environment.
Bill McDonough's arguments are valid to some extent in
terms of what kinds of reaction we would get, but I think those would
take care of themselves and we would really be better off with 50
basis points.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I agree with all the comments that have been made
about it being the appropriate time to move, and I won't go through
the rationale for that.
On the question of magnitude, I have a mild
preference for a 50 basis point move basically on the grounds that I
believe short-term interest rates have to move pro-cyclically. A 1/4
point increase at this point just doesn't seem to me to be an action
of much magnitude at all. My guess is not that it would get lost in
the markets--that certainly won't happen--but that it's not going to
turn out to be significant relative to the job ahead of us. And if
I'm right that short-term rates have to move pro-cyclically, it seems
to me that we ought to get started. Therefore, as I said, I would
have a mild preference for a 50 basis point move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I too would favor tightening at
this point for the reasons that have been mentioned. I might note

-52-

2/3-4/94

that I found your discussion of inventories quite interesting.
Yesterday, I characterized our forecast as being very similar to that
of the Greenbook. One difference is that we have somewhat greater
strength in the early part of the period largely as a result of much
higher nonfarm inventories than assumed in the Greenbook forecast.
With regard to the amount of our move, I do favor 50 basis points. I
think it's the appropriate move for some of the reasons that have been
mentioned. I'm not in favor of 25 basis points. But if one wanted 25
basis points, communicating as best we can that other increases are
coming, I think that would drive one to asymmetry. It seems to me
that 25 basis points and symmetry just doesn't represent what most of
us think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. To start out, I guess I disagree with Bob Parry.
I came into this meeting thinking that we should do something. As I
read expectations and where things are, I would have thought that 25
basis points would not be seen by the market as something that was
lacking in courage or testosterone on our part. I want to make some
other observations, but could I ask a question of Joan just as we are
in this comment process?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

MR. SYRON. And the question is, Joan: What do you think the
expectations in the market will be if we are to do something? What do
you think the market reaction would be to 25 basis points as compared
to 50 if either were announced about an hour from now?
MS. LOVETT. When the market was anticipating the move, I
think most of the expectations were for 25 basis points. Some of that
got built into the rate structure yesterday; I think by the time the
day was over about 80 percent reflected that a 1/4 point move might
occur today. This morning's numbers on the January employment
situation may have moved some of that pricing back out of the market.
So, certainly a move of 50 basis points would have to be reflected in
the market. Since 25 basis points is not fully in there now, the next
25 basis points would clearly result in some rate back up; rates would
have to adjust much more than they have.
MR. SYRON. Well, let me just continue. I think policy has
been stimulative but I don't think it has been inappropriately
stimulative. I don't want to argue about a month or five or six weeks
one way or the other, but we went through a period in which we needed
to do something. What we all want to do very clearly is to maximize
long-term growth in the economy, controlling real growth. As Larry
Lindsey said, controlling prices is a mechanism for doing that. But
the reason we're concerned about prices is that we care about longterm real growth, not for some abstract reason. While there's no
long-term tradeoff, in the short term the way things work--at least in
my model--is that we can't avoid some lost output at the edges; and
what we're trying to do is minimize that interval of lost output over
time. I'd be cautious about doing 50 basis points because I'm not
sure that we have to raise rates 150 basis points. And at this point
I wouldn't want to start down a path with fairly fixed notions of
where I'm going at the end of it in terms of rates or in terms of
monetary policy. I have a notion of where I want to get in terms of

2/3-4/94

-53-

the economy, but not necessarily on what we need to do to get there.
I think policy over time has been pretty effective. We're already
what I might call orally asymmetric in a sense, given what the
Chairman did rather effectively in his testimony. I would strongly
suggest doing 25 basis points now with this accompanying change in
process. And don't forget this will have a big announcement effect
both in the way it is done and the fact that we haven't done anything
in 17 months and we haven't tightened in 60 months. I would also
suggest that it's not terribly long until the Humphrey-Hawkins hearing
and there's going to be plenty of opportunity to be orally asymmetric,
if I may use that phrase again, or to indicate how we see things. So,
I think going 50 basis points would be depreciating a little too much
the opportunity we're going to have to put this in context and may not
be fully taking into consideration the announcement effect of doing 25
basis points and announcing it after this long a period of policy
inaction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I've been around a long time
watching markets behave and I will tell you that if we do 50 basis
points today, we have a very high probability of cracking these
markets. I think that would be a very unwise procedure. It is far
easier for us to start the process with a smaller move. And, as Dick
Syron says, there's a very large announcement effect. Having stuck
with an unchanged policy for so long, it is going to be far easier for
us to get on an accelerated path if we need to at a later time. To go
more than 25 at this point I think would be a bad mistake. It could
generate surprising counterproductive responses in this market.
Strangely, it is far easier to do 50 basis points in the second move,
not in the first move.
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a very big move, not because of
the magnitude but because of the announcement effect, as Dick Syron
points out. I would feel very uncomfortable if we tried to do more at
this stage. I think it's the wrong pattern and I must say it would
make me really uncomfortable.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Could I make a comment?

Certainly.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I very much share the view that the
effect of a 50 basis point move today in the marketplace is highly
unpredictable. It's sufficiently likely to be damaging in cracking
the markets that I think it's a step we should not take.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, the stock market is at an elevated
level at this stage by any measure we know of. We could set off a
sequence of events here that I think could make the policy path that
we have been developing here a difficult one. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I do have a preference to tighten 1/2
point immediately. It's probably too strong to say that a 1/4 point
move is following the market but a good deal of that is already built
into the market. I do think that because of the cyclical influences a
1/4 point move won't have as much effect. I don't see anything on the
horizon that would warrant an asymmetric directive. Now, having said

2/3-4/94

-54-

that, I will say that I can live with a 1/4 point on the "Fed on hold"
theory and the expectation of more to come.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm in the camp that prefers 25
basis points. I am not sure whether we are early or just right or
late; I don't know how history is going to judge that. But I am
reasonably confident that we're not seriously late and that conditions
are not in the process of running away from us on the up side. I just
don't see the economy as overheated now. I see it as in the process
of approaching full employment but still with some meaningful soft
spots. President Parry among others mentioned some important places
where that's still evident in the economy. I just don't think we need
a strong shock. What we need is a new policy momentum. We have been
in a momentum of rest for a long time; I think we need to change that
and now is the time to do it. But I believe the 25 basis points would
establish that; it would put a new framework in the marketplace and a
new orientation to policy. In my view that's what is needed at this
point rather than a more serious move than that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. I certainly buy the fact that this is the time
to make a change in policy toward more constraint. But I really favor
the 50 basis point move at this point, and I respectfully disagree
with the assessment that such a move would crack the markets. I think
the markets have already discounted a 25 basis point move and are
still burning away at a great rate. I would like to see a stronger
move than 25 basis points simply to damp down without a crash the
stock market particularly. I think it is getting increasingly
dangerous because of the way it has been running. I believe a 50
basis point move will send an unmistakable message that will damp this
enthusiasm in the stock market without causing it to crash. If it
successfully scotches the inflationary expectations that may be part
of the structure of long-term rates, that may have a very salubrious
effect in bringing down long-term rates, and I don't think 25 basis
points will do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I certainly favor moving and, like
others, I have debated in my own mind the difference between a move of
25 and 50 basis points. I was impressed with the tone of the comments
yesterday. It does seem to me that there has been a very significant
shift toward strength in the reports that we heard yesterday as
contrasted with December. But despite all that, I must say that some
uncertainties still remain. Things are looking awfully good but there
are some questions that we've all talked about that still need to be
answered. So, I come down favoring 25 basis points. It does seem to
me that 25 basis points with this announcement--which may turn out to
be precedential but at least this morning would be unprecedented--will
have a very strong signal effect. Therefore, I think in effect we
will get more than 25 basis points out of the action that we
contemplate. With regard to symmetry versus asymmetry--and this is a
different thought--I've come to the conclusion that we ought to get
rid of the asymmetric language forever. It seems to me to cause far
more complications than it's worth. If we are going to move,

2/3-4/94

-55-

particularly over the foreseeable future, I think we ought to do it as
a result of a conference call where we are all participating as
opposed to getting all wrapped up in asymmetric language. So, I would
strongly favor symmetry now on a continuous basis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

If you're going to
MR. MCTEER. To me the question remains:
cut off the cat's tail, what is the optimum number of snips? Normally
the answer to that is one. In a policy context, I think that
translates to the 50 basis points, but I could certainly live with
your recommendation of 25 basis points plus the announcement effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, I rarely feel strongly about
an issue, and I very rarely sort of press this Committee. But let me
tell you something about what's gnawing at me here. I am very
sympathetic with the view that we've got to move and that we're going
to have an extended period of moves, assuming the changes that are
going on now continue in the direction of strength. It is very
unlikely that the recent rate of economic growth will not simmer down
largely because some developments involved in this particular period
are clearly one-shot factors--namely, the very dramatic increase in
residential construction and the big increase in motor vehicle sales.
Essentially the two of those have added one-shot elements to growth.
In the context of a saving rate that is not high, the probability is
in the direction of this expansion slowing from its recent pace, which
at the moment is well over 4 percent and, adjusting for weather
effects, may be running over 5 percent. This is not sustainable
growth, and it has nothing to do with monetary policy. In other
words, it will come down. And the way a 3 percent growth feels, if I
may put it that way, is a lot different from the way the expansion
feels now.
I would be very concerned if this Committee went 50 basis
points now because I don't think the markets expect it. You want to
hit a market when it needs to be hit; there is no significant evidence
at this stage of imbalances that require the type of action that a
number of us have discussed. Were we to go the 50 basis points with
the announcement effect and the shock effect, I am telling you that
these markets will not hold still. I've been in the economic
forecasting business since 1948, and I've been on Wall Street since
1948, and I am telling you I have a pain in the pit of my stomach,
which in the past I've been very successful in alluding to. I am
telling you--and I've seen these markets--this is not the time to do
this. I think there will be a time; and if the staff's forecast is
right, we can get to 150 basis points pretty easily. We can do it
with a couple of 1/2 point jumps later when the markets are in the
position to know what we're doing and there's continuity. I really
request that we not do this. I do request that we be willing to move
again fairly soon, and maybe in larger increments; that depends on how
things are evolving.
I also would be concerned if this Committee were not in
concert because at this stage we as a Committee are going to have to
do things which the rest of the world is not going to like. We have
to do them because that's our job. If we are perceived to be split on
an issue as significant as this, I think we're risking some very
serious problems for this organization. I don't think there is a

2/3-4/94

-56-

philosophical difference anywhere around this room. If somebody asked
me if I think there is an economic case for 50 basis points, my answer
is "most certainly there is a case."
Do I think there is a case in
the full context of where the financial markets are at this stage and
what the expectations in the markets are at this stage?
I would say
emphatically "no."
It's far too risky. We don't need to take those
risks. If I could see a very significant benefit from doing 50 basis
points, I would say let's do it; I just don't see it.
Bob.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, you certainly made your points very
strongly and they are points that one wants to take into account.
I
think the concern of some who are favoring 50 basis points may be
related to the long time between now and the next meeting. Is it
possible, as something of a compromise, that we could have an
agreement to have a telephone meeting at some intermediate point
between the two meetings to see if things have changed to any extent?
We certainly would have the benefit of seeing the market reaction to
this 25 basis point move. In addition to that, we'd have some more
information on the economy, particularly the inventory side, and maybe
we could discuss these developments again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's perfectly fine with me.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, if we could make it specific, I
would recommend that we do 25 basis points today and have a conference
call within two days after your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.
MR. PARRY.

Upon what evidence?

MR. SYRON. May I ask a procedural question?
I favor Bob's
suggestion. I would be a little concerned about setting a precise
date just because we're in this process of change.
The announcement,
for example, is a change and these are all things that we will openly
discuss later on.
I think we have to be careful that what we're
announcing today is-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I've been
Chairman of this Committee now for over six years.
I hope I have
enough credibility to know when a telephone call is appropriate.
I'm
watching the same developments that you are. I'd just as soon not set
a date. It may turn out that way, Larry, but I don't-MR. LINDSEY.

But there will be a phone call?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

I wouldn't put a fixed date.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I would very strongly prefer that
we not set a precedent that the Chairman, particularly this Chairman,
has to agree in advance on the need for a phone call. His record is
that he's going to call us if there's something to talk about or if a
few of us call him and say we think there's something to talk about
and request a telephone conference. I think it's demeaning to the
process, to the nature of this Committee, to say to the Chairman,
"I'll vote for what you want but we've got to have a phone call."
I
really think that's a terrible precedent to set.

-57-

2/3-4/94

SPEAKER(?).

I agree with that.

MR. SYRON. I agree with that and I also agree with that from
another perspective. In being fully open and honest, which we should
be, in what we discuss when we release the minutes for this meeting,
we don't want half a picture conveyed. We don't want to say that
there has been a dramatic change in process and that we went along
with this policy but it was with a contingency--that it was really a
nod and a wink. It's fine if there's a call, but it has to be on your
volition without essentially a nod and a wink agreement that, yes,
we'll do this but with a strong presumption that we'll do another 25
basis points in a call. I think that would be wrong. I think it
still has to be an open issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
same thing.

Yes, I think Bob is saying precisely the

MR. JORDAN. I'm willing to defer to your judgment on the
market reaction, but the logic of that position is that if 50 basis
points really would be the correct move except for constraints of the
market, then once we've done the 25 basis points and overcome any
concerns about market reaction we would come in with the second
installment fairly promptly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm of the belief that if this economy
behaves as strongly as it has been behaving recently, it means that
our forecast is wrong and that more is required rather than less. I
think it's too soon to make that judgment. But if this economy
continues to move, especially if the inventory issue which I raised
begins to show its head, I would be strongly supportive of much more
rapid and, frankly, larger moves.
Let me make the suggestion then that we move 25 basis points
with symmetry, that we watch this process very closely, and that if
evidence suggests that this situation is not simmering down, that we
have a telephone conference at the appropriate time. At that point we
can decide to do nothing, move further, or suggest another telephone
conference; we can do a number of things. But it would effectively be
a continuation of this meeting. So, I would request that. I don't
request often that we try to stay together. That's not what is
required here. I think we're all very much on the same focus. It's
not as though some of us think we shouldn't do anything, some think we
should ease, and some think we should tighten. We've had those
occasions in the past and that's a legitimate difference reflected in
the nature of the Committee itself. As I listened these last two
days, I didn't sense any significant difference within the Committee
on the purpose and the goals of what we're doing. I would request
that, if we can, we act unanimously. It is a very potent message out
in the various communities with which we deal if we stand together.
If we are going to get a split in the vote, I think it will create a
problem for us, and I don't know how it will play out. I rarely ask
this, as you know. This is one of the times when we really are
together and I'd hate to have our vote somehow imply something other
than the agreement for a tightening move that in fact exists in this
Committee. With that I would ask--I'm sorry, Governor Lindsey, did
you want to say something?
MR. LINDSEY.

You answered my question.

-58-

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With that I would request that you read
a symmetrical directive with a somewhat tighter-MR. BERNARD. I'll be reading from the Bluebook on page 24:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to increase somewhat..."
MR. KOHN.

I would say "slightly," Norm.

"...to increase slightly the existing degree of
MR. BERNARD.
pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over the first half of
1994."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thank you for that. I think it's the
right move. I think in retrospect when we're looking back at what
we're doing over the next year we'll find that it was the right
decision.
MR. JORDAN.

What is your intention now for implementation?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
announcement.

I think we're going to make a short

MR. MELZER. Alan, what is your judgment on adding--I'm
talking about the part of our directive where we're just reciting
historically what has occurred--some reference to the behavior of
narrow aggregates and taking the edge off of the relatively weak
growth in the broader ones?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would be inclined to change as few
things as possible. We are making a very large announcement at this
point. Let's put that on the table.
MR. MELZER. That's fine. I just think it may help in terms
of people understanding that the aggregates aren't presenting a clear
picture of the stance of monetary policy.

-59-

2/3-4/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know it might be best to
handle that in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.
MR. MELZER. Yes, whatever you decide on that is okay with
me. I put that forward as a suggestion that might be helpful in terms
of defending our position. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Here's the statement I plan to
release.
"Chairman Greenspan announced today that the Federal Open
Market Committee decided to increase slightly the degree of pressure
on reserve positions. This action is expected to be associated with a
small increase in short-term money market interest rates. The
decision was taken to move toward a less accommodative stance in
monetary policy in order to sustain and enhance the economic
expansion. Chairman Greenspan decided to announce this action
immediately so as to avoid any misunderstanding of the Committee's
purposes given the fact that this is the first firming of reserve
market conditions by the Committee since early 1989."
SPEAKER(?).

Perfect.

SPEAKER(?).

Good.

SPEAKER(?).

Perfect.

SPEAKER(?).

Fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
coffee, assuming it's there.
MR. MCTEER.

Why don't we break at this stage for

You will release that now?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, well, we have to release it ahead
of "Fed" time. We are going to release it before 11:00 a.m.
MR. KELLEY.

So we are are adjourned or recessed or whatever.
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN. I will be referring to page 8 in the Bluebook in
the course of my report.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I understand it, we have basically
two ways of looking at the monetary aggregates. Either we're going to
look at them and make them usable and useful in policy determination
or we are not.
If they come back into vogue and they are working,
what we want is a range that is consistent with price stability. As I
understand it, that's 1 to 5 percent for M2, if it's working.
MR. KOHN.

Right, assuming a flat velocity.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. The monetary aggregates could come back in a sense
of predictable velocities.
In fact, we haven't done that poor a job
of predicting them in recent years, but we believe it's not a stable
situation. But you're right; if the M2 velocity comes back to its

2/3-4/94

-60-

flat path, the 1 to 5 percent range would be approximately the right
range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If that's the right one, then the
question is what do we do in the interim? We have a choice of making
them lower, in which case we're basically saying that M2 doesn't
matter. As Paul Sarbanes said, we've shot the bullet and then drawn
the circle around the bullet hole. If M2 starts coming back and we
have a 0 to 4 percent range, do we want then to raise the range to a
price stability range?
It raises an interesting game theory question
I'm almost inclined to say we ought to leave it where it is,
here.
and if it's not working it's irrelevant, and if it starts to work we
are where we want to be.
MR. SYRON.

Why lower it and have to raise it?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think raising it gives the wrong
signal. We've been trying to get the M2 range to price stability, and
we finally got it here. It may be true that M2 isn't working, but the
range is working!
[Laughter]
And if M2 comes back, we actually will
not be pressured to move on it. Anyway, that was supposed to be a
question!
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, a possible answer may be that when
we made some of those recent adjustments, we did emphasize their
technical nature in response to some recent developments in the
behavior of the aggregates, so there might be some feedback.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but I have this technical problem
where if it's technical we're not using it, and if it works we want it
to be right. And to make it right by raising it, I find difficult.
Governor Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you completely on a
1 to 5 percent range for exactly the reason you gave. My question is
on debt, however. If you look at Chart 4, the world was lovely until
about 1981 or 1982, then it fell out of bed. And unlike M3 and the
rest of them, it didn't even change course. It looks as if during the
1980s we moved to a new secular plateau. We know what happened during
that period:
There was corporate restructuring in favor of debt for
lots of reasons; there were lots of learned papers to explain that
development. Similarly, households moved toward debt. Not only have
those trends stopped in the corporate sector, but they are now
reversing themselves.
Equity is now being issued to replace debt.
Wouldn't it be reasonable to expect that, if anything, the velocity of
debt would accelerate in the years ahead largely as a result of
responses in the corporate sector?
MR. KOHN. I think it's a balancing of a couple of things
here--the federal government versus the private sector. The privatesector debt growth as you know was very low and total debt growth
actually was close to GDP, as you can see by the flatness of that
line, largely because the federal government was such a heavy
borrower. Now, federal government borrowing is being cut back but we
believe the private debt growth will be picking up a bit; in fact, it
The projection for 1994 is
did over the second half of last year.
basically that the pattern of the second half in terms of household
and business borrowing--there are tradeoffs between the two but taken

2/3-4/94

-61-

together the total--will be about the same as it was in the second
half of last year. We're not predicting an acceleration of that.
MR. LINDSEY. You are basically predicting an elasticity of
one with respect to nominal GDP and debt spending.
MR. KOHN. Although I think that's what works out of a
complicated underpinning in which we say, as Mike pointed out
yesterday, there will be more corporate use of external funds over the
coming year or two because their cash flow is slowing relative to
their spending. Household borrowing growth, on the other hand, is
expected to slow a little.
MR. LINDSEY. But there has been a secular change in the
relative costs of debt and equity in the corporate sector. They are
voting with their feet now and issuing new equity, particularly IPOs
and what have you.
MR. PRELL. You could greatly overstate these trends. We are
talking about $20 to $25 billion a year of net equity issuance, which
is a very small part of the overall external financing activity in the
economy. So that isn't a major element of the financial flows at this
point.
MR. LINDSEY. In the takeover of Paramount, what I find
striking about the composition of that offer is how heavily equity
oriented it is compared to offers five and six and seven years ago.
MR. PRELL. But it's less so than a lot of the other
transactions. In fact, that one includes some cash, whereas most of
the major transactions have just been stock or stock swaps. So,
indeed in our forecast we're assuming we're going to see some trickle
of cash buyout transactions over the coming years because our sense is
that the firms probably have gone a long way in adjusting their
balance sheets and trying to get the mix that they will be comfortable
with. Our tax system, with an increase in corporate income tax rates,
tilts even more in the direction of favoring debt than it did a year
ago.
MR. LINDSEY.

Well, I don't know if I would make that

conclusion for the aggregate effect of the taxes.
other way.
MR. PRELL.

I might argue the

Well, okay, I was just looking at the marginal

taxes.
MR. LINDSEY. But while I agree with the alternative I M2 and
M3 target ranges, I prefer alternative II on debt.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.
I have a question. I'm probably the next to the
oldest person in this room and I remember Ml.
The precipitous decline
in M1 growth shown on page 13 puzzles me. What's the rationale or the
reasoning behind that?

factors.

MR. KOHN. Going from 1993 to 1994, we have two special
One is the mortgage-backed securities situation, which added

-62-

2/3-4/94

a couple percentage points to M1 in 1993 and will subtract a little in
1994. We are assuming that the refinancings of mortgages will settle
down or actually decline, and they have, and that subtracts from
demand deposits. Number two is
which
shifted a bunch of deposits, about $7 billion or so--we're not quite
sure how much yet but in that order of magnitude--from NOW accounts to
MMDAs. It doesn't affect M2, but we think that subtracted about 3/4
of a percentage point from M1 growth. For M1 growth, when you go from
1994 to 1995 the principal effect is interest rates. We've assumed
that the short-term interest rates consistent with the Greenbook
forecast start on an upward trend in the second half of 1994 and
continue that way through 1995. One thing we have found about M1 is
that it is a very interest-sensitive aggregate. There's the issue of
compensating balances and the earnings effects, but even more so, I
think, there's the issue of NOW accounts. When time deposit rates or
maybe even savings deposit rates start to rise with market interest
rates, some of the funds that had been shifted into NOW accounts-because rates on NOW accounts and small time deposits were about the
same or not much different--may well be shifted back to time deposits.
So, we think the NOW accounts in particular have become extremely
interest sensitive. And that's why you see the velocity of M1--on
Chart 5--has become highly variable, especially after 1980. It's
because of the interest rate effects. Primarily what's happening,
going from 1994 to 1995 in particular, is the effects of the rising
interest rates.
MR. LAWARE.
segment of Ml?

So, the major effect is in the demand deposits

MR. KOHN. Demand deposits but the NOW accounts as well.
think that rising interest rates will pull funds out of the NOW
accounts into small time deposits which would have, obviously, no
effect per se on M2 but would have a major effect on M1.

We

MR. LAWARE. What is the underlying assumption about the
spread between a NOW account rate and a CD rate?
MR. KOHN. We would assume that that spread would widen. Our
experience is that the NOW account rates adjust very slowly and
sluggishly whereas the small time deposit rates in recent years have
come to adjust fairly rapidly. We would think that the retail CD rate
would rise with a lag but fairly promptly as the fed funds rate rose
and other market interest rates adjusted higher, but that the NOW
account rate would be quite sluggish.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. A couple of questions, Don, about your table on
page 8. I realize the risk of making too much out of these
projections, but the first question relates to the Chairman's remarks
about the ranges. As I understand your M2 projection in the outer
years, under all three of these alternatives M2 is in the upper, upper
half of all of them, even the 1 to 5 percent. That would assume that
if we went to your alternative II, 0 to 4 percent for M2, we would at
some point have to raise the range if the idea was to have the range
center around what we would wind up with in equilibrium.

2/3-4/94

-63-

MR. KOHN. Yes, although I think the baseline is a little
toward the upper end, but we are assuming that these special trends in
velocity do come to an end. We do have some declines in short-term
rates in 1996 and 1997 in the tighter and easier alternatives, which
push up money growth a little. We have long-term rates coming down so
we have the yield curve flattening. So, there are a few special
factors, which are pushing up money growth out there.
But the
underlying assumption is consistent with what the Chairman said, that
is,
aside from those special factors having to do with the shape of
the yield curve, in the out years we assumed--without any evidence yet
that it's happening--that the big shifts in money demand did cease.
MR. JORDAN.
When I look at your nominal GDP projections and
the M2 out at the end of your projection, I notice your velocities are
zero for all three.
It's the constraints that you impose; you've
assumed that by that point-MR. KOHN. Yes. When the interest rate effects die down in
1998 and 1999, we have assumed that velocity growth will be zero as
you said, that the special shifts will-MR. JORDAN. Okay. It struck me, when I looked at the top
and the bottom of the federal funds rate projections for the out years
and the top CPI projections, that you have under all
three
alternatives either 4 or 4-1/2 on the funds rate.
That means the
funds rate--I don't like the words tighter and easier so I won't use
them--on the less inflationary path is above the inflation rate.
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

MR. JORDAN. And even substantially above the nominal GNP.
In Street jargon, policy is becoming relatively more restrictive
going
forward in that the inflation rate and inflation expectations are
coming down more than the nominal yield and you're leaving the funds
rate above nominal GDP six years out.
MR. KOHN. It's two things. One is that we recognized when
we talked about whether we should fine-tune this strategy, in
particular when we got out there, that in fact real interest rates are
rising in this tighter strategy. We have the unemployment rate still
at 7 percent.
I think that in fact if the Committee were to engage in
the tighter strategy--that is,
raise rates higher now--it would end up
reducing the funds rate in the out years.
It just seemed like a
degree of fine-tuning that perhaps wasn't needed. But we recognized
the problem you're raising, which is that the real rate is rising out
there, and the Committee would have to bring it down.
I think it is
important to emphasize that to get the kind of disinflation embodied
in this scenario and without credibility effects--as we pointed out
we're just working off short-run and long-run Phillips curves--you do
need to keep the real interest rate a bit above its equilibrium level
in this
tighter policy to keep slack in the economy, to keep the
inflation rate pointed down.
So, it's not surprising that the real
rate in the tighter strategy is above the real rate in the baseline or
the real rate in the easier strategy; that corresponds to the various
unemployment rates in the model which you need to get the inflation
rate--

2/3-4/94

-64-

MR. JORDAN. Well, there's no doubt the lack of credibility
has effects on this. But the last time we were running for a
sustained period at 2 percent or less on the CPI--as in the period
from 1997 through 1999--we had a lot lower short-term rates than you
are suggesting here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

I don't have any questions on this.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Any further questions? If not,
would somebody like to start the roundtable on what you want to do?
MR. SYRON. I agree with what I think was implicitly the
Chairman's suggestion, which is that I would leave these ranges alone.
I understand the point that Larry raised on debt, and I could go
either way with that. But my own personal view is that it risks
putting a little too fine a point on this. That's a tactical issue;
it's not a substantive issue. I think the comment was correct, but
given our level of knowledge on these things and the disruptions that
we are and have been subject to, I'd be very wary of making a
relatively small change in one of these ranges because I think it
could imply an ability to forecast and to understand these things that
is greater than we have. I don't know if you want my view now on
presenting a forecast for 1995, but I would have fairly serious
reservations about going ahead with that. As has been said, that is
far enough out that it certainly incorporates as much an objective as
it does a pure forecast. And I think that suggests we need to think
very carefully about whether we want to do that or not. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Well, I don't think we should change the
targets for the reasons that Dick Syron just went through. I agree
with him. Given the kinds of uncertainties we're facing with M2,
especially now, I do think that that raises a problem. Not having a
nominal anchor in some explicit way raises a problem for monetary
policy, but I don't think that putting out the 1995 forecasts would
solve that problem. It would raise more questions than it would
answer about preferences and tradeoffs and a lot of other things. So,
I think that would be a bad idea. To me the way to deal with that
problem basically is just to continue publicly to communicate our firm
commitment to price stability over the longer haul, no matter how
tired people get of listening to us say that and how tired we get of
listening to ourselves say it. But that I think is our best option in
that sense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there are so many
uncertainties at this point with respect to M2 that we shouldn't
change the range. And those uncertainties are magnified by the fact
that if we do have an increase in rates, M2 could grow much more
quickly, with defections from asset funds; this effect could in fact
be heightened if there is concern about the safety of these uninsured
assets. If we're confident about our current estimates, I think
there's enough scope in the current ranges to adjust policy the way we
want to. With respect to a tighter alternative, I would find it very

2/3-4/94

-65-

difficult to assume a policy path that shows a rise in unemployment
from the current level that is basically sustained over a five-year
period. So, I would favor retaining the provisional ranges that we
have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
publication?
MR. FORRESTAL.
just have 1994.

How do you stand on the 1995

I don't think we ought to do that;

I would

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Having seen the results, in terms of the
forecasts submitted, I am a little dubious for the reason that Jerry
Jordan pointed out yesterday. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. I think we should stay with the current targets
as we have them, no changes. And in my view we should not be
projecting 1995.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think our current ranges are
consistent with our longer-term objectives and I would not be for
changing them. In addition, I would not favor using the 1995
projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'd adopt the provisional ranges shown in
alternative I. And I agree with your logic, Alan. I've always felt
that we ought to get those ranges where they ought to be in terms of
some concept of long-term price stability and then not move them
around, even though they're not useful right now. I wouldn't provide
the 1995 projections. My reason has to do with the fact that they
incorporate different underlying assumptions. They really are not
comparable. People have made different assumptions about monetary
policy in particular. If we were going to do anything along those
lines, although I wouldn't suggest that we are ready to, we'd be
better off to set a nominal GDP target which, of course, implies an
inflation target. That's something we might want to explore in
connection with setting provisional ranges for 1995, but we're
certainly not ready to talk about it seriously right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. I would prefer to stay with the provisional
ranges and I would be strongly opposed to releasing the 1995
projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would not change the provisional
ranges and, like Governor LaWare, I feel very strongly about not
releasing the 1995 forecasts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

-66-

2/3-4/94

MR. JORDAN. I prefer the 1 to 5 percent range on M2. I
don't have a clue about the debt number; I never did. While in
principle I prefer publishing not only the 1995 numbers but beyond
that, I certainly wouldn't want to publish these numbers!
[Laughter]
I'd like us to publish CPI objectives out through 1999, but I sure
don't like the numbers that are companions to them.
So, I'm stuck
with saying:
Don't publish 1995 unless we come up with some better
numbers!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I agree with what has been said. I would keep
the ranges as they are. I don't see any point in calling any more
attention to the aggregates at this time. And I would not publish the
1995 forecasts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I would keep the ranges where they are and not
publish the 1995 forecasts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. The same:
release of 1995 forecasts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.
[Laughter]
SPEAKER(?).

no change in the ranges and no

President McTeer.

I agree with everybody on everything.

All the time!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I agree with maintaining the
provisional ranges and believe we should not release a forecast for
1995.
There's no question in my mind that it would become a forecast
with which we would be expected to live and there's no consensus in
the Committee on what such a forecast should be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I'd declare victory on the M2 and M3 ranges, and
I don't have any feelings about debt at this point. And we're not
ready for an extended forecast beyond the next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we're as close to unanimous as
we can get on these sorts of things.
Why don't we vote on the same
ranges and no publication of 1995 forecasts.

MR. BERNARD.

I'm reading from page 23 now in the Bluebook.

The first sentence is unchanged, and continuing:

"In furtherance of

these objectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of
1994. The Committee anticipated that developments contributing to
unusual velocity increases could persist during the year and that

-67-

2/3-4/94

money growth within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives.
The monitoring range for growth in total domestic
nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8 percent for the year." Then at the
bottom of the page, "The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to take a moment before we
adjourn to note the impending retirement of one of the System's most
distinguished economists, Dick Davis.
During his 33 years at the New
York Bank he's provided important service not only to that institution
but to the System as a whole. Repeatedly when there was a major issue
regarding monetary policy--for example, the role of the monetary
aggregates or what our operating procedures should be--we all looked
to Dick for leadership in our research efforts. Dick has always
exhibited an extraordinary ability to blend sophisticated, technical
analysis with common sense and an understanding of institutional
realities.
In addition, he has been a model for all economists in the
System. We thank you very much and wish you well in your future
endeavors.
[Applause]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you're welcome.

Dick, if you want to make a speech

MR. DAVIS.

I appreciate your remarks very much; thank you.

MR. SYRON.

Good speech!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, let's adjourn to lunch.
END OF MEETING

