Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 15, 1994

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, November 15, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Moskow and Ms. Minehan,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Goodfriend, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, and Simpson and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

-2-

Mr. Brayton, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Arfairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Pianalto, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Ms. Browne and Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Vander Wilt, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 15, 1994
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We ought to
congratulate Governor Lindsey who has just returned without mishap
from Rumania with an addition to his family.
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes!

MS. MINEHAN.

Congratulations.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Applause]

What do you have, a girl?

MS. MINEHAN.

A girl?

MR. LINDSEY.

A one-year old girl.

MS. MINEHAN.

How nice.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What I have been trying to tell Larry
was that he had better learn Rumanian pretty quickly because when she
learns to talk if he does not understand Rumanian, he is in trouble!
SPEAKER(?).

He's in trouble anyway!

[Laughter]

MR. LINDSEY. For now, it is either feed me or change me;
that won't always be so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we'll allow you to move approval
of the minutes for the September 27th meeting.
MR. LINDSEY.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. You all have before
you the Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account that
was distributed on November 3rd. Are there any questions relating to
that?
If not, would somebody like to move its acceptance?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. After we complete
our general monetary policy discussion, I am going to raise some broad
issues about our recent intervention in the foreign exchange markets.
I will also comment about the alleged increase in central bank
participation in the G-7 process. So, after Peter discusses his
operations, let's hold off discussion of the broader questions with
respect to intervention until later in the meeting. We will have more
time then for a general discussion. With that in mind, let me call on
Peter Fisher to report on foreign currency operations.
[Statement--See Appendix.] Mr. Chairman, I
MR. FISHER.
wasn't quite sure how you wanted to proceed. I could take questions
on the report, or I could go on and ask for ratification of the
operations and renewal of the swap lines. Should I just go on with
each of those?

11/15/94

-2-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you do that? We will then
have general questions on all issues but leave the intervention
discussion until later.
MR. FISHER. I will need the Committee's ratification of our
operations on Wednesday, November 2; we sold $400 million equivalent
of Japanese yen and $400 million equivalent of German marks for the
System's Account. On November 3, we sold $250 million of yen and $250
million of marks for the System's Account. Thus, over the period we
sold $650 million equivalent of each of the two currencies for the
System Account.
Mr. Chairman, the System's reciprocal currency arrangements
are up for renewal for another year with the exception of our Mexican
and Canadian arrangements. I have no changes to suggest in the terms
and conditions of the existing swap arrangements and request that the
Committee approve their renewal without change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say this. If anyone objects
to voting until we have had our discussion on intervention, we can
delay the vote. If anybody wants to object, object now and we will
just postpone the vote.
MR. BROADDUS. I would appreciate it if the swap vote could
be delayed until later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's fine. In fact, there is a
certain symmetry in doing that. So why don't we leave that vote until
later?
I was a little curious myself as to why the dollar was as
strong as it was yesterday. You implied that the reason was because
the foreign exchange market expected us to move today. But last week
and two weeks ago they expected us to move today. What is the
explanation?
MR. FISHER. I admit it is rather hard to fathom. I think it
is this combination of foreign demand surprising the dealer community
which has for some time now been playing the dollar from the short
side. I think the two factors continue to operate together. The
surprising election result last Wednesday produced precisely that
sequence, that is, the resulting foreign demand for the dollar
surprised the U.S. dealer community a bit and the dealers rushed to
cover shorts. Monday morning, the same thing seemed to be occurring
again. The dealers saw a slightly surprising level of foreign
interest in the dollar and the dealer community once again tried to
play catch-up with their customers, as best I have been able to
understand. There was a rather quick mark-up yesterday. If you look
at the charts, it really happened rather quickly. I have not been
able to ascertain what in particular was happening at that time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, you indicated that you inferred
from the market that we are behind the curve in three areas and that
we are in striking distance of reaching at least one or more of those
curves. Is there any view within the foreign exchange market that
puts federal funds numbers on that?

-3-

11/15/94

MR. FISHER. The very fact that we are effectively at parity
on the funds rate with German rates suggests that any move we make now
will give the dollar a cost-of-carry advantage against the mark. One
of the things that some people talk about and that I perceive as
important is that the foreign exchange market generally is not
focusing on that. That is, during the spring, that was the "be-alland-end-all" of the exchange markets. People talked about the point
in time when fed funds would be higher than overnight German rates. I
think that that is in effect the sleeper that could catch up with the
market. If fed funds were to be trading between 50 and 100 basis
points above German overnight rates as we went into year-end, that
would begin to shift the whole dynamic of leads and lags in corporate
deposits and the like. That again would slightly shift the burden of
proof to the speculative community. If they start to lose money by
running a short dollar position on cost-of-carry, that will begin to
work on their calculations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions?

MR. JORDAN. Peter, your remarks suggested that some traders
view intermediate- and long-term U.S. Treasury rates as not being at a
high enough level. That differs from a feeling that a policy action
by this Committee to increase the funds rate will at least temporarily
depress bond prices. Which is it? Are they saying that the level is
not yet high enough or are they waiting until that last shoe is
dropped so they don't get caught holding an unwanted long position?
MR. FISHER. Let me answer that in a couple of ways.
It
obviously varies depending on the institution. The point is that the
Fed being perceived as behind each of those curves means it is rather
hard to justify and means that foreign demand is around the corner.
There are extraordinarily high real returns in foreign bond markets,
and that is a cause of major concern to our European counterparts.
There are incredibly high yields in France at present and German real
yields simply calculated are extraordinarily high. That in itself is
the problem. One way of looking at the problem is to ask when
investors will be prepared to buy our bonds. For example, if there
were to be a sense of stability and the sense that a capital gain was
available in the intermediate term, that might overcome the lack of a
real bond yield advantage for the dollar.
I don't mean to suggest
that it is a necessary condition for the Fed to be ahead of each and
every one of the curves. Rather, the negative sentiment is premised
on the fact that, no matter what the analytic frame of mind, one can
look at the exchange market and see that the Fed is behind each and
every one of the curves. That's been feeding on the market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
on to Joan Lovett.

Any further questions?

If not, we'll go

MR. FISHER. Do you want to ratify the foreign operations or
do you want to save that for later also?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will save that for later on. In
other words, until we have the discussion, it would be inappropriate
to vote on the ratification. Joan.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--See

11/15/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Joan, was that 4.79 percent the federal
funds rate average since the last FOMC meeting?
MS. LOVETT.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What is it so far this month?

Do you

remember?
MS. LOVETT.

For the month of November?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The month of November to date.

MS. LOVETT.
I don't know the precise average, but it is on
the high side, because after its rise at the end of the quarter the
rate never really went back down. The last statement week ended on a
firm note and it was a holiday on Friday. With expectations of a rate
move at this meeting today, the funds rate has been persistently above
that average.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. LOVETT.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Mr. Chairman.
MS. LOVETT.

So it would be more than 4.79 percent?

Would it be 4.82, 4.83 percent?

The month-to-date effective rate is 4.81 percent,
For November.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

For November, okay.

MR. KOHN. That 5.11 percent futures rate implies 5.34
percent for the remainder of the month.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. You did my calculations for me, I
If not, would somebody
thank you. Any further questions for Joan?
like to move to ratify the actions of the domestic Desk since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on to
Mike Prell and the staff report on the economic outlook.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--See

Questions for Mike?

MR. BOEHNE. The profile that you have for growth over the
next 15 months or so I find somewhat puzzling. The economy has a fair
amount of momentum, and yet you have a rather significant falloff in
the rate of growth out into next year with a yield curve that is still
sloping upward. I think that you would have to have more flattening
of the yield curve to get this dramatic a slowdown. That's one piece
that is puzzling. The other part of it, even if you are right, is
If you take growth down to 1 to 1-1/2
reminiscent of the late 1980s.

11/15/94

percent, if it really does get that weak, you open yourself up to any
kind of a shock. I'm puzzled on both sides:
one, that we will get
this amount of slowing with the kind of increase in rates that you
talk about; and on the other side, if we actually do end up with this
kind of slowing, then you can argue that we are vulnerable on the down
side. So I have two opposite concerns.
MR. PRELL. President Boehne, I think the first question is
more a forecasting question. The second one perhaps is more a policy
question, though there are obviously ingredients of both in the two
questions. We hinted in the Greenbook that, in essence, we see the
probability distribution as skewed a bit in the direction your first
question suggested--that, indeed, the momentum could turn out to be
better maintained in the near term and that it might take considerably
greater monetary policy tightening in order to generate a quick and
significant slackening in growth, bringing the economy below potential
and beginning to reverse what we regard as an overshooting in resource
utilization. So, I take your point, and while I don't think history
would suggest that a moderation in growth requires a total flattening
of the yield curve, I would say that perhaps we are a bit optimistic,
if you want to view it that way, on that relationship. The Greenbook
assumes a reduction in the upward slope, but the latter is still
significant. If I had to pick an alternative scenario, I might lean
in the direction you are talking about.
As to slow growth and openness to shocks, the economy is
always open to a shock that could move it off the projected path by a
given amount. When growth is that low, such a shock obviously could
move the economy into negative territory. Maybe the psychology of
that is different and downward momentum might develop, but I don't
think we have a way of coping with that. In fact, in 1989-1990, we
did have a period of slow growth. There were some revisions of data
which revealed just what the pattern was, and it wasn't until that
shock occurred that the economy really tipped into recession. In the
absence of that shock, it is conceivable we might have skated by. A
period of slow growth does not necessarily mean that the economy is
going to slip into a recession.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, in your verbal presentation and also in the
Greenbook you twice referred to more lenient lending terms by banks as
a factor in the strength of the economy. I want to make sure I
understand the point. Are you saying that banks are more lenient than
one typically would see at this stage of the cycle, or is this just
what we typically see? My own discussions with bankers suggest that
they are not doing anything unique for this cycle. As a matter of
fact, I think that in some respects they are a little more cautious.
Are you seeing something exogenous to what our experience has been in
the past at this stage of the cycle? If so, how important is it?
MR. PRELL. This is hard to pin down, but my sense is that
the credit availability cycle has been out of sync with the normal
pattern this time around.
MR. PARRY.

A little later?

-6-

11/15/94

MR. PRELL.

In the sense that, when interest rates were

coming down in 1991-1992, we were still seeing the tendency toward
tightening of bank credit terms.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. PRELL. And, as we have been tightening money market
conditions, our loan officers' survey and the preponderance of the
anecdotal evidence have suggested that the banks have become
increasingly aggressive in their business lending and obviously have
been increasingly willing to extend consumer credit as well. We
looked back at the responses to that same senior loan officers' survey
some years back through a couple of cycles and found that, as we might
have expected, during periods of rising interest rates and a
flattening term structure, some of which we have had, we generally had
a tightening of credit terms; but recently we had a tendency toward an
easing in credit terms. So, I think we may be moving in an unusual
direction. Be that as it may, we are pretty much convinced that we
have been moving in the direction of easier credit availability and
that that has tended to work against the effect of the rising interest
rates on demand. From the perspective of businesses, it is certainly
clear that the credit crunch is no longer there and credit
availability is not a concern to firms that want to expand their fixed

investment or inventories.
MR. PARRY. I guess I'm a little surprised that in the past
we have seen a tightening of terms in the first year of rising
interest rates. I would have thought that it would have come later.
MR. PRELL. I don't want to put too fine a point on it, but I
think the main point is that this seems to have been an offsetting
influence over the past year to the rising market interest rates.
MR. PARRY.

I don't think there is any doubt about that.

I

really wonder if that's unique.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is not.

There is a bias in the

measure of the degree of ease in the loan officers' survey.

the size of it?

What is

Do you remember, Don?

MR. KOHN. The Richmond Fed did a study once that showed
that, at least back in the 1970s, it looked like the responses were
biased toward showing tightness. Now, the psychology of everything
has shifted so radically in the current cycle that I wonder whether
that same bias is there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The trouble is that if you cumulated the

first differences, you got a progressively greater degree of
tightening, which at the end of the day should have strangled the
total financial system.
MR. KOHN.
bias was found.

Right.

That was true back in the 1970s when the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, there is no evidence
that that has been the case since then?
MR. KOHN.

We just don't know.

11/15/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Mike, I've got two quite different types of
questions. The first one has two parts and it is about productivity:
What has been going on and what do you foresee going on? In the past
four quarters, growth in manufacturing productivity is reported to be
something on the order of 6 percent or so, and for the overall economy
it is substantially less than that--the rest of the economy only
running about 1-1/2 percent. A large part of that is because we
define output in such a way that we preclude labor productivity gains,
at least for services. Nevertheless, we wind up with some pretty good
numbers for these past four quarters. When I look at your forecast
for the next year--the first part of the first question is how you
read these numbers as to what happened with productivity gains in the
manufacturing sector being four times what they have been in the rest
of the economy. Is it simply a measurement error in that we don't
know how to measure productivity in the rest of the economy and how
does that affect judgments about policy? Or do you take those numbers
at face value? The second question is, what do you foresee going on
in manufacturing and nonmanufacturing productivity to produce the slow
growth of under 2 percent in output for four quarters starting next
spring?
MR. PRELL. As a technical matter, the productivity numbers
for manufacturing that are published along with those for overall
productivity growth are in essence based on a separate system in the
current period. The recent period is based on industrial production
data rather than industry gross product data. Those numbers will be
revised. There isn't any reason, though, to think that they are
giving a grossly misleading picture. Our assumption is that, indeed,
there has been substantial growth in manufacturing productivity. I'm
not sure you want to subtract that number from overall nonfarm
business sector productivity growth and get the residual for the rest
of the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Actually, Mike, when we separate the GDP
into its factory value components, don't we get results that are not
all that different from numbers based on industrial production?
MR. PRELL. There's a big gap between the industrial and the
nonindustrial sector productivity measures even when we do this
exercise.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. PRELL. Maybe that isn't actually true; maybe there is an
inaccuracy in the measurement of output. It would be affecting the
GDP numbers. It also would be affecting our estimates of potential
output growth. It is in fact neutral in terms of assessing what the
output gap might be. All the measures are commensurately affected.
As to the pattern we have going forward, we do have a deceleration of
productivity growth. This is a normal accompaniment to a significant
deceleration in output growth. We believe that we are somewhat above
the cyclically-adjusted trend line and that deceleration normally
occurs in mid-expansion. As we move to fuller resource utilization,
the expansion will be slowing; there will be some tendency to move
back toward that trend line. Historically, the economy has moved
below it during recessionary periods, but we don't have a recession in

11/15/94

our projection period. In essence, we have a somewhat below-trend
growth of nonfarm business productivity over the next year or so and
then we move back toward that trend. Basically, looking at the growth
of productivity in the 1990s, we don't see any real evidence that our
assumption for some time now of about 1.4 percent trend growth in
nonfarm business productivity is off the mark. The data seem to be
conforming to that in terms of the normal cyclical pattern.
MR. JORDAN. Just as a comment on it, I'm not hearing
anything that suggests to me that businesses--manufacturing or others
--foresee fewer opportunities for productivity improvements in the
next year or two than they have had in the last couple of years. What
produces this quite dramatic slowing of productivity? I think this
is troubling.
The second question is more involved--sorry about this. When
I pair up what has happened in the last four quarters and your
projection out to mid-1995, it looks like a pattern that says, because
output has grown faster than projected, say, at this time a year ago
and also faster than some ideas about potential, what we have to do is
give it back so that, in the end, we wind up at the same level of
output and employment as we would have otherwise. Another way of
looking at this same situation is to pair up this last year with the
prior year. Instead of matching off a year in the future, match off a
year in the past. We went through a period in 1992 and much of 1993
of downward revisions in forecasts--staff, Blue Chip, everybody else;
the forecasting errors were on the down side in relation to
expectations about what the economy was capable of doing. If you do
that matching up of 1993 and 1994, the level today comes out about
where you would have projected it two years ago. Then, if you don't
have to give anything back in the future, the question is what is
happening to growth in the future.
In your framework, when you talk about inflation, you rely on
excess demand. I puzzle over what is producing this idea of excess
demand. Nominal GDP growth really has not accelerated that much. In
fact, it looks the same for the last four quarters as it looked in
1992. To put it into terms that I feel more comfortable with, I try
to reconcile your forecast with what I think is going on with money
and the desire to hold money balances. At least conceptually, I can
make equivalent an excess-demand-for-output model and an excesssupply-of-money model. How well that can be done depends on what is
going on in asset markets. But conceptually, we can make the two the
same. A year ago at this time, I said that the opportunity cost model
for narrow money, M1, or for the monetary base, was tracking very
well; nothing had gone wrong. We had had two years of double-digit
growth of M1 and the base. At that point a year ago, we had four
options for the year ahead: One was that the relationship would break
down; we don't want to make monetary policy on the idea of the
relationship breaking down, so put that one aside. That left three
possibilities. One was a further sharp decline in interest rates. It
would have taken a 20-25 percent decline in interest rates from where
we were a year ago to make the opportunity cost model hold up, given
the kind of money growth we were getting and the forecast you had. At
that time, you thought that there was some possibility of further
declines in bond yields and that the funds rate would stay at about 3
percent. I actually would have leaned on the side of thinking that if
inflation psychology improved, bond yields could have too. I do

11/15/94

remember the Chairman saying he would have been shorting the bond
market. Of course, I probably would have been buying! That
improvement didn't happen. So that left the other two possibilities:
Either nominal GDP growth doubled, shot up to about 10 or 12 percent,
or M1 growth and base growth collapsed. What we got was a combination
of the two with a small increase of 1 percent in nominal GDP growth
and mostly a drop in money growth--M1 and the base. The opportunity
cost model still fit.
So here we are now and as I look ahead, we've got four
options:
One is that the relationship breaks down; hold that aside.
Second, I can come at it one of two ways.
I can look at your
Greenbook forecast and the Prell path of policy and ask if this is
reasonable for interest rates and money growth if the model still
works.
That would say to me that if interest rates remained at
today's level and your Greenbook forecast was right, M1 growth would
decline a little over the next year--1 percentage point or so if the
relationship holds.
Or, if your fed funds recommendations are
correct, that implies that M1 growth has to drop about 6 percentage
points in absolute level in the next year for your nominal GDP
forecast to be correct. Is that reasonable? What's going on in the
demand for money balances for the velocity to have to increase about
10 percent?
MR. PRELL. I don't think I can work my way through all the
history you gave on the forecast. But I think the first statement you
made about giving back the extra growth that we had recently is
fundamentally correct. That extra growth, as we assess it, resulted
in an overshooting of sustainable levels of resource utilization-levels that would be consistent with at least stability in inflation
as opposed to accelerating prices. We tried to devise a scenario in
which, within a reasonable period of time, we move back to and
slightly above the NAIRU to damp the incipient inflationary process.
I think that is an apt characterization of how this scenario is
designed.
I hope Don has some thoughts on the M1 velocity story. It is
not something we focused on, frankly, in designing the forecast. We
didn't give any attention to M1. M1 is an endogenous byproduct in
this forecast just like many other variables. There can't conceivably
be any tension in our thinking about the money and income
relationship. It is whatever it is, and we don't have an M1 target
range that we need to worry about violating, so that doesn't arise as
a side constraint, and we think the broader aggregates will remain at
growth rates that are compatible with the 1995 ranges and any
reasonable extensions.
MR. KOHN. In fact, you're right, President Jordan, in the
sense that the M1 that we have been getting for the last two years or
so has been pretty much on the M1 demand curve. But that aggregate,
of course, is very interest elastic. We are predicting even slower
growth next year than the 2 percent that we have for this year and
another hefty increase in velocity. I have to admit that our models
suggest that if the same relationships hold, M1 might even drop next
year consistent with the Greenbook GDP and interest rates. We have
projected essentially no growth. We don't have the drop built in, but
I couldn't rule out the possibility that we could get the Greenbook

-10-

11/15/94

GDP and a decline in M1.
surprise.

It would be right on the model and not a

MR. JORDAN. If the money demand relation still holds on M1
and you get a 5 or 6 percent drop in the absolute level of M1, what
does that do to your M2? Unless you've got non-M1 components of M2
starting to take off suddenly-MR. KOHN. We do have opportunity costs narrowing over the
latter half of next year, and we do have M2 picking up then. We see
those costs rising in the first half of the year when we expect very
damped growth in M2. As you can see in your Bluebook, we have built
in declines through March. We do have a bit stronger growth built in
for next year partly because some of the special factors, like the
reduction of demand deposits stemming from the fade out of mortgage
refinancings, will not be there. So, we do have a little
strengthening next year as things come a little more into line with
our models. In fact our models for M2, based on the same interest
rates and the same incomes, predict much stronger growth in M2 next
year than this year. We trimmed it by a percentage point or two, so
we only have 2 percent growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. An opposite question to President Boehne's: I
was interested in the reference in the Greenbook to the cessation of
speed effects that brings about the moderation of CPI increases in the
last part of 1995. I wondered whether you had any estimates of what
that CPI figure might be absent speed effect changes? Did you look at
it that way?
MR. PRELL. I don't think we can do a precise dissection.
One of the things we've pointed out in the Greenbook is that in
looking at the acceleration--I don't want to overstate this--what we
are talking about in essence in the core CPI number is that we are
going to get pretty much .3 increase a month rather than a mixture of
.2 and .3 a month.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes, right.

MR. PRELL. Whether we'll be able to perceive this month-bymonth isn't entirely clear. But we see this as involving a mix of
things that are sort of overlapping. We have had an exchange rate
depreciation. We have seen raw materials prices increase. Some of
those raw materials are internationally traded and are imported in
some instances. We have seen rapid growth of output recently, and
econometrically, while it is not always a particularly robust result-you can tinker with your models and get large or small effects--that
mere increase in resource utilization can produce in these models some
increase in markups, and when things taper off we see some stabilizing
and a return to the trend. I really can't parse these things out with
any great precision. Some set of these factors we think will give a
little bit faster rise in prices in the near term than would be
dictated simply by the margin of slack in the economy, which we would
see as only adding maybe a couple of tenths to underlying inflation
over the coming year, no more than that.

11/15/94

-11-

MS. MINEHAN. So you think it is more the special factors
that are pushing the increase in prices to 3.8 and 3.6 percent rather
than any uptrend?
MR. PRELL. Right. We have a timing question here. It is
hard to say but we think that we might get a little more of the price
increase announcements at the beginning of the year.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. So, there is a considerable amount of guesswork
involved here. But, yes, I think it is these speed effects or the
exchange rate effects on import prices and so on that are giving the
bulge. However, if we did not eliminate the excess pressures on
resources during 1995, as we have in this forecast, the risk would be
that wages would begin to reflect more fully the higher price
increases, inflationary expectations would take hold, and we would
begin to build that higher track into the trend. That's why we felt
it important to try to indicate what kind of interest rate path would
lead to this slackening fairly promptly.
MS. MINEHAN. Looking at the other side, you have a declining
impact from inventories, but certainly a smooth one. Do you care to
comment on that?
MR. PRELL.
MS. MINEHAN.
MR. PRELL.
Greenbook.
MS. MINEHAN.

Reality will never be that smooth!
That's what we thought too!
That's one of the risks we noted in the
Right.

MR. PRELL. An inventory adjustment could come more quickly:
If final demand were to taper off and be perceived to have tapered off
early next year, perhaps the inventory adjustment would be sharper.
That could move us much closer to zero or even conceivably negative
GDP growth for a quarter, but inventories might then come back if
final demand is still growing moderately. So, they are certainly a
potential source of volatility in the numbers and of some greater
cyclical variation.
MS. MINEHAN. Finally, have you looked at the price effect
when the ARMs that were issued this year kick in next year? The
teaser rates this year have been very low. Some of these ARMs have
new provisions to extend the maturity, but a good portion of them will
kick in next year.
MR. PRELL. It is going to be a factor affecting the cash
flow of many households, but it is not a huge effect. It is less huge
than one might have expected because what we've observed this year is
that a substantial proportion of the ARMs originated this year have
fixed rates for 5 or 10 years. This is something of an innovation in
this cycle. We are not going to have any adjustment on those and
there is a 2 percentage point limit on those shorter-term ARMs.
So,
this is not going to produce a drastic income shock in 1995.

-12-

11/15/94

MS. MINEHAN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Mike, I want to ask you a question about the
projection for the automobile market, which in the Greenbook is
peaking this quarter at about 15-1/2 million light vehicles--cars and
trucks--and then declining very modestly, almost trivially. In the
Greenbook, short-term interest rates are up 150 basis points more. In
addition, it is been a notable feature of this episode, I think, that
auto loan rates have gone up only about half--or less--as much as
market rates. The first part of the question has to do with what this
implies about the future of auto loan rates and for the responsiveness
of purchases to auto loan rates. Furthermore, as I look at the real
disposable income forecast, it is also peaking this quarter. Then, in
the first three quarters of 1995, while the auto industry is barely
showing a dent in sales, real disposable income growth rates are going
to 2.2, 0.9, and 1.7 percent. The question is how do you square that
circle? What's going on with autos in this forecast?

road.

MR. PRELL.
[Laughter]
MR. BLINDER.

I think we have a forecast that is middle-of-theThat's the question; why is it in the middle!

MR. PRELL. A view that is certainly held in the industry is
that there is considerable pent-up demand that could buoy sales of
automobiles and light trucks but such demand really has not been fully
seen yet because of capacity constraints. We think there is some
element of truth to that story. On the other hand, it is true that,
to date, we have had a very moderate response of auto loan rates to
the increase that has occurred in market rates.
Prospectively, one
would expect that gap to close, and in addition we have assumed some
further rise in market rates.
I must say that the rise in rates is
most pronounced at the very short end of the market, and the sort of
intermediate-term rates that we typically compare to auto loan rates
would not be going up as much. We get some flattening in the yield
curve here. So, in our thinking, there is some further increase in
auto loan rates, but maybe not as dramatic as one might think by
adding the rise in the funds rate to the gap that seems to exist now
between market rates and auto loan rates. Arguably, that sort of
normal interest rate response could produce a weaker automobile market
than we have. I think we are somewhere in between, but I would grant
you that the interest rate picture might constitute a downside risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just want to mention that the
scrappage model that was developed by my former colleagues at
Townsend-Greenspan is closely consistent with the numbers that we are
getting from the income model.
I meant to show it to you; I have a
copy. As Mike said, there is an implicit scrappage demand element
here that seems to be running stronger than the income flows are
declining. I understand that the short-term interest rate elasticity
of the demand for motor vehicles is something like several hundred
thousand units per percentage point in the loan rate.
MR. PRELL.
I think that's fair. One also could argue that
we do not have as large an interest rate response here as we could
have. Again, as President Boehne suggested in his original question,

-13-

11/15/94

it is possible that we have not put in enough of an increase in
interest rates to get the damping of aggregate demand in the Greenbook
forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I had Governor Blinder's question. But I had
another one on profits. You have a very sharp deceleration in profit
growth in the forecast, and I have a cause and effect question about
that. The cause question is whether the deceleration is due to a
narrowing of margins. You were mentioning earlier your perception of
the PPI and the changes there. Secondly, on the effects side, I am
surprised that given a very sharp deceleration in the outlook for
profits, you have real business fixed investment holding up as well as
it is at very high levels. Could you also give me on the effects side
your perception of what this means for equity markets?
MR. PRELL. Equity markets clearly have been buoyed, in the
face of rising bond yields this year, by surprisingly favorable
earnings reports. Our anticipation would be that those reports will
not be pleasant surprises in 1995. That suggests some vulnerability
to the stock market, at least in the early part of the year before the
significant bond market rally that we anticipate occurs. This pattern
of flattening profits and diminishing profit share is quite consistent
with the cyclical pattern of profits moving with the acceleration and
deceleration of output--moving with the growth of productivity in a
sense. As we go forward, as was noted earlier, we do have a
considerable slackening in productivity. We see some pressure coming,
as wages accelerate and productivity flattens out, toward certainly
weakening profit margins--maybe not a pronounced plunge but some
pressure on them.
MR. LINDSEY.

And the effect on investment?

MR. PRELL. We think that investment has been benefiting to
some degree from strong profitability and ample cash flows. As we go
forward, cash flow does flatten out. We do get a growing nonfinancial
corporate financing gap, and we do see that as an element that will be
damping business fixed investment. Recall that you are probably
looking at real numbers that are inflated to some degree by the
computer deflator. You get rapid growth in real computer purchases
with a zero nominal increase. That's basically what we have in our
forecast for the next two years. We still think this is a climate in
which business investment in computers will be fairly robust. On the
nonresidential structure side, we anticipate a pretty solid uptrend.
There are lags in this process. Permits have been rising noticeably
recently. We think the uptrend at this point is unlikely to be
reversed in the near term by the further rise in interest rates.
That's giving some underpinnings to this advance, and BFI along with
exports are a couple of the sectors against which we are working in
reducing the growth of other elements of private domestic demand.
looking
between
outlays
It is a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You will also remember that you are
at outlays, not appropriations. The relationship is closer
cash flow or profit margins and appropriations. You can view
as sort of a distributed lag against the appropriations data.
quite considerable lag.

11/15/94

-14-

MR. LINDSEY.

So that would begin with 1997?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Mike, as I recall when the household survey was
changed by the Labor Department, a lot of people anticipated that at
some point there would be a significant bump up in the unemployment
rate, which has not materialized. Is that simply because it has been
swamped by employment gains or what is the explanation for that?
MR. PRELL. In all likelihood, the parallel survey that was
conducted prior to the first of this year misled the Labor Department.
It showed that the unemployment rate would be 1/2 percentage point
higher with the new survey. The evidence from the survey that was
conducted afterwards using the old relationships to other series such
as the unemployment insurance data and payroll employment series
suggests that somehow or other that parallel survey was misleading-perhaps a fluke statistically--and that the gap between the old and
the new series is probably very small, maybe no more than .1 with
another upward estimate of .1 for the change in census population
controls.
MR. STERN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
Chairman McDonough, did you have a question?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Vice

No questions.
Do you want to start our tour de

table?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Whenever you are ready.
You can start off.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Let me begin, Mr. Chairman, with
just a brief remark about the goings on in the Second District.
The
New York State economy is continuing to grow but at a slightly slower
rate than that of the nation. The major source of strength is the
consumer. Retail sales have been strong and the sales of existing
houses have been quite high. Needless to say, there is great
uncertainty about the fiscal future of the state. The new governor
inherits a $4 billion hole in a 1995 budget of $34 billion, but he
continues to promise to cut taxes. New York City dwellers wonder
about how well the city will fare given the dynamics of the recent
campaign. So, I think any investment decisions in which the state tax
burden is an issue will almost certainly be put on hold.
The banks in the District are lending very aggressively, and
that seems to reflect a combination of two things. Regional banks
both inside and outside the Second District seem to be trying to
increase market share. Secondly, the money center banks that in some
cases have had a considerable reduction, modest in others, of their
trading income seem to be somewhat more aggressive in lending in order
to improve their earnings. The spreads are sufficiently low now that
it is not clear to me that they are getting an adequate return on
capital from such activity. There is no question in my view that

11/15/94

-15-

their lending standards, as evidenced by the covenants being required
of their borrowers, are slipping excessively.
Switching to the national economy, the question we have been
asking ourselves is:
What do we know that we didn't know at the last
meeting of this Committee? Well, the first thing we know is that
current and recent GDP and employment growth are even stronger than my
colleagues at the New York Bank and I thought would be the case at the
time of the last meeting. That is the case both as regards the third
quarter, which came in stronger, and our view of the current quarter,
which we have ratcheted up even more. Second, we believe that even if
inventory investment slows enough so that it becomes a modest drag on
the economy, real growth will stay above 3 percent through most of
1995.
We do not have growth slowing in 1995 and 1996 as much as the
Greenbook does. Third, the interest-sensitive areas are in fact major
contributors to growth and show very little response to higher
interest rates, even though one must state, of course, that the full
effect of the tightening to date has not yet been felt. Automobile
sales are strong, and if General Motors could straighten out some of
its production problems, they would be even stronger. Housing is
robust. The fourth thing we think we know now that we didn't know
then is that the surge in average hourly earnings in October of 0.7
percent is not traceable to unusual factors. The Bureau of Labor
Statistics' announcement of a pending major upward revision in payroll
employment means that the help that we thought we would get from
productivity is much lower, causing an upward revision in the trend of
labor costs. Fifth, even though medical costs were beginning to be
better behaved before the health care debate of the last 18 months, we
do not think that the improvement in medical costs and therefore the
cost of benefits to employers will continue to be a help in
controlling inflation. Sixth, the rate of unemployment in our view is
below the NAIRU, which we think is 6 percent, give or take 0.1. We
could be wrong. Since unemployment is now below 6 percent and the CPI
is rather well behaved, the question could be asked, is God kinder and
has the NAIRU become lower? We don't think so. History in the late
1970s and in the late 1980s gives us a lesson, we believe. At those
times there was hope that the NAIRU would come down. Certainly in the
late 1980s it was thought that it would come down somewhere within a
range of 5 to 5-1/2 percent. Unfortunately. those hopes turned out to
be ill founded. I think that what was overlooked is that monetary
policy works with a considerable lag and inflation, when it starts,
doesn't leap out of its cave; it starts rather slowly and almost
imperceptibly.
In the meantime, have the financial markets given us any new
information? The first thing that I think we should all pay no
attention to is the zigs and zags of the financial markets from one
day to the next as they absorb the most recent data and as 35-year old
bond dealers make profound remarks to the media. What I think the
market is telling us is that inflationary expectations are high and
that our tightening to date has not reduced those expectations. One
can look at a variety of places on the yield curve to measure
inflationary expectations or look at consumer surveys and so on. We
find the spread between 3-year and 1-year Treasuries a very helpful
indicator in large part because it covers just the period during which
monetary policy should have its effect initially on inflationary
expectations. That spread has jumped around because of the volatility
of markets this year, but on average it has stayed quite steadily

-16-

11/15/94

around 85 basis points despite the choppiness. It has not improved;
it has not narrowed as a result of the tightening since the 4th of
February.
I suppose I should really stop there, but I think that the
Greenbook and Mike's presentation place the stance of monetary policy
rather front and center. At the last meeting, we decided that it was
appropriate to have an asymmetric directive, which the world will know
about this Friday. That meant that we were ready during the
intermeeting period, when we didn't know all those new things that we
think we now know, to increase the fed funds rate and perhaps the
discount rate by 50 basis points. We think that because of all the
additional information available since the last meeting, such a move
would no longer be adequate. It could in fact increase inflationary
expectations not because young bond dealers would raise questions, but
because sensible people could question the resoluteness of this
Committee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, New England continues to recover
gradually. But there is a distinction to be drawn between the
incoming labor market data and other indicators, so I'll try to frame
my comments about New England along those two lines. Unlike most of
the rest of the country, New England has not yet recovered the jobs
lost in the last recession and is not expected to do so until late
1998 at best. There is a continued lull in growth that I commented on
at the last meeting, and it is hardly as welcome in New England as it
might be for the country as a whole. Payroll employment declined in
five of the six New England states in September, putting the region's
establishment job count slightly below its July level. But it is
still nearly 2 percent over a year earlier. Massachusetts and New
Hampshire continue to reflect the strongest growth rates among the six
states, and Connecticut still bumps along on the bottom. The
September job decline for the region was concentrated in manufacturing
unfortunately, but all the major industry categories except
construction and government recorded declines. Unemployment rose
noticeably in the region in October, also in contrast to the national
scene. Prices and wages seem to be rising somewhat more slowly in the
region than in the nation, and the residential real estate markets are
definitely slowing.
To round out this rather downbeat picture, trends in defenserelated business also show deterioration relative to the national
picture. For example, prime defense contract awards to New England
companies during the first half of 1994 were lower than at any time
since 1980 and 35 percent below their 1989 peak. Defense-related
employment continues to decline and in some states the decline is
nearly twice the national pace and probably accounts for a healthy
share of the manufacturing job losses I noted earlier.
Moving from the labor market data to other indicators,
however, consumer confidence, help wanted advertising, and retail
sales all show continued improvement in New England. Retailers
contacted for the Beigebook, especially those selling hard goods, were
upbeat about recent activity and the near-term outlook. I must admit
that every business group I meet with seems to be much more positive
than the incoming labor data would make me believe. More than 50

11/15/94

-17-

percent of any group I have talked to in the past month or two are
contemplating hiring people over the next 12 months and out into the
future; they are seeing escalating input prices and are seriously
considering raising prices in response to these escalating prices,
probably along the lines of the January price increases that were
mentioned in the Greenbook.
In sum, New England faces considerable sectoral challenges-defense, the computer industry, health care--which tend to drag down
the data. But there are sources of growth and ebullience emerging.
On the national scene, we agree with the Greenbook's
inference that the economic expansion has overshot. We expect
employment costs as measured by the ECI to turn up soon, and we agree
that near-term inflation prospects are not optimal.
I've covered our
concerns about the Greenbook in the questions that I had for Mike, but
overall we don't find a lot to complain about. We seem to be slightly
further behind the curve than I would have liked at this point and the
longer we wait and fail to slow the economy, the greater the chance
that rates will need to be significantly higher.
If we don't increase
rates at this meeting, I see a real chance of causing the boom-bust
cycle that we have been trying to avoid. I think the risks are on the
up side, and I think we have to move sharply and fast to curb those
risks.
I'm in agreement with President McDonough that that move
should take place at this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I have been reporting for
several meetings now, the Southeast economy is sustaining a broadbased expansion, although we have seen a little slowing of growth
recently. There really hasn't been very much change in the situation
in the Sixth District since the last meeting, so I'm not going to
repeat a lot of the detail that I have given at the last couple of
meetings. Let me hit just a couple of highlights.
Retail sales rebounded in October after a somewhat lower
September. Retailers are expecting strong increases, in some cases
even record increases, in sales over the holidays. According to our
latest manufacturing survey, activity was not quite as robust in
October, but an increasing proportion of respondents expect production
and shipments to be higher six months out. Single-family home sales
slowed in most of the District last month, dropping below strong
On the other hand, multifamily real estate
levels seen a year ago.
markets continue to improve throughout the District, and that has been
going on for a while. Commercial real estate markets clearly have hit
bottom and are beginning to move up. We are beginning to hear some
reports of speculative building in that sector, particularly in
Atlanta. Bank loans overall are growing modestly for the first time
this year, although I find it interesting that consumer loans are flat
in the District. Employment growth picked up a little in the third
quarter with services, trade, construction, and durables manufacturing
showing the best gains. More reports of wage and price pressures are
coming in than before. The wage pressures are concentrated for the
most part in a few localities and in a few areas. Respondents in our
manufacturing survey are reporting pressures on prices of inputs and
finished goods, and they are expecting to be able to pass those
through later on. Again, although retailers have held the line so

11/15/94

-18-

far, prices are expected to increase as new shipments come in after
the first of the year.
In sum, the situation in the Sixth District is not very
different from what it was at the time of the September meeting.
There is momentum and the expansion is moving along at a quite good
and sustainable level.
Now with respect to the national economy, I must say that I
was quite surprised at the extent of tightening assumed in the
Greenbook and the resultant low level of GDP growth for three or four
quarters in the range of 1 to 1.8 percent. As President Boehne
indicated, I think this is flirting with recession even in the absence
of shocks to the economy. There is very little margin for error. In
the short term, our forecast does show the economy starting to
decelerate a little sooner than the Greenbook, but in the longer term
even though we have some deceleration, we show stronger growth with
lower unemployment and a somewhat higher inflation rate. I think that
it is going to take less tightening than envisioned in the Greenbook
to cause inflation in the current expansion to peak at a level that is
well below the one that we had in the last cycle. Our forecast
assumes that a rise in inflation can be viewed as a cyclical
phenomenon and not necessarily the start of a trend. But that being
said, our view is a little more optimistic and it may not be the
correct view; it may be unrealistic. The risk, in my judgment, is on
the up side, and we need to remain vigilant to inflation. I think
that the cost of underestimating price pressures can be very high.
Perhaps I've tipped my hand as to what I would want to do, so I won't
go any further at this point. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Dallas District continues to
show moderate to strong growth across the board. Virtually every
sector seems to be expanding with the exception of livestock
production. At our board of directors meeting last Thursday, the
reports were uniformly upbeat. Every region within the District
reported positive news. The only negative reports were scattered
slowdowns in single-family housing construction, but even these
reports noted strong gains in other construction activity such as
apartment, shopping center, and industrial construction. Our
Beigebook contacts and numerous other reports from around the District
noted a significant boost in both price and wage pressures over the
last several weeks. This represents a sea change from previous
reports, and if this is a start of a new trend, it implies serious
consequences for monetary policy. More and more industries are
reporting reaching or approaching capacity limitations as well as a
newfound ability to pass on some of their higher input costs to the
next stage of production or consumption.
The national economy, as best as we can tell, is showing the
same early signs of overheating as the Eleventh District. Various
resource constraints rather than demand conditions seem to be the
major factor determining the growth of output. Although the
statistical measures of price and wage inflation have yet to show an
upward trend, we can't help but notice that the Beigebook reports from
around the nation indicate a pickup in price and wage pressures that
may suggest a red alert for the Federal Reserve. As I look at the

11/15/94

-19-

national economy, the Greenbook seems to have the current state of
affairs about right, but I expect that the staff forecast may have
underestimated the strong forward momentum in the economy as we go
into 1995. The risks to the forecast both with respect to growth and
to inflationary pressures seem to be that we have underestimated the
underlying strength of the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the economic recovery in California
appears to be taking hold while conditions in the rest of the District
generally remain strong. Abstracting from month-to-month volatility,
the California unemployment rate has fallen about 1 percentage point
since the first quarter of the year, although it remains about 2
percentage points above the national rate. In the rest of the
District, state employment growth has outpaced the national rate in
Arizona, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and Utah. Contacts in District states
other than California and Hawaii generally indicate that regional
wages are accelerating. Labor markets are regarded as especially
tight for construction workers, computer programmers, as well as
banking and retail sales personnel. Consumer prices have been fairly
weak in California in large part because of weak housing prices. More
recently, housing sales in the state have picked up noticeably, and
many of our contacts expect a pickup in housing cost inflation.
Turning to the national economy, real GDP growth has
continued to be surprisingly strong, showing no signs so far of
falling below the potential rate of growth. As a result, as already
has been mentioned, tight labor and product markets have become
noticeably tighter since our last meeting. Moreover, at present
levels of interest rates, I would expect to see further robust
economic growth and declines in the unemployment rate in the remainder
of this year and in 1995. Under these circumstances, it has become
increasingly clear that inflation would be on an upward trajectory in
the years ahead without a substantially tighter stance of policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District remains strong,
and the strength is spread generally across all our states. Activity
is robust in most of our key industries, although there may be some
signs of a slowdown in single-family housing; that has yet to be
determined. Our farm income has weakened in 1994. The current data
show that the number of payroll jobs in the District increased by
about 3 percent in September over a year earlier, about the same as
the nation. I should note, though, that New Mexico had job growth in
the neighborhood of 5 percent and only Kansas and Wyoming added jobs
at a rate less than the nation, although not a whole lot less.
Manufacturing continues to improve with most of the strength in the
durable goods industry. The District's key automobile assembly plants
have completed their model changeovers. They have told us that they
expect gradually restored production toward capacity levels. In
general aviation, aircraft production, another of our key durable
goods industries, improved in the third quarter with billings up
significantly over the second quarter and over a year ago. Energy
activity improved just slightly in October, but farm income is down
due to poor livestock prices, and that will be offset just slightly by
the record harvest that we expect or are having. As we have been

11/15/94

-20-

seeing for the past few months, construction remains robust across the
District. But as I said, there are some signs of slowdown in the
housing permits area. Anecdotal reports point to some shortages in
labor, and that includes unskilled labor in our area. Upward pressure
on wages appears to be increasing. Loan growth in our District
continues to be strong although slightly less than last summer; it was
extremely robust last summer.
Turning to the national economy, my view is that the economy
has considerable momentum. Domestic spending remains strong; export
growth is trending upward. With the exception of housing, it is
difficult to see any immediate signs of a slowdown. Indeed, activity
appears to be picking up in several industries, particularly
manufacturing. At current interest rates, I would expect real GDP
growth to remain above potential for at least the next three quarters.
As a result, with the economy already at more than full employment, an
upturn in inflation seems inevitable. We already are seeing
inflationary pressures, not just at the early stages of production but
at the final stages as well. As Bill McDonough said, inflation starts
out very slowly, and that is what we are seeing. On a year-over-year
basis, virtually all the price indices as well as the employment cost
index and average hourly earnings have either bottomed out or are
showing increases in recent months. So, it seems to me that the issue
before us now is not whether inflation will be picking up, but how
much and over what time horizon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Anecdotal reports suggest that the Philadelphia
District is catching up to some extent with the rest of the nation.
Manufacturing in particular is showing strength and the outlook is
positive. Steel and auto products are notably brisk. Retailers
generally report a pickup in sales, especially in apparel and
appliances, and the mood is upbeat about holiday sales. Realtors say
home sales are strong in the Philadelphia area but uneven in the rest
of the District. The supply of homes is high, however, and selling
prices have been steady. Commercial real estate activity varies a
great deal around the District from weak in south Jersey to strong in
some parts of central Pennsylvania. There is a pickup in the
Philadelphia area, especially in the Pennsylvania suburbs. Lending
activity is on an upswing around most of the District and lending
terms are easing, but I don't think we ought to be surprised at that;
that's typical. Bad loans are made in good times, and there is a
bandwagon effect that human nature just cannot resist despite changes
in legislation, better supervision, and so forth. There are no
general signs of price pressures, although I hear more reports about
tightness in skilled labor markets and the demand for professionaltype jobs. Some manufacturers seem more confident about selected
price increases sticking, but most still talk about tough competition
holding prices down. All in all, the District economy is less of a
laggard and the tone is better, although feelings of insecurity are
just below the surface and sometimes on the surface, depending on who
is doing the talking.
At the national level, we are seeing what we have seen
before. Once the economy gets going, we tend to underestimate the
strength of its forward momentum and the level of interest rates
needed to achieve moderate growth with subdued inflation. Now

-21-

11/15/94

fortunately, if we have fallen behind the curve, we are not all that
far behind. With timely actions going forward, we have a good chance
of keeping inflationary pressures in check and the expansion on track.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, my comments will be very similar
to many of the others you have heard already. With respect to the
District, last week I attended a meeting of leading business people in
Virginia who advise the governor on revenue estimates. This group
includes the CEOs of most of the state's large corporations--a couple
of major railroads, a major aluminum producer with worldwide
operations, some banks, a big shipbuilder, and a big trucking company.
I was really struck by the uniformly bullish commentary at that
meeting, not only about the state economy but about regional and
national economic prospects as well. Several of these people said
explicitly that they were planning major capital outlays in the near
future based on these expectations. A number of them said explicitly
that they thought the consensus national economic forecast, which had
been summarized for them at this meeting as calling for GDP growth of
It was a very
about 2-1/2 percent next year, might be too low.
bullish meeting.
The tone of our board meeting in Richmond last Thursday was
similar. All of the directors were optimistic about conditions both
in their local areas and in their respective businesses. Consumer
spending appears to be especially robust in our region. Retailers are
expecting a good Christmas. There is what I would describe as a
gradual revival of commercial construction in the District. The main
negative factor is still the reduction in defense expenditures. But
even places like Norfolk, Virginia, and Charleston, South Carolina,
where there had been projections of a big negative impact, are not
seeing that--I guess because of the strength of the general economy.
In spite of this strong growth, we have seen only scattered reports of
actual price increases for final goods and services in recent weeks at
least.
But a number of our directors at the meeting last week,
especially those who have contacts in the manufacturing sector, said
they expected a number of their suppliers to put price increases in
place, perhaps fairly substantial increases, at the end of the year.
Several of them said they would expect to pass at least some of these
increases along in their own prices.
Nationally, I thought the staff did a very fine job of sizing
up the current situation in this month's Greenbook.
I guess it is
fair to say that Mike and his people are still calling for a fairly
soft landing. I think that's appropriate, but I would make three
points. First, I think it is worth noting that the landing in this
Greenbook seems to me to be less soft than that in the September
Greenbook, which if I remember correctly was slightly less soft than
that in August. I think there is a lesson for us somewhere in this
pattern. As I recall, the Greenbook states explicitly at one point
that the risk of error is on the up side toward the situation where we
move back into some kind of boom-bust pattern; that's something we
have seen so often in earlier postwar cycles. The second point I
would make about the Greenbook is that, as you know, the current
projection is predicated on a significant further move toward
restraint in monetary policy over the next several months. Finally,
even with this further tightening, the Greenbook is still calling for

11/15/94

-22-

a 3 percent inflation rate; we are not really getting any reduction in
inflation. So even with this outcome, we are still going to be some
distance from full price stability.
On the inflation score, I think it is fair to say that many
business people with whom I have contact and probably more financial
market people now expect a moderate increase in the inflation rate
next year to about 3-1/2 percent. I've spoken to a number of people
who are expecting something more. I would say that this increase in
inflation expectations is clearly at least part of the explanation of
what is going on in bond markets and foreign exchange markets. The
behavior in these markets suggests to me that we probably have lost
some additional credibility over the last several weeks. I agree with
Bill and Cathy and others who have said that we are in a position now
where we need to make another decisive move in order to shore up our
credibility and convince the public that we are still serious about
our goals.
In this regard, Mr. Chairman, I would like to repeat
something I said at the September meeting. I think that inflation
expectations currently are especially sensitive to incoming short-run
economic data and to indications of monetary and other economic policy
changes precisely because we don't really have a clear, step-by-step
strategy to meet our longer-run goals. I think we would be well
served by explicit multiyear inflation targets that we would announce
publicly. If we took this approach, I think it would relieve some of
the pressure on us, in a situation like the current one, to make a
strong move to reinforce and shore up our credibility. If we were to
do something like this, we obviously would need to talk about it a
bit. But I think it would increase our operational flexibility in the
short run, and it would reduce the risk that at some point we might do
some damage to the economic expansion. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard to the District economy, there is
not a lot new to report; it remains strong. Manufacturing is robust.
Materials prices are going up. Employment is high throughout the
District. In some of the metropolitan areas, the reports we are
getting are that everybody who wants to work is working. What seems
to be restraining some further job growth in those areas is housing
shortages; businesses would attract more labor from the rural areas in
the region or maybe from outside the District, but there is no housing
in some of these places. Despite that, there are no widespread
reports of wage or price pressures, at the retail level at least.
What wage pressures there are seem to be concentrated mostly at the
lower end of the pay scales. I think that is because of the
difficulty of retaining workers there; they have so many easy
opportunities to move out and up. Elsewhere in the District, the
agricultural situation is mixed. It is a good year for crops, though
prices are not entirely favorable. It has been tough in the livestock
industry at least outside the dairy sector. Since they are coming off
about 7 good years, I'm not sure there are any real problems emerging
there. We did hear some reports from our Advisory Council members
about interest rates starting to bite in the housing and furniture
markets. It is hard to know exactly what to make of that in light of
the national statistics that seem better. But however that may be, it
is clear that the paper industry has bounced back.

11/15/94

With regard to the national economy, I don't have a lot to
add to what has already been said. When we go through our translation
process that takes the labor market data, in this case for October,
and turns them into a GDP estimate for the fourth quarter, we get
about 4-1/2 percent growth in real terms at an annual rate. In some
sense, that's neither here nor there, of course. It's history, but it
does tell us something about the underlying momentum of the economy,
which I do think is quite positive and quite strong. There is always
the danger of extrapolating the latest reading. On the other hand, as
several people have already commented, it seems to me our experience
over the years has been that once momentum starts to build in terms of
real growth, it tends to go on for quite some time and it probably
takes more restraint than we usually anticipate, at least early in the
game, to avoid an acceleration of inflation or indeed to make progress
in reducing the rate of inflation.
Finally, let me comment on the suggestion
just made. I may come out at a somewhat different
but I do think that the suggestion to consider the
longer-run inflation targets may be a constructive
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

that Al Broaddus
place than he did,
implications of
one.

That's a legislative issue.

MR. STERN. Well, you certainly wouldn't want to do it
without considerable political support. I agree with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. National economic activity is much stronger than
earlier forecasts anticipated. Employment grew twice as fast as the
labor force from January to October. There was a large rise in hours
worked in both September and October, including an extraordinary
amount of overtime. Wage pressures are building. Average hourly
earnings surged in October; for the past four months, this measure of
wages has risen at a 4.4 percent annual rate, up sharply from only 1.3
percent in the first five months of 1994.
Such reflections of tight
labor market conditions are signs of prospective inflationary
pressures.
Strong credit demands also reveal the strength of economic
activity and nominal spending. Growth in business loans at commercial
banks nationwide and in the Eighth District has been rapid throughout
this year. Since spring, banks have reduced their holdings of
securities and have bid aggressively for time deposits to accommodate
loan demand. Nonfinancial firms have also increased issuance of
commercial paper since September, corroborating the increased demand
for credit by businesses. The large inventory accumulation in the
second quarter was followed by a larger accumulation in the third
quarter. Those forecasters who had expected a substantial slowing in
real growth following a large buildup in inventories in the second
quarter seem to have guessed wrong. Nevertheless, inventory-to-sales
ratios remain very low by historical comparisons, so low in fact that
many firms are concerned about both deteriorating vendor performance
and the prospect of continued acceleration in sensitive materials
prices.
My contacts in the Eighth District indicate that increases in
inventories have largely been planned in anticipation of strong sales,

-24-

11/15/94

including retailers who ended the last Christmas shopping season with
largely empty shelves.
Overall, employment in the Eighth District
remains robust and the District unemployment rate hovers near its
lowest levels since August 1974.
This September, the District
unemployment rate was 4.7 percent compared with the 5.8 percent rate
for the nation in October. In recent contacts with business
executives and directors in the Eighth District, the consensus was
that wage pressures are building, especially for unskilled workers and
construction workers. I have been hearing these reports and have
mentioned them here for some time, but I'm hearing more and more
reports of actual increases in wages.
Furthermore, contacts report
price pressures from rising costs of raw materials from both domestic
Prices of imported goods, which had been an
and foreign sources.
important factor in holding down inflation until recently, rose at a
6.9 percent annual rate in the past two quarters after falling over
the previous two quarters.
Finally, looking ahead, I am troubled by the Greenbook
forecast, which shows that among G-7 countries only Italy and the
United Kingdom have a higher inflation outlook for 1996 than the
United States. Thus, it is not surprising that we seem to lack
credibility with respect to price stability, and this is indeed costly
in current circumstances. Picking up on what Al Broaddus said, I feel
that it may be time for us to consider setting a specific inflation
I think, and this point was
target that looks out into the future.
made as well, that it could make our job considerably easier in
circumstances like the present--with upward cyclical inflationary
pressures--if people were willing to look out to a longer-range target
and that added to credibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, economic activity on balance in
the Seventh District appears to be a bit stronger than at the time of
our September meeting. Retail sales and manufacturing output have
strengthened, and overall housing activity through September held up
better than might have been expected given the rise in mortgage
interest rates. One cautionary note is that new single-family home
sales in the Midwest have been weaker than national trends. Contacts
in the manufacturing sector continue to report robust activity, and
several are now beginning to report gains from higher levels of
exports.
Looking ahead to next year, a number of manufacturers
anticipate that growth will slow in their domestic markets, but this
slowdown could be offset by continuing increases in exports.
Similar
to the Board staff, we estimate that the auto sector will contribute
about 1/2 percentage point to real GDP growth in the current quarter,
despite the fact that the auto industry is still struggling to address
several model changeover and parts shortage problems. We also expect
about the same contribution to real GDP growth in the first quarter of
1995.
Indicators of consumer activity in the District are quite
robust. Regional income growth has been above the national average.
Retail sales have improved, with sales in Michigan and Wisconsin up
more than 12 percent in the third quarter, which is well above the
7-1/2 percent national figure. More recent reports from two major
retail chains indicate that sales in early November were very good and
that it would not be a surprise if holiday sales exceeded earlier

11/15/94

-25-

expectations. In general, retailers throughout the District are quite
optimistic about the holiday season and have been adding to
inventories. Consumer confidence remains high and well above the
national average, but it has flattened out in recent months due to a
decline in the expectations component.
In the agricultural sector, harvests of corn and soybeans
will set new records in the District and the nation. Cattle and hog
supplies are also running at historically high levels. These
developments have led to lower prices to date, and prices are expected
to remain low throughout 1995 in those areas. The banner corn and
soybean harvests have taxed the capacity of the grain storage and
transportation facilities, but these bottlenecks, which are common in
years of big crops, are already starting to ease.
Examples of Seventh District industries operating at or near
capacity are numerous, including motor vehicles, steel, appliances,
construction, agricultural equipment, office furniture, and railroad
car loadings. Steel price increases appear to be in the 6 to 8
percent range, and significant increases are reported for other
commodities such as chemicals and paper products. Although
manufacturers continue to resist supplier price hikes, conditions seem
generally more conducive to such increases. Some manufacturers can
offset these increases with productivity improvements; others cannot
and will increase prices of their products to consumers.
In almost
District employment growth has been quite good.
all of our states, unemployment rates are below the national average,
including a 5.1 percent rate in Michigan after many years of
significantly higher unemployment rates in that state. We are
increasingly hearing of labor shortages at the low and high ends of
the skills' spectrum from retailers having difficulty filling entrylevel positions to manufacturers reporting a futile search for
engineers and designers. I visited Detroit recently, and it is clear
that the help wanted signs are out in Detroit. I learned that one
large retailer is trying to attract new employees by putting help
wanted advertisings in the monthly bills that they send to their
customers. Despite these shortages, few manufacturers or retailers
have reported any significant upward pressure on wages of permanent
positions. However, as I mentioned at the last meeting, temporary
help firms have reported higher wage increases of about 5 percent.
On balance, Mr. Chairman, we concur with the Greenbook
assessment that the economy is now past the point of full
noninflationary utilization of productive resources.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to the
national picture, I'd like to associate my comments with the very
eloquent analysis of President McDonough; he was right on target.
With regard to the staff forecast, I would only add the issue of
timing. We do not know in what quarter the economy will slow down,
but we do know that it will slow down. I think the point about
forecasting increasingly hard landings is a good lesson for us. As a
side note on hard landings, if anyone really wants to experience a
[Laughter]
hard landing I recommend Rumanian Air.

-26-

11/15/94

At the last meeting, I set aside my normal reservations and
favored an asymmetric directive because I perceived the possible need
for foreign exchange intervention.
I specifically recommended that,
if we had that intervention, it be accompanied at that time by a 50
basis point increase in rates. Frankly, I think that had we done that
at the time, the move would have been both appropriate and, I would
add, sufficient. Why did we have the intervention? It wasn't because
of volatility or disorderly markets.
It wasn't a signal of policy
change at the time. The word that was most commonly used was a
"bridge." A bridge to what? At the time, cynics in the market and a
few of the press reports guessed it was a bridge to the election.
I
hope and trust that that was not the case, and no one knew what the
outcome would be anyway. I think the other option was that it was a
bridge to what we are about to do today. If so, if we are bridging to
a 50 basis point move, which everyone anticipates, then it would be
like building a bridge to the middle of the river, which is actually
another thing they do in Rumania, [Laughter] but so much for that.
The key is that I think markets will probably think we are all wet if
we do. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN.

Oh heavens!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You are in great shape today!

MR. LINDSEY. That is what happens when you are awakened at
2:00 and 4:00 in the morning by a one-year old! The other part of my
trip, I had both our bureaucracy and the Rumanian bureaucracy prepare
a serendipitous schedule. The first part of the week I was in Paris
and I was able to go on from there after
meetings.
I think
both in
meetings and also in private meetings I had with
and with folks at
there was a strong sense that U.S. policy is behind the
curve.
I can only second what Peter mentioned about the perception
that we are behind and that therefore a big increase would be coming.
Of course, diplomats always talk about it a little circumspectly. My
favorite description was by one of the Europeans that monetary policy
was behind the curve in non-European OECD economies.
[Laughter]
I
don't think they were talking about the Australians and New
Zealanders, but here we are.
The bottom line is that while I
certainly do not believe in the tail wagging the dog, and I certainly
don't think that foreign exchange concerns should drive our long-run
policy, I do think that given what the folks around the table have
said about the strength of the economy, the issue is not whether to
move but when. Frankly, I think our intervention really boxed us in a
corner, and I don't think that the 50 basis point option is still
there. So, I would join others in recommending that we do something
more than that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook outlook for
dramatically increased short-term rates and a marked slowing in the
rate of economic growth accompanied by rising inflation and increased
unemployment is not a particularly appealing one. It would be much
more attractive if the inflation projection was one that reflected
An even more unpleasant vision
greater progress toward stable prices.
is the one that would emerge if further significant restraint were not
put in place.
In spite of recent declines in consumer confidence as

11/15/94

-27-

measured by the Michigan survey, consumer confidence remains at a high
level and may be further enhanced by the election results.
I suspect
that the current momentum in the economy may be significantly stronger
than previously expected and may in fact produce a stronger GDP
performance in 1995 than that projected in the Greenbook. It is hard
for me to accept the idea that we can't get an inflation rate
significantly below 3 percent. If the monetary policy inherent in the
Greenbook forecast can't produce a better result, then perhaps we
should be considering monetary policy alternatives that would make
better progress toward stable prices even at the short-term cost of
unemployment marginally above the NAIRU. The signal effect of greater
restraint may in fact wring out some of the inflation expectations in
the markets, which are inherent in current bond prices.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me the situation is
unequivocal. At this point in the morning, I have very little to add
that's useful. Virtually every bit of information that we have gotten
and certainly the reports around the table this morning have indicated
that we have an extremely strong expansion. It may be accelerating.
I don't expect this, but if somehow nothing were done, I think we
probably could get rather quickly into a runaway boom situation. The
inflation teakettle isn't whistling yet, but I think the temperature
inside of it is rising rather markedly. There is no need to go back
over any data; we are all familiar with them. As far as I'm
concerned, the only question before the house is in the next part of
the meeting. That is, what is the best way to deal with this
situation?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. The momentum of the real economy
certainly seems to be stronger in all sectors than was anticipated
earlier. I think that the revisions we have seen recently in a number
of forecasts and, for example, the recent benchmark revision in the
employment level, demonstrate that there was more momentum than we
earlier thought. This may well carry the economy forward at an even
stronger pace than we had anticipated. It is carrying forward into
consumer confidence. All of the spending indicators are showing
considerable strength, even housing. We would have expected more of a
downturn than we have seen in the interest-sensitive parts of the
economy. The outlook in industrial production is for continued
strength. Autos and light trucks alone probably will sustain us for a
while. The real economy is showing more strength than we had
predicted a couple of meetings ago; essentially, the second-half
slowdown that was anticipated never occurred.
Turning to the financial markets, I think that they generally
are functioning quite well; the currency markets may be a bit hard to
read. We should look to some of the lessons that the financial
markets are trying to suggest to us. Even though the lecturing that
we are getting is coming from 35-year olds, these 35-year olds still
are voting with dollars.
I think that there is something to be
learned there. The markets are not as volatile as they were earlier
in the year. There is more depth. There are more varied expectations
on market direction and financing needs.
Some people have expressed
disappointment in the stock market, but we may well look back on this

-28-

11/15/94

in coming years as being one of the most orderly corrections that we
have seen in quite a while.
The cost of capital has increased, both
for equity and debt financing. But it does not appear to be
inhibiting investment either by households or in the business sector.
Banks are now providing capital that earlier was being provided
directly by the stock and the bond markets. It seems to me that we
have had a relatively smooth transition from credit crunch to the
direct issue market and to bank financing. The financial markets
generally are functioning quite well. The fact that we haven't had a
major accident, I think, is significant.
On the inflation side, some people have suggested that we are
getting closer to the point where we should see more increases in
final consumer prices.
But in fact, we have seen increased pressure
in the CPI for the third quarter. We are well above a 3 percent rate
at current levels, and I would hope that our goals would be better
than 3 percent. I'd associate myself with Al Broaddus' comments about
starting to look at some kind of monitoring range for inflation,
particularly one with a long-term outlook. I think that we are not
giving as clear signals as we might with respect to what we think
inflation should be.
I guess I'm getting a little tired of seeing all
these analysts say that inflation is under control when in fact it is
above 3 percent.
In sum, I think that some of the previous uncertainties that
we saw in the economy appear to have been resolved in favor of
economic strength. Productivity increases have resumed. The markets
have been reasonably steady. The elections are over except for the
State of Maryland. We still do have some downside risks.
Health
insurance still is going to be an uncertainty. I suspect the
solutions are likely to change now, but the problem is still there.
I
The new Congress may yet create unimagined new challenges for us.
think we are going to have to start factoring in such things as tax
cuts and perhaps increases in defense spending. What is this going to
be doing for the Federal deficit? The monetary aggregates remain
surprisingly weak, so I count this as one of the remaining
uncertainties. I hope that productivity, efficient capacity use or
even more capacity will permit higher growth with no inflation, but I
think that's fairly wishful thinking. Perhaps the NAIRU is lower than
we had thought, but again that may well be wishful thinking. On
balance, the risk seems to be for continued economic momentum at least
in the near term. I think we'll see inflation pressures increasingly
evident.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I'll say very little about the District.
In my
District contacts, I raised two questions that I thought were of some
use in the period since the last meeting. One was about labor market
conditions and the persistent comment about shortages, tightness,
especially for unskilled, semi-skilled workers and so on. I asked
what they were doing about it, and the general response was "hiring
bonuses," with the exception of the construction industry. That
industry is willing to raise offering wages; others industries are not
going to let higher wages go into the cost structure. I asked them
how they are responding to current retention requirements and again
the answer was bonuses--one-time payments to retain workers that they
In response to a
are not willing to build into the cost structure.

11/15/94

-29-

question about the outlook for passing through cost increases to
higher prices, respondents, especially retailers and various consumer
products companies, simply said "impossible."
I noted in the
supplement to the Greenbook that the Michigan survey of consumer
sentiment indicated that household appraisals of car and appliance
buying conditions deteriorated in early November. I think that bears
watching, especially in this post-election period. Small businesses
that I asked about their outlook for the next year versus their
outlook for 1994 at this time last year were more optimistic last year
than they are this year looking a year ahead. That was before the
election. I have no idea what the election did to their optimism.
Also, the Michigan survey shows the mean and median values of expected
inflation declining over the next five years to their lowest levels
since 1990. So, we may not be as far behind the inflation psychology
curve with real people as financial market indicators would suggest.
On the national economy, as shown in the Greenbook, we have
had four good quarters averaging 4 percent growth, and I have no
reason to disagree with the staff projection that this quarter also
will have 4 percent growth. That comes after approximately eight
quarters of subpar performance. We had a rebound effect after the
Gulf war in the spring and summer of 1991, and the economy then tended
to go flat. The staff forecasts overstated the economy's growth after
that for about two years. I don't view those two years as having been
a result of the inadequacies of aggregate demand, but rather the real
shock effects of a variety of depressants in various sectors and
industries that were preventing the economy from performing very well.
Therefore, I don't view the last four or five quarters of good growth
as being the result of pump-priming stimulus to aggregate demand by
our monetary policy or fiscal policy or anything else. Rather, I see
them as the result of the dissipation of those earlier depressants.
In that sense, I view this growth in output and employment as having
been a good thing, a make-up for the earlier subpar performance.
I don't view that growth as being a precursor to future
inflation because I don't view it as having been fostered by excessive
money creation. The subject of inflation to me is still the subject
of the purchasing power of money. I don't see that the growth of
output and employment reduces the purchasing power of money. I do
think it would be helpful, as Al Broaddus was suggesting, for us to
have credible, multiyear objectives and to seek a legislative mandate
for achieving our price objectives. In part, the reason is the
problem that we now have with inflation psychology. Here is where our
own words cause us a problem. If we talk about the purchasing power
of money as having something to do with the NAIRU and potential output
or something, then I think that we have no choice but to continue
raising the funds rate and create some unemployment and some perceived
slack. The last time this Committee went through a tightening period
in 1988 and 1989, it was being guided by the opportunity cost
relationships of broad money and the P* model, which seemed to be
serving the Committee fairly well including the behavior of the stock
of money--we got about 5 percent M2 growth in that period. We don't
have that now. The Committee lost confidence in staff estimates of
the demand for money balances or the supply of things; we just didn't
know what to make of that and we all fell into a pattern of thinking
that we know a lot more about aggregate supply of goods and services
and labor and aggregate demand for labor and output and how to
influence demand for labor and output than I think we have reason to

11/15/94

-30-

know.
I don't think that we have reason to have more confidence in
our ability to know what is really going on out there in terms of
productivity, consumption, and investment patterns than we do about
money supply and money demand. There appeared since our last meeting
a very good article in Business Week magazine on this problem of the
quality of the economic statistics that we use to guide ourselves.
There was nothing new in that article for those of us in this
business, but I think it was very helpful to have that in the public
forum saying that there are a lot of very serious quality problems in
those numbers. We better be careful and not rely on them too much in
deciding what to do about monetary policy. We have been in a pattern
since last spring where every time we come back, we need another 50
basis points to get to neutral. Now the staff is at 6-1/4 percent. I
know where it is going to be in December; it will be at 6-3/4 percent
and then in February at 7-1/4 percent--just extrapolating the trend.
At some point we have to have a different rule that says, enough is
enough and let's coast for a while. I'm not soft on inflation.
I
want to go to price level stability. But I also don't want to make
the mistake of continuing to tighten too much, precipitating a
downturn because I know what will happen. This means we will go
completely the other way and set the stage for more inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Since our last meeting, the evidence has
continued to accumulate that there is enough momentum in aggregate
demand to carry the economy past potential output. We have yet to see
much slowdown in the interest-sensitive sectors, and it may well be
that easier lending terms have offset somewhat the impact of higher
interest rates. The news on the international side of yet further
upward revisions in foreign GDP growth reinforces the view that the
economy will overshoot the NAIRU with potentially inflationary
consequences. The recent decline in the dollar exacerbates this
concern, although fortunately the dollar has risen a bit against both
the mark and the yen since the Greenbook was put to bed. The amount
of slack in the economy, however it is measured, clearly has
diminished. I think that the performance of wages and prices accords
quite well with the predictions of a Phillips curve model in which the
economy is currently in the vicinity of the natural rate. So there
are few surprises there.
It is not surprising that we are seeing some
early warning signs of rising inflation, including business reports
that there will be price increases after the first of the year and
anecdotes about rising wages to retain and attract qualified
employees.
I think the staff's inflation forecast that the CPI will
rise to 3-1/2 percent in the first half of 1995 is quite reasonable
It is difficult, though, to construct a
based on historic experience.
scenario in which inflation over the next year would rise by a lot
more than the staff forecast. So, I think there is limited upside
risk of an inflation rate increase over the next year or so. The key
question, of course, is whether and how quickly this modest rise in
core inflation may become embedded in inflationary expectations,
feeding back into wage and price formation. I think there is risk
here unless aggregate demand is restrained.
Now, what concerns me most in connection with the Greenbook
forecast is that the assumed further tightening of 150 basis points
entails considerable downside risk to the economy that will be
concentrated in 1996.
In light of the current strength in the

11/15/94

-31-

interest-sensitive sectors, it is tempting to conclude that the
monetary tightening we have had so far isn't producing and will not
produce the slowdown we desire. But the time honored view among
economists is that monetary policy operates with long lags. I
consider this view to be supported by considerable empirical evidence.
If so, there is a real risk of a hard landing, instead of a soft
landing, if we are too impatient and overract. Demand may be strong
now because monetary conditions were so easy until last spring. The
tightening is really quite recent and its impact most likely has not
yet been fully felt. Indeed, as President Jordan noted in his
comments, the November Michigan survey suggests a sharp deterioration
in household appraisals of buying conditions for houses and
significant declines in willingness to use credit and savings. The
October survey suggested that some of the current strength in housing
may stem from the belief that interest rates are on the rise, so it is
better to buy now than later.
This view, namely that there remains restraint in the
pipeline, seems consistent to me with the Greenbook forecast because,
given the lags of monetary policy, the Greenbook's projected slowdown
in 1995 must primarily be related to the interest rate increases that
already have occurred, along with other factors, and can't be related
primarily to the assumed further tightening of 150 basis points. The
staff forecast implicitly assumes that we already have enough
restraint to slow growth in 1995 by enough to bring unemployment back
to the natural rate by the end of 1995. In that case, the argument
for an additional 150 basis points of restraint rests on the staff's
assumption that without that restraint, demand would rebound strongly
in 1996. Now, that view may be correct, but the logic of why there
would be this strong rebound in demand in 1996 without the 150 basis
points of additional restraint does not seem compelling to me. I
think there is a distinct possibility that that much extra restraint
would represent overkill and that the overkill would make itself felt
in 1996. In addition, I would point out that the Greenbook forecast
assumes that the tightening is going to have relatively little
additional effect on long-term rates. While I'm not a good forecaster
of movements in long-term rates, certainly that assumption has proven
incorrect thus far. I conclude that the degree of tightening assumed
in the Greenbook poses a serious risk of a hard landing in 1996,
although in the absence of some further tightening, I think there
would be an unacceptable risk that inflation would accelerate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Until about three minutes ago I thought that,
even though I was speaking last, I would have some things to say that
had not been said before. But that is less true now than it was a few
minutes ago. Let me start at the point where Janet Yellen left off.
I thought it was a remarkable feature of the Greenbook projections
that we could put in another 150 basis points of tightening at the
short end and get almost nothing--10 basis points or something like
that--at the long end. Now, that is not impossible; nobody can rule
that out. But given the history of 1994, I think it takes a certain
amount of guts to project that. I commend the staff for having that
much guts; it is more than I have. I'm not as worried about the
35-year old bond traders that Bill is worried about as I am about the
25-year old bond traders who will be on it very quickly. Furthermore,
if in fact long rates don't move at all, we won't get a lot of

11/15/94

-32-

tightening out of this additional 150 basis points. I don't doubt
that GDP, sales, etc., are growing briskly and that the level of
resource utilization, including labor utilization, is pretty near and
maybe right at or even a little beyond capacity. I also don't doubt
that growth in the second half of 1994 now looks higher than we
thought in August and certainly higher than we thought in July. So
I'm persuaded that there is a strong likelihood of a small overshoot-we may indeed already have had a small overshoot--and that probably
some more monetary tightening is indicated. Nevertheless, as we whip
ourselves up into a frenzy here, I think we should remember a few
things. The first is that the staff's 4.1 percent forecast for the
current quarter is well above the consensus, as Mike mentioned. Now
it is true, as Mike also mentioned, that the early indications for
this quarter are quite strong, but let's also remember that, as we sit
here now, we know very little about October and nothing at all about
November and December. Also, there are, as Jerry Jordan and Janet
Yellen mentioned, a few, small contra-indications--no indication that
the economy is about to slump, absolutely not--but a few contraindications.
Much more important than the next quarter is the longer-term
outlook, and that is what I really want to focus on. I am thinking
about, roughly speaking, the broad picture of the economy and monetary
policy over a four-year period comprised of the last two years and the
next two years. As Janet mentioned a few minutes ago--and as Ed
Boehne and Bob Forrestal mentioned earlier--there is a sharp tail-off
in the Greenbook forecast between now and the second or third quarters
of 1995. The real GDP growth numbers starting with the current
quarter are: 4.1, 2.5, 1.4, and 1.0 percent. Given the lags, that
does not have anything to do with any subsequent tightenings from here
forward. Therefore, it can come from only three places. It could be
factors having nothing to do with monetary policy, and that's
possible. But I think we have all agreed that there is considerable
forward momentum in this economy and, if anything is slowing it down,
it is monetary policy. I think that's a very strong consensus around
this table; and I share it. The second candidate is, of course, the
175 basis point increase that we have already put into the system and
the huge run-up in long-term rates that has come along with that.
Thirdly, something that has barely been mentioned up to now, though I
guess Janet Yellen touched on it, is the wearing off of the monetary
ease that the FOMC put into the system ending in September 1992. It
was a very substantial dose of monetary ease. That factor is
virtually ignored in all public discussions and in most of the
discussions inside the FOMC to date. But everything we know about the
effects of monetary policy says that monetary ease put into the system
in strong doses in 1991 and 1992 should have its maximum effects on
real GDP growth in 1993 and 1994--and now come the important words-and then wither away. You do not permanently raise the level of GDP
by putting the economy on a monetary high. We push it up a hill and
then it comes down of its own accord. I don't think there is much
dispute about that.
Now, there is a lot of dispute about the numbers. I had the
staff run its econometric model of the economy, the MPS model, to try
to quantify that. Nobody has to believe these numbers, but I don't
know where else to get numbers other than trying to put this policy
through an econometric model. According to our staff model, the
impact of all the changes in monetary policy from mid-1990 to date,

11/15/94

-33-

including the easings from mid-1990 to September 1992, the subsequent
period when short-term interest rates were held constant, and then the
tightening this year up to now should have done the following to GDP:
added about .7 percentage point to the 1992 growth rate; about 1-1/4
percentage points to the 1993 growth rate; almost 1-1/2 percentage
points to the 1994 growth rate; about 3/4 percentage point to the 1995
growth rate coming down the hill; and 0--coincidentally it happens to
be 0--to the 1996 growth rate. What I want to focus your attention on
is the estimate of the swing in the monetary impulse on the growth of
demand from 1994 to 1996 of about 1-1/2 percentage points.
The same model says that, if we follow the Greenbook's
recommended increase in the next few months of another 150 basis
points in the funds rate--and by the way, if long rates respond as
they historically do and not by next to nothing--then we will chip a
tiny bit off the 1995 growth rate--a very, very small amount--and
about a percentage point off the 1996 growth rate. If we add those
two together, we are talking about a swing from monetary policy from
both the end of the expansionary stimulus and the move to contraction
of about 2-1/2 percentage points, from about plus 1-1/2 percent in
1994 to about minus 1 percent in 1996. That's a big number. I think
that with all the focus on the upside risks, which are certainly
greater right now--I don't by any means see imminent risks that this
economy is about to head downhill--we should remember that we are in
this business for longer than a quarter and longer than a year. And
as we go out a couple of years into the future, there is a substantial
downside risk. At some point, all these higher interest rates are
going to hurt autos more, I think, than is indicated in the staff
forecast. They are going to hurt housing; that might be right around
the corner. Who knows? I believe they are going to put a damper on
business fixed investment, which is growing strongly throughout this
Greenbook forecast.
One last comment about stopping momentum: There is forward
momentum in this economy. It is not going to be stopped by putting a
rock in the road. I don't dispute that at all. I just want to close
by putting some perspective on what a 325 basis point increase in fed
funds within a year means--that's 175 to date and, if we do another
150 by February, that will make 325 basis points in a year. Only once
since 1984 has the Federal Reserve tightened by this much within a
year. That period, which has been discussed around this table a
couple of times, was between March 1988 and February 1989 while the
economy was in the midst of quite a large overshoot of capacity. If
you look at the previous 30 years, and leave out the very exciting
episodes between 1979 and 1982 when 325 basis points in the funds rate
was hardly worth talking about--there were many moves of 325 basis
points in that period--there are only two other episodes in the
previous 30 years from 1954 to 1984. One was in 1969 and the other
was in 1972-73, both with inflation rising considerably. As a result,
the real federal funds rate rose considerably less than 325 basis
points. But here we are talking about the vast majority of the
projected 325 basis points being on the real rate. The moral of the
story to me is that a 325 basis point swing, which is being
contemplated here, is not trivial; it is very strong medicine. It is
enough to stop an economy with considerable momentum, although there
is also an amount of momentum that even 325 basis points would be
insufficient to stop. It is therefore not to be prescribed lightly.

11/15/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
adjourn for coffee?

-34-

Thank you.

With that, why don't we

[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, as I think Governor Lindsey already
remarked, the decision facing the Committee at this meeting would seem
to be not whether to raise interest rates but by how much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me tell you this.
I thought that
the two great remarks made previously were:
One, Governor Lindsey's
half bridge; and, two, Governor Kelley's teakettle. They have brought
the theoretical structure of monetary policy forward immensely.
[Laughter]
MR. KOHN. The teakettle is probably a better metaphor than
the automobile metaphor we so often use--steering back and forth and
tapping on the brakes.
(Statement--See Appendix.)
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
If not, let me get
started. I must say the discussion this morning has been one of the
best discussions I have heard around this table in quite a long while.
I certainly don't have much to add to it.
Let me just say, however,
that inventories in my view are going to be the crucial area that will
determine to a large extent how much momentum this economy has in it.
It is not that inventories per se will engender the total gross
national product, but as you recall when inventory investment is high,
gross domestic product is high, disposable income is high, consumption
expenditures are high, and we get a very significant multiplier from
that phenomenon.
We can't look at inventories independently of final sales nor
the reverse because they are clearly interrelated. We don't have data
much beyond August and part of September, but there is a good deal of
indication that inventory investment has not slowed in any appreciable
manner in the fourth quarter. I must say to you, I would not be
surprised to find that fourth-quarter inventory investment turns out
to be higher than it was in the third quarter. First, we have a very
Commercial loans, with
robust rate of increase in commercial loans.
or without commercial paper and with or without the merger adjustments
that we make, have been a reasonably good indicator of book value
inventory changes.
If one looks at those data through the last week
for which information is available, there is no evidence of any
slowdown. If we postulate, which I think the data will support, that
inventory investment in September was significant when the industrial
production index was unchanged from the August level, it seems quite
noncredible that the increase in industrial production of .7 percent
that we published today for the month of October did not create an
acceleration in inventory investment in October. This is consistent
with the data on loans and, I must say, it is consistent with the
indications that vendor performance continues to deteriorate.
This is important because inventory levels, as has been
indicated, are still quite low by any objective measure. This is
especially the case if we use what I think is more important in
business-cycle forecasting analysis, namely, inventories at factory
value as distinct from including the trade markups that we get in
these data. Inventory factory value as a ratio to consumption, for

11/15/94

-35-

example, is still low, and indeed it has not shown the level of uptick
that we have seen in the data where there has been a disproportionate
amount of retail inventory accumulation with a very large trade markup
element in it.
This says in effect that even though accumulation is quite
large at this moment, that is, production levels are quite a bit above
consumption levels, we are going to need quite a long period of that
type of accumulation before the economy slides off. While it is quite
plausible that inventory investment may begin to slow over the next
month or two, I find that quite unlikely. It is more likely that this
investment will proceed for a while with some momentum. That is one
of the reasons why the notion in the Greenbook that the upside risks
are larger than the downside risks in the forecast strikes me as
plausible. That is not to say, however, that what we are looking at
is a runaway boom. The reason is that when inventory investment
builds up rapidly, even though the levels of inventories may be low,
it is difficult to sustain very large inventory investments that
result in significant increases in inventory/sales ratios or
inventory/consumption ratios. At some point after we have gone
through this inventory surge that I think may be in front of us--it
may not all be behind us but it may be in the period immediately
ahead--we are going to see that buildup slide off and the economy's
growth slow down quite appreciably. That's what the history is.
I
think that the expectation that we will get very strong final demand
rests in large part on how we view this pattern as unfolding.
Clearly, producers' durable investment is moving strongly.
As Governor Lindsey pointed out, it does depend on what the profit
numbers look like. To date, there is no evidence that profits are
deteriorating. Indeed, we are still in a mode where Wall Street
analysts are underpredicting the profits that are coming out. So,
while I do think we are likely to get some slide in profit margins,
right now those margins show no signs of declining. History tells us
that when we are in this type of inventory environment with profit
margins still strong, the decline--I might even say the slowing--is
still an appreciable way off. That is, we are still an appreciable
distance away from any actual decline in the economy short of one
induced by a financial problem, in other words short of a crack in the
financial system which I'll get to shortly. History tells us that the
economy just continues to move until it wears itself out.
As a consequence, the general discussion around here, which
is somewhat skeptical of the economy's slowing down very dramatically,
strikes a familiar chord with me. I'm not sure, however, that I would
dismiss the comments made by Governors Yellen and Blinder with respect
to the pattern of monetary impetus because there is no doubt that that
is a very relevant consideration. You can very readily, as President
Jordan points out, get yourself into a notion where all you have to do
is keep jacking rates up and finally you get it right. The trouble is
that the process of getting it right historically has led finally to
our knocking the economy off its perch.
I don't think that policymaking right now is very difficult.
I think it is going to become exceptionally difficult when the
expansion starts to slow, unit costs no longer get distributed over
rapidly rising output, and price pressures begin to emerge as Governor
Kelley's teakettle starts to whistle. We will be looking at a

11/15/94

-36-

situation in which the growth rate of the economy is slowing down,
while inflation is picking up. This is in the context, as President
Forrestal raised it, of a cyclical rise at the end of a cycle, which
is really the quite relevant consideration. We are going to be in a
position where we are going to see the economy slowing and the actual
inflation data picking up. And we are going to have to be able at
that point to recognize that that's the tail end and continuing to
ratchet rates up would be a mistake. But we are nowhere near that
point as far as I can see at this particular stage.
I think that we are behind the curve, and that it would be
plausible, as I infer from what is going on around here, to move rates
up more than 50 basis points because markets have built in something
close to 60.
I think that creating a mild surprise would be of
significant value; creating a very strong surprise on the up side
would be more risky because the stock market, in my judgment, is still
a little rich although off its price/earnings ratios of a while back.
I would not want to argue that we couldn't break it down very easily.
However, what bothers me about doing only 50 basis points is that even
though the markets are saying that that is what we probably are going
to do, I think we have to distinguish between what they are
forecasting we are going to do based on our past behavior and what
they think we ought to do.
I suspect that while the majority think we
are going to do 50, the vast majority will think that that is not
enough and they will immediately price an additional 50 or more basis
In my judgment, we would be
points in the December forward contracts.
risking--a low probability risk but a potentially very large outcome
if it were to happen--a run on the dollar, a run on the bond market,
and a significant decline in stock prices. This would be on top of a
$750 billion paper loss as a consequence of the declines in bond and
stock prices earlier this year. We would find out what a wealth
effect can do to economic activity in a way that would make us really
quite uncomfortable. So, I think that we have to be very careful at
this stage and be certain that we are ahead of general expectations.
I think we can do that with 75 basis points.
I don't know what that will imply about what we do in
December. I think it puts December somewhere between no change and 50
basis points.
I'm not sure I can say at this moment that I fully buy
into the Greenbook's projection of where the funds rate should be.
That will depend on how the markets behave. I would argue that at
this point we should give serious thought to 75 basis points.
If we
do that, I think we can go to a symmetric directive.
If we choose to
do 50, I would argue that we should at least retain an asymmetric
directive, but I must tell you that 50 makes me a little nervous. No,
I take that back: it makes me very nervous and I would be disinclined
to go in that direction.
MR. FORRESTAL.
discount rate.

Mr. Chairman, you haven't mentioned the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I judge the Board's general view, a
recommendation to increase the discount rate by 75 basis points would
be approved. Implicit in that would be a recommendation that the full
75 basis points gets passed into the funds rate. The Board will be
discussing the discount rate after this meeting. President McTeer.

11/15/94

-37-

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, in my opinion strong action is
warranted today, but I don't think we should prejudge future actions.
I, for one, particularly don't want to commit today to a series of
increases that add up to 150 basis points and that will result in a
hard landing as depicted in the Greenbook. So, I would support your
recommendation for 75 basis points.
I also believe that part of the
justification for such an increase has to do with the weakness of the
dollar in the foreign exchange markets, and I think it would be
helpful if that is cited as one of the reasons for the action today.
As we go forward from today, I would bear some cautions in
mind. One is that we shouldn't forget the lag. When we started
tightening in February we were doing it for anticipated inflation
reasons, not for current reasons and that still applies today. We
can't fight today's inflation with today's policy. Another point to
keep in mind is that policy already has tightened considerably more
than the 1-3/4 point increase in the fed funds rate, both in terms of
long-term interest rates and particularly in terms of the sharp
slowdown in all the monetary aggregates so far this year; even the
aggregates adjusted for stock fund increases have slowed considerably.
I just think we should keep that in mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your analysis and
your recommendation. I also agree with the points that Governors
Yellen and Blinder made earlier. I hope that we won't go 150 basis
points, because I think your analysis was on the money. The question
I have to ask myself is how best to avoid that.
I think the best way
is by going 75 today. Frankly, I think if we go 50 today, we are
going to be locked into doing 50 in December. I agree we can't
prejudge the next meeting, but I support 75 today in the hope--and I
must say the expectation--that December will be 0.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I'm in full agreement with your recommendation,
Mr. Chairman. My comments earlier were fairly strong and I'd like to
put them in context. First, I agree with the comments that both
Governors Yellen and Blinder made that monetary policy lags being what
they are, we won't see the full effects of what we have done already
and certainly what we may do today until 1995 and early 1996.
However, I do believe that the labor markets and other data we have
gotten today continue to indicate that we have overshot.
I fear,
along with Governor Lindsey, that if we move too slowly, underlying
growth rates, which we have consistently underestimated all year, will
cause significant overshooting. In that case, we might find it
necessary to pull even harder on the monetary reins, perhaps in the
aggregate moving the full 150 basis points or more, and create a real
hard landing. Thus, I believe we should move now, move more strongly
than the 50 basis points everyone expects, go to the 75 you have
recommended, and I wouldn't care to predict anything about December.
I'm hopeful that we will be able to rein in the strong economy and
achieve a better and softer landing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

-38-

11/15/94

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, since our last meeting, the economy
certainly has shown considerable momentum and labor and product
markets now appear to be extremely tight.
I feel that if we don't act
strongly, it seems likely that the economy will substantially
overshoot its potential and that inflation will take on a rising
trend.
It seems clear that interest rates need to be raised
considerably above current levels, and therefore I support your
recommendation of a 75 basis point increase in the federal funds rate.
Moreover, I would not be surprised if a further tightening in policy
is necessary in December. Therefore, my preference would be for
asymmetric language toward tightening in the directive. I would not
want the press release to imply that there would be a pause in further
action. While I am at it, since I am making suggestions, I would find
any mention of the dollar as a rationale for the change a mistake.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I personally agree with both
of those recommendations. President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. I came into the meeting, Mr. Chairman, with a
slight preference for a 50 basis point rise, but having heard the
discussion around the table and your analysis, I am strongly in
support of the 75 basis points. As I said earlier, I think that the
150 basis point increase suggested in the Greenbook is too much. I
hope we can keep an open mind on that issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation
completely. I am convinced that the sooner we move on this, the less
we will have to move later.
I am not at all inclined to say that we
have to look to a 150 basis point increase at any time. Right now the
75 is before us; I think that it is a wise move. I also think we
should make as little comment about this as possible, in line with
what Bob Parry is saying in terms of the dollar or whether we should
pause. I think it would handicap us needlessly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that the preliminary view would
be a statement that is pretty bland and promises nothing and doesn't
mention the dollar. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,
and I would associate myself with both of Bob Parry's recommendations
and yours.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor LaWare.

I support your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I support your recommendation also, Alan, based
on what I have heard about emerging inflationary pressures and also
the importance of credibility and the fact that if we have
credibility, it will reduce the long-term cost of keeping inflation
and inflation expectations under control.
Just a couple of comments on things that came up after my
earlier comments. One is on the slow money growth. That's something

11/15/94

-39-

that would ordinarily trouble me.
I think I mentioned last time or
the meeting before that in view of the very large monetary stimulus
from 1991 through 1993, I am not as concerned as I would otherwise be.
It is very difficult to evaluate when the effects of that stimulus
will all be played out.
I applaud Alan Blinder for trying to put
numbers on it.
I think we all know that if it were that easy to put
numbers on the effects of monetary policy actions, we probably could
be much more precise in setting policy. But it still is helpful in a
directional sense to try to understand those things.
With respect to stop/go monetary policies and the risk of
putting things over the edge here, unfortunately we don't have, in my
view, a lot of inflation credibility. The time to correct this
stop/go phenomenon and try to look through current developments is
when we are in a "go" phase. In other words, I think it is much
easier to correct by not driving the funds rate too low or stimulating
the aggregates too much when trying to foster a recovery. If we try
to fix it at this stage, because of presumptions about an
inflationary bias of Fed actions, it really becomes very difficult to
do that and maintain credibility. I agree with what you said before.
At some point, we are going to reach a very difficult juncture, and we
will have to make some tough judgments. But I think we are far from
that point right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Earlier in the year when we knew that we had to
begin to tighten, I think there was a case on real sector grounds that
we probably should have moved by more than we did. I think you argued
rather persuasively, Mr. Chairman, that we had a bubble in financial
markets and that we had to deflate that rather slowly. Otherwise we
could take a big hit.
In hindsight, I think that was wise. We may
have a similar bubble now in the nonfinancial sector of the economy.
Sentiment and the outlook for the economy have improved. Inventories,
as you have noted, are a positive influence on the economy. However,
while we talked a lot today about financial markets and the foreign
exchange markets, we talked very little about sentiment in the
nonfinancial part of the economy. We run a risk with the 75 basis
points of making a pretty big hole in that nonfinancial bubble out
there. It is going to hit those in the nonfinancial part of the
economy with a big bang; they are going to be quite surprised; they
are going to think that either we know something that they don't know
or that this move is going to bring about a significantly slower 1995.
If we had to go another 1/2 in
My own preference would be to go 1/2.
December, I would go another 1/2. But just as we had to be careful
about deflating the financial bubble earlier in the year, we have to
be careful about deflating the nonfinancial bubble at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I don't know whether or not 150 basis points
is ultimately needed. It seems to me that that is fairly large,
I wouldn't want to
particularly in view of the monetary aggregates.
prejudge. I do support 75 basis points, symmetric. It strikes me
that 50 is not enough.
I think the markets would be immediately
looking for the next move, and we would be in that treadmill
situation. A move of 100 basis points would be too much of a jolt.
I
do think we have to be alert to the question that has been raised

11/15/94

-40-

about how much tightening is left in the pipeline and alert to the
potential effects of the tightening in the pipeline.
But we also have
to be alert to the possibility that if momentum is greater than we
thought, that pipeline may be getting flooded out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
getting to be legend!

Monetary policy insights by analogy are

MS. PHILLIPS.
I resisted analogies in my original comments,
but I couldn't this time around!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I support your
recommendation with considerable enthusiasm. The New York Bank has
had a recommendation in since November 3 for a 75 basis point increase
in the discount rate.
I am very pleased with that piece of it.
I
think 50 would be too little and 100, for the reasons that Ed Boehne
suggested, would be dangerous on the high side. I believe that the
symmetry is as important a part of your recommendation as the number.
Janet Yellen's eloquent explanation put into economics what had been
in the lining of my stomach and therefore was very helpful. But I do
think deciding what we do in December at that time rather than
prejudging it in any way now is very appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I can support 75 and symmetry at this meeting.
Regarding outside expectations of what we are going to be doing,
though, it looks to me like we are in a trap. Former Governor Angell
was in Cleveland a couple of weeks ago giving a speech, and he said we
will be at 7.75 percent on the funds rate a year from now. We have
this world of traders and Fed watchers, whether they are 25 or 35,
that seem to be persuaded like many people that growth reduces the
purchasing power of money. As long as that is the perception, any
output growth above around 2-1/2 percent or unemployment rate below
something like the NAIRU is going to have these people calling for
another 50, another 100, basis point increase. At some point we have
to ignore them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I interpret them, I think the
comments around this table support that. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have had in mind an intermediate
The
target, if not a final target, of about 100 basis points.
question was when and how to get there.
I have been holding out hope
that perhaps we would not have to go too much further than that. My
preference would have been to do this in stately 50 basis point steps.
I think that's the more elegant way to proceed. But I am afraid that
that has been taken off the table. Your analysis for the 75 is
I also
persuasive, and I would no longer be that comfortable with 50.
would favor symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. As I mentioned, it seems clear to me that some
tightening of policy is needed to prevent inflation from accelerating,
but I have strong doubts about the need for an additional 150 basis

11/15/94

-41-

points.
My guess is that it will take 75 to get the job done, and I
can live with 75 basis points today. But on balance, I guess I would
agree with Ed Boehne, and I would favor 50 today. I share his
concerns. As Don mentioned, it worries me that in the absence of an
announcement of the type we issued in August, 75 can backfire.
Instead of simply flattening the yield curve and our seeing very
little effect on long-term rates, a rise of this magnitude may raise
market expectations both about the risks of inflation--because we are
so concerned about it--and market expectations about the ultimate
expected tightening that we intend here.
I am concerned about the
possibility that bond yields could rise more than the Greenbook
forecast, which could provoke a stock market reaction. My own
preference would be for 50 today, but I can live with 75 as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I also support your recommendation for 75 basis
points on tactical grounds because it seems to me that the markets
have been discomfited by our failure to respond recently. I don't
think that that has done our credibility any good. I would reiterate,
though, a couple of the dangers that other people have mentioned. At
some point, there is a danger of overkill. I don't know whether 150
basis points in total is going to turn out to be too much or too
little. On fundamentals, I think there might be something to be said
for buying a little time to see when the presumably lagged effects of
previous tightenings start to bite, or if they do. But because of the
state of the markets and market expectations, my view is, as I stated,
that 75 is fine for now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I support the recommendation.
Quite frankly, I came into the meeting thinking that a series of 50
basis point increases would be preferable for the reasons that Mike
Kelley enunciated. I also felt that, coming from a business
background, it is preferable for people in business to see us moving
in a progression that gives a certain logic to the direction we are
moving. I think this facilitates longer-term planning in business and
makes it easier to operate in that type of environment. But I was
persuaded by the discussion here today. I thought that Governor
Blinder's and Governor Yellen's comments and their cautions were very
helpful, and I think we should keep these in mind in the future. I do
think that the mild surprise that was mentioned, at least in terms of
the financial markets, will be useful now in sending a positive
signal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I think all of us have experienced the
You go into a hotel room and the room is too cold. You
following:
turn the thermostat up a notch. You go in the shower. When you come
out, it is still a little too cold. You turn the thermostat up
another notch. You then go to sleep, but wake up at 2:30 in the
morning in a sweat in your bed. The classic mistake of monetary
policy--and I am not talking only about the United States and I am not
even talking only about the postwar period--is overdoing it.
Overdoing it in either direction. The classic reason for this error,
though not the only reason, is impatience in waiting for the lagged

-42-

11/15/94

effects of what already has been done.
It is very, very frustrating
to wait just as it is difficult to keep our fingers off that
thermostat when we are still cold.
Furthermore, one thing we know about the hazards of finetuning is that we really can't do fine-tuning. That means that when
we are close to target we should be very wary of oversteering. I
think that with 3 percent inflation and the economy right about at
capacity we are in an awfully good position, and so we should be
extremely wary about oversteering. I fear that doing 75 today rather
than 50 may send us down an oversteering path. I want to be clear--it
is not that I think a total of 75 more is going to clobber the economy
into the ground. But it provides the setting and the jumping off
point for where we go from here.
On strict macroeconomics grounds, a difference of 25 basis
points today--between doing 50 and 75--is no big deal.
You can barely
detect it. The issue to me is the signal we send--the signal we send
to the markets, the signal we send to people running businesses, who
are thinking about their sales and therefore their inventories for the
near-term future, and the signal we send to consumers about their
expected near-term incomes. And this, as you know Mr. Chairman, is
where I differ from your assessment.
I think the signal we send out by doing 75 today, although I
can see that we are going to do 75 today, is that the Federal Reserve
is more scared about inflation than the people out there thought we
were yesterday, and that the Federal Reserve signs on to the Wall
Street indictment that we are behind the curve. That will be correct
because the FOMC does sign on to that view. Thirdly, we will signal
that there is much more to come.
I do not believe the market
expectation after tomorrow will be only 75 more.
I don't believe that
for a minute. I believe Wayne Angell's 7.75 percent federal funds
rate will be raised, not lowered, as a result of what we do today.
Finally, I think it sends a signal that I find very unfortunate:
that
we can be led around by the markets. I don't want to send any of
those signals.
I'd rather follow the Kelley strategy. A confident,
patient--stately did you say, Mike?
MR. KELLEY.

Elegant.

MR. BLINDER. Elegant, that is, moving with thought and
planning in increments of, say, 50 as necessary and as a central bank
that is not behind the curve, that is not panicked by an inflation
which is likely to tick up 1/4 point or 1/2 point or something like
that, but as a central bank that is willing to prescribe moderately
strong doses at intervals if the need is there. I think Don described
it in his opening statement as taking a reasonably routine step and
then waiting to see what happens.
I am worried for a number of reasons, as Ed Boehne is, about
the signal that 75 sends. Don mentioned--I just want to underscore
this--that the Greenspan Fed has never once moved the fed funds rate
by 75 basis points in either direction. Not once. When this Fed has
erred, it has been on the side of caution. When I was on the outside
as a citizen, I always thought that was good idea. I would rather see
my Federal Reserve err on the cautious side in either direction, and
now that I am on the inside, I still think the same. This Federal

-43-

11/15/94

Reserve, under our current Chairman's leadership, has only once
changed the discount rate by an amount greater than 50 basis points.
This will be the first 75. The 75 now will make it-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

More than 50 basis points in the funds

rate?
MR. BLINDER. No, the discount rate.
point change in the discount rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There was a 100 basis

I am sorry, that's right.

MR. BLINDER. A 75 basis point increase now will add up to
175 basis points within a 6-month period, if you go back and add the
other 50s.
Since 1984, tightening has proceeded that quickly only
once--in the period that I mentioned earlier between March 1988 and
February 1989.
There are several 6-month periods you can find within
that period to get that pace of tightening.
Fourthly, I think this will be like feeding red meat to the
bond market lions. They will chew it up and they will ask for more.
A Federal Reserve that did 25, 25, 25, 50, 50, 75 does not look to an
outside observer like it is about to stop.
I think we will create
what are already strong expectations that we are not about to stop.
We will create, rather than diminish, expectations of more near-term
tightening to come--with the potential that has for markets,
especially the stock market. That's at the top of my worries about
the surprise that will be created.
My personal preference is strongly for 50, for reasons
similar to those Ed Boehne mentioned. The difference, of course, is
that I have to vote.
I thought hard about whether I should dissent on
this matter, and I did not decide until last night. I finally decided
that I won't, but I want to say why because it leads to a conclusion.
I won't dissent because, as I said, the macroeconomic difference of
Secondly,
doing another 25 basis points today is really quite small.
nobody really knows about market psychology. I don't pretend that I
know. I said what I believe will happen--that this will be received
adversely--but I certainly could be wrong. Finally, I think it is
better to show a united Federal Reserve against the criticism that we
are surely going to get for this move. But I just want to say right
now that unless we receive some really surprising news between now and
December 20th, I am not going to be prepared to go further on December
20th.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
symmetric language.

Okay, I propose that we move 75 with

SPEAKER(?).
We may need a need a new word to describe 75
basis points in the opening sentence of the operational paragraph.
SPEAKER(?).

"A lot"!

[Laughter]

SPEAKER(?).

"Substantially"?

MR. KOHN. I think it could be "increase significantly."
The
announcement will make it very clear what the Committee has in mind.

11/15/94

-44-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, "increase significantly" instead of
"increase somewhat," which seems clearly inappropriate.
SPEAKER(?).

Just say "increase?"

SEVERAL MEMBERS.

"Significantly."

MR. BERNARD. The proposed directive language is as follows:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to increase significantly the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions, taking account of a possible increase
in the discount rate. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser
reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd like to adjourn this meeting for
just 5 minutes so the Board of Governors can go next door and take up
the discount rate question. Then we can come back and Peter will have
the floor to answer questions after I make some brief comments.
[Recess]
Secretary's note:
The Bank presidents were informed that the Board
members at their meeting in the Chairman's office had approved an
increase of 75 basis points in the discount rate, effective
immediately for those Reserve Banks with pending increases of that
amount.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to raise a couple of issues
following up on what Peter Fisher said earlier and just open up the
discussion to general comments.
First of all, I understand that there
were some questions about statements coming out of Madrid to the
effect that the central banks would be playing an enhanced role in the
G-7 process. What that basically comes down to is nothing more than
the central bank deputies being involved with the finance ministry
deputies in formulating the agenda for the meetings, and that actually
is pretty much what was being done in any event. We central bankers

11/15/94

-45-

have not in any way materially increased our interface with the G-7.
Indeed, as best I can judge, and I may have indicated this before,
there seems to be more concurrence in those discussions among the
governors on the one hand and the finance ministers on the other
rather than there being country positions.
So long as that continues,
I think that the central banks will have a very effective and
important role in the G-7 process. Should it turn out at some point
that we get involved in the politics of the finance ministers, then I
think we had better give this very significant second thought. There
is no evidence of that and certainly nothing of that sort was
indicated or implied in the notion of increased central bank
activities with the G-7.
So, nothing has changed in any material way.
On the issue of intervention, we had some fairly interesting
discussions earlier and I would like to lay some thoughts on the
table that have certain implications for the future. I might add
that, interestingly, my view about the way intervention works is
something that Hans Tietmeyer and I happen to agree on. I am not
necessarily speaking for the Bundesbank, but I am pretty sure that
they would not be in severe disagreement on this issue.
First of all, I think there is a view in the financial
marketplace that intervention is far more effective than it actually
can be. The analogy I like to use is that irrespective of what people
in the markets believe, we can set the federal funds rate wherever we
wish to place it, and market trading, market activities of all sorts
have no effect. There are people in the foreign exchange markets who
believe that we as central bankers have the capability of doing the
same thing to the exchange rate. A number of French financial
officials clearly do believe that. A lot of commentators on the
periphery believe that we central banks can fix rates where we choose.
The truth of the matter that I think all of us have acutely recognized
is that that "ain't the case."
As a consequence, if we were to announce what we are going to
do with exchange rates in the way that we announce what we will do in
the federal funds market, inevitably the financial community would be
disappointed. The reason I say that is their belief that we can do
more than we can; and when we do only what we can, they will
necessarily be disappointed.
We have all concluded that the only way we can have an effect
in the exchange markets on a short-term basis--because nobody believes
that sterilized intervention can have any long-term effect--is to
If in effect we catch them in a short
catch the markets by surprise.
position, it is very obvious that we can create a run-up in the
exchange rate and indeed that has occurred on many occasions. There
have been numerous occasions when we failed, when for one reason or
another we either misjudged that the market didn't expect us to act or
we felt that we had to act even though the market knew we were going
to act in order to "show the flag" as the Treasury likes to say on
occasion.
I think the important point, however, is that we succeed some
of the time because, if we create a presumption that we might
intervene, we establish an atmosphere on the part of a lot of traders,
who wish to take short overnight positions against the dollar, that
Indeed, it does seem to be the case
they should be a little cautious.

11/15/94

-46-

that when we have, in a sense, a dull but nonetheless a Damocles Sword
hanging over the markets, that often will deter individuals from
raiding our currency.
While I think we all to a greater or lesser extent believe in
efficient markets, the truth of the matter is that sometimes they are
not. There are periods when we get a confluence of forces driving
down the exchange rate. Such a development may at times lead to
market conditions that cannot readily be viewed as involving the
functioning of truly efficient markets.
When we were negotiating with Treasury officials, who were
concerned about the exchange rate weakness that Peter was discussing,
their initial choice was to do a full blown, multiday intervention,
multilaterally. We argued that we started off with one-day shots
unilaterally, then one-day shots multilaterally, and now they were
proposing multiday shots, multilaterally, and one had to ask where we
would go from there. The argument that we put on the table was to mix
it up because if the argument is that we cannot effectively do
anything unless there is a surprise, we have to create some surprises.
So, what we agreed to in this instance was that we would intervene
unilaterally but would do so two days in a row. As Peter points out,
there were some positive effects there. I don't know whether we
stemmed the dollar's decline effectively, but clearly one has to chalk
up certainly the first day as a success. The second day was actually,
somewhat to my surprise, a mild success.
Let me just say that as best I can judge, and obviously I
can't read peoples' minds, I don't think that the issue was the
upcoming election at that point.
It is possible; I obviously can't
argue against that, but Larry Summers' recommendations were wholly
In my judgment they had no
consistent with his previous positions.
bearing on whether or not there was an election coming up. That issue
did come up in the news media, and I must say that I find no evidence
or basis to support the media speculation.
Larry Summers, and it is possible the Secretary at this
stage, is still concerned about the dollar and thinks that we should
be doing something more. I believe they would like to see how the
outcome of this meeting gets reflected in the market, but they still
would like at least to discuss the issue of doing a multilateral,
multiday type of intervention. We said we would be glad to discuss
that with them. We have made no specific commitments, but I think it
is important for the Committee to know that that issue is on the table
and it will be discussed. It is important to know what the Committee,
which authorizes the actions on the part of the Fed in this regard,
has to say on this question before we go into discussions with the
Treasury. But before we go to anything else, I do think we owe Peter
a chance to answer some questions after which we are going to have to
take several votes for the record. Now, let me open the floor to
[Pause]
I do not believe that silence!
questions to Peter.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I have a question.

Why didn't you ask him before!

11/15/94

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Was the second-day success the
result of the sheer brilliance of the operation? Just say yes.
[Laughter]
MR. FISHER.
wife question!

This is kind of the reverse of a beating-your-

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Just say "yes;" that's enough!

MR. FISHER. Yes! I'll mention one thing, Mr. Chairman, that
relates to the commentary earlier by Governor Lindsey. Maybe this
will inspire questions from those who are reluctant to dig in. I
recognize in your comment the idea that intervention takes place and
it seems to box in the Committee; the bridge had better go somewhere.
I think both in the way you pose that and in other remarks at previous
meetings, one has to say "compared to what?" We don't always have the
counter-factual of what would have happened had we not intervened. I
think the hypothesis I worked with and why I thought it was a good
idea to intervene was the risk of an extreme event--that in early
November the dollar could have dropped another 3 percent rather
quickly. The range could have dropped to the mid-140s on the mark and
to 94 to 96 dollar/yen. The market would have interpreted that move
as entirely related to the inaction of the Fed. I think the Committee
could then have found itself at this meeting in a very different kind
It would be a box
of box, one that you would have liked a lot less.
that is much harder to get out of, one that was similar to the box in
which the Committee found itself in July where to do anything
plausible or reasonable on interest rates would have looked very bad
from an exchange market point of view because it was not going to be
adequate. That is, the reasonable change in fed funds for domestic
policy purposes would look like a sop to the exchange market. That is
not a counter-factual thing one can put one's hands around, but one
has to think of what the counter-factual is to devise recommendations
--whether the risks are leading one to think it is a good idea to
intervene versus not.
MR. LINDSEY. There are two counter-factuals:
One would be
not intervening and having something happen at this meeting; the other
would be intervening coupled with a monetary policy change at the
time. That's one you did not mention; that's in fact the one I
recommended. Had we done that, I think we would have been in a much
better position; we would have been at 50 instead of 75.
I think we
would have signaled a policy change that is at least intellectually
consistent with what we all believe.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I have done in the past, let me argue
against the use of monetary policy to achieve exchange market
objectives. I am not necessarily referring to this particular
instance, but this is something I think we have to be aware of. Often
when we have a weak currency, we are looking at significant portfolio
adjustments. Often we are looking at correct or incorrect views of
differential rates of return between two currencies, not only in
interest rates but also real estate, the stock market, all of those
things. What history seems to tell us, especially if we look at
something that may be an extreme example here--the breakdown of the
EMS--is that the types of expected differential rates of return are
something like maybe 10 basis points a week. That's 500 basis points
or more at an annual rate.
I am concerned that if we run into one of

-48-

11/15/94

those situations and we hit it with 50 basis points and it turns out
that we needed 300 basis points, the central bank is caught in the
dilemma of whether or not to keep moving the rate.
I must say that it
is tough to envisage our doing that because then we would basically
subvert domestic policy to the exchange rate, which I think none of
us, yourself included, wants to get involved with. I am not saying
that if we had done 50 basis points, that that might not have an
effect if in fact the expected differential rate of return between,
say, the deutschemark and the dollar was only a few basis points.
Yes, it would have worked, but I'd be terribly worried since we have
almost no way of making that judgment. We have to worry basically
about getting ourselves into that process and finding it very
difficult to extricate ourselves once we are there. So it is a high
risk operation.
MR. LINDSEY. There is no question that we have no way of
making that judgment; that's what markets are for. That's why I think
it is inappropriate for us to take on the job of guessing at some
point that the market is oversold and now is the time to plunge in.
The Sword of Damocles would hang. I agree that markets are not always
rational. When those players who behave irrationally are punished by
losing money, the people who hold the Damocles Sword and wield it
effectively are rewarded by making money. That's how those markets
work. We are putting ourselves in that position. So my first choice
would be for us not to intervene.
But I think we have to think about
this from a public choice perspective. Right now, it is absolutely
costless for the Treasury to decide to play with what former Vice
Chairman Mullins used to call that "little toy in the closet."
We all
wrote papers saying we should never use it, but when we get in the
position of having it, we just can't stop ourselves from using it.
If
we are going to intervene, I think that we gain two advantages by
having our general posture be that the intervention be coupled with a
monetary policy change:
One, it is at least intellectually
consistent; the intervention may work, but then again it may not work.
But secondly, it creates a price for the Treasury.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say that I don't deny that
there should be a relationship. It is just that if it is tying
monetary policy directly to the exchange rate, it locks us in. To
have it in parallel paths or somehow related, I think the answer is
obviously yes.
MR. LINDSEY. Let's not admit it to the world. But when the
phone rings in your office, if you have behind you the view of this
Committee that a monetary policy change will ultimately accompany an
intervention, you will have a weapon supporting you in the view that I
think you really hold, and that is that intervention should be used
rarely if at all.
MR. BLINDER.

We don't have to exercise it.

MR. LINDSEY. We don't, but I think we should have that as
the Chairman's weapon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.
rate phenomenon?

Other comments, questions?

Are we saying that dollar/yen is an interest

11/15/94

-49-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Differential rates of return. In other
words, if most of the exchange rate moves these days against the
dollar are the result of portfolio shifts rather than, say, current
account deficits or flows, then the question is why do people change
portfolios? And the answer is that the risk-adjusted rate of return
is perceived to be better in one currency versus another.
MR. PARRY. There may be times when what you want to do for
monetary policy purposes is consistent with what the Treasury wants to
do to affect the exchange rate. I have difficulty relating that to
what Governor Lindsey said. It sounds like he wanted a tool for all
time for you to put in the closet, and I don't understand that. This
Committee will have a view about what is appropriate monetary policy.
It may be that today it would be consistent with what the Treasury may
want to do, and that's good for today.
MR. LINDSEY. In point of fact, we had a view; we stated it
in our asymmetric directive. It was quite clear what this Committee
wanted to do. It was quite clear that that was consistent with an
appropriate action if an intervention occurred. And I will stipulate
that the Committee's view may vary from time to time.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. LINDSEY. My precise recommendation at the last meeting
was that because foreign exchange markets were likely to be unstable,
that we go asymmetric and have a 50 basis point move as our explicit
price for intervention. I think that was quite appropriate. I think
that that would be the right kind of message for us to send in the
current environment if a multilateral move or any kind of intervention
were to come up in the intermeeting period.
MR. PARRY. So the trip factor would be a request for
intervention. When we have asymmetry, what we are assuming is that we
or the Chairman will be looking at a set of data that will lead him
perhaps to request a rate increase. Are you saying that there is one
development we are going to focus on and that is a request from the
Treasury to intervene?
MR. LINDSEY. There may be other reasons to adjust monetary
policy, but it should be clear that there is a price associated with
intervention. There is a monetary policy change that accompanies our
intervention.
MR. BROADDUS. I wonder if I could put another alternative on
the table--that we not intervene at all. I realize that there are
many people on the Committee who would disagree with that because they
think that, at least in a limited way, intervention may be useful from
time to time, and I certainly respect those views. But I have to tell
you that I personally have very serious reservations about the wisdom
of our continuing to intervene. Whether we renew the swap lines is
relevant to this discussion, because in many ways the swap lines
facilitate these operations and make them more convenient. I'll be
brief here, but if I could just go through the way I see this at the
risk of some repetition. As you said, Mr. Chairman, it is now widely
agreed that sterilized intervention doesn't have any sustained impact
on exchange rates unless it sends a signal that we are going to follow
it up with a monetary policy action. This implies, for me at least,

11/15/94

-50-

and this is really the heart of the matter, that it is not really
possible for the Fed to maintain a truly independent monetary policy
for an extended period of time while following the Treasury's lead on
foreign exchange policy. Now, of course, in reality the way I see
this is that we have maintained our independence by not making a
commitment to follow interventions with monetary policy actions. But
that's not a perfect situation either. I think it is a problem
because of the possibility that these operations will not be
successful. Of course, back in June we had an operation I think most
people would agree was not successful. That really bothers me from
the standpoint of credibility because when we participate in an
operation like this and it is not successful, we get associated with
that result. Specifically, we lose credibility. It is adverse for us
from the standpoint of public perceptions about the central bank and
what we can do. I think that can reduce our effectiveness over time
in conducting monetary policy generally. It is an important issue; it
is a broad issue. Again, I would respectfully submit that we ought to
consider withdrawing from these kinds of operations, maybe not
immediately but gradually in some way. This is a side point: If we
did that, we would not need swap arrangements. Frankly, I would
oppose renewing the swap arrangements this morning. Let me say that I
am not opposed to or saying that the U.S. Government should never
intervene in foreign exchange markets. I am simply saying that I
don't think we should participate except perhaps as the Treasury's
agent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You are raising an interesting question.
The dilemma we have is that if we withdraw and act strictly as an
agent, we then lose any voice in altering or casting the structure of
the policy that they would like to implement. The points you are
making, Al, are quite to the point; I don't disagree with that. The
question that we have to trade off here is, do we wish to remove
ourselves from any influence on how these things are done? In my
experience, because we are involved in the discussions, we have headed
off a lot of actions that I think would have been detrimental, more so
than what we have done. There is unquestionably the problem that we
are not the final voice on that; legally they are. Nonetheless, we do
have a de facto veto if we wish to use it, and the reason we do is
because we participate in those discussions. We have to choose
whether we want to lose what is in my judgment a very valuable asset
in tempering what the Treasury Department does. It is not a simple
tradeoff. If you are asking me, do I disagree with the way you have
put it? I personally don't. I think that the question really gets
down to, are we as a nation better off with our participating in these
deliberations, granted at some cost to the Federal Reserve? I have
argued that, yes, looking at it from the national point of view as
distinct from the Federal Reserve itself, I think we are better off.
That's the way I come out, and it is one of the reasons I have
supported this type of operation.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, again, I just worry about the
credibility effect. I think there is a negative there and I guess I
see the tradeoff differently. Obviously, I have no personal
experience in this and I respect your views. But is it the case that
we would have no influence whatever in these discussions if we were
not participating directly?

11/15/94

-51-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, ultimately, I would say, if we
decided to bow out.
In other words, you can't be half in or out.
Either we are acting as an order taker, which is strictly as the agent
of the Treasury, or we get involved in the discussion. We either have
to cut our participation completely and have Peter act as an order
taker with no conversation except what he might say as a broker--don't
do it now; the market is closed.
[Laughter]
SPEAKER(?).
If the System is not participating in these
operations, that's going to have some effect in itself on the way the
Treasury views the operations-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
I think that is the point, President Broaddus.
Ultimately, we can and have declined to participate. There have been
occasions--I am referring to a long period of time--when we have
declined to participate. The suggestion that we are not going to
participate can be a significant brake on the enthusiasm of the
Treasury--of all the Treasuries that I have had anything to do with
over the years--partly because the norm for the last decade or so has
been that almost all operations are joint and all are on a 50/50 basis
since we have roughly the same amount of reserves.
If you said, Peter
is just their agent, the quality of our advice would probably be
unchanged, but the consequences of ignoring it would be substantially
reduced compared to current circumstances where ultimately it becomes
known via the Manager's reports whether the Federal Reserve was part
of the operation.
MR. LAWARE. Al, I would argue that we can't withdraw from it
completely because part of our statutory responsibility is the
stability of the financial system. I can envision a situation where
the foreign currency markets were so disorderly that they were a
threat to the financial stability of the country. I think that to
take us completely out of that would be a mistake. Now, the problem
is how to define a disorderly market; who makes the decision whether
it is disorderly; or whether, in fact, for whatever purpose, we are
trying to peg or stop a decline in a rate relationship. But I don't
think we can get out of it completely. I would like to see us, as a
matter of internal policy, limit our participation to those situations
where we have a disorderly market and where we define what is a
disorderly market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

That's practically what we try to do.

Yes.

MR. BROADDUS. I guess I think if we are out of these
operations, there is less chance of disorderly markets.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think we have to talk as a
practical matter about how we would go about this disengagement. At
the present time, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York operates as the
agent for the U.S. monetary authorities, which means the Federal
Reserve and the Treasury. The way the conversations take place is
that the Desk, Peter and his colleagues, are the technical advisors.

11/15/94

-52-

Typically, the people at the Treasury talk with Ted; they talk with
me; they talk with the Chairman; and sometimes they talk with other
members of the Board as well.
They get our advice and they pay a
great deal of attention to our advice.
It is very, very rare that if
we really say you should not do it that they do it. The last time we
didn't participate in an intervention was in February 1992.
The fact
that we have that threat can give us some additional leverage with
them, although I think it is not something that one would wisely use
very often.
If the Federal Reserve were to decide to disengage itself
from being part of the U.S. monetary authorities for foreign exchange
purposes, we would have to announce that to the world. We can't just
let it slip out. That would impress me as saying that the Federal
Reserve--at the risk of some backslapping to this wonderful
institution, it is a part of the U.S. public sector that is
universally highly regarded outside of our country, sometimes even
more than the Administration of the day--would be seen by the world as
retreating into a kind of Fortress America. That, I think, would be a
terrible signal to give. It would be a great disservice to the
American people and a great disservice to financial stability in the
world. Our ability to have these operations done at sensible times
and in a sensible way is very great, which obviously brings upon the
Federal Reserve in general and the Chairman in particular an
additional amount of responsibility. It is a serious burden, but I
think one that we really have no choice but to accept and carry
forward. There is no question that if we undid the swap lines, it
would be mainly a signal to the world. We haven't drawn on the swap
lines since the 1970s, if I remember correctly. They are much more
symbolic than real. But if we wanted to say to the rest of the world
that we are beginning a retreat into Fortress America, it would
naturally be through the swap lines.
It is the classic case of the
dog that didn't bark in the night. When we renew the swap lines, it
is such a routine matter that nobody pays any attention. If we didn't
renew the swap lines, it would create an international hoopla of very
considerable seriousness and, I think, a very negative one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We haven't used the swap lines.
Indeed,
all the intervention that has taken place has been profit-taking,
because we have been selling off our deutschemark and yen reserves.
President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Mr. Chairman, this to me is an exceedingly
difficult issue and not one that this central bank or any central bank
in today's world can solve by itself, whether by any unilateral
declaration by us or even all the central banks.
Both your initial
remarks and your response to Al's comment, I think, highlight what the
problem is.
Since August 1971, this country has not had a policy
toward its currency; it has had a sequence of policies, and sometimes
they are consistent internally and sometimes externally. Therein lies
the problem. It is not just the traders who don't know that
sterilized intervention cannot produce results inconsistent with
domestic monetary policy, but sometimes members of executive and
legislative branches of the government, ours and other governments
around the world, don't know that. The hazard comes from having the
power to do these things in the context of outside expectations, that
we do not share, that they will work. I remember being told that when
President Nixon was confronted by his advisors--some of the outside

11/15/94

-53-

people--about the issue of wage/price controls, he said:
I don't
believe in controls; I know they won't work; and you don't believe in
controls; you know they won't work; but the people don't know that.
And so we got controls.
In the late 1970s, we had a policy toward the currency
externally that was inconsistent with what at least I would want for
domestic monetary policy. Earlier in the 1970s, as we were thrashing
around for a policy, the Open Market Committee had a number of debates
on the issue. At one point, Arthur Burns made what I thought at the
time was a pretty effective argument, that the only way to be certain
that you absolutely have to intervene is to declare you are never
going to intervene and you will get some asymmetric bets in the
foreign exchange markets.
If you want to be in a position where you
don't have to intervene in this institutional setting, you have to
declare that you are willing to intervene massively and often to burn
speculation and so on.
It reminds me of Charlie Coombs' beartrap
arguments. In the early 1980s, the Treasury tried out the idea of
declaring unilaterally that we would never intervene. However people
viewed that experience, the Treasury Department abruptly changed our
currency policy at the beginning of 1985 in association with the Plaza
Accord and the Louvre Accord and all of that.
It is troubling to me
that nothing has changed institutionally. In going forward, we can
again find ourselves in a position with an executive or a legislative
branch view that we can or should have a policy toward our currency in
the international markets that is incompatible with what this
Committee thinks is appropriate for domestic markets. We ought to
attack that policy issue as something that our government in its
totality needs to address.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think that if we were to
withdraw in that way, it would create a wound that could very easily
be opened at almost any time.
It would indicate a continuing disarray
in U.S. financial management to any serious observer, official or
private.
I think it could have very deleterious consequences in an
ongoing way and in ways that would be impossible to foresee. There
would always be a question about where U.S. policy was and where the
Federal Reserve was relative to the Treasury. Furthermore, I think
that frankly it would be a display of unseemly arrogance if the
central bank were to walk away from its Treasury in that manner,
essentially being seen as thumbing its nose at the government or maybe
holding its nose. I just don't think that that would sit well with
other governments; I don't think it would sit well with the Congress.
We see ourselves as wanting to be independent in managing monetary
policy for very good reasons, and I don't want to poison the well for
the wrong reasons.
I am afraid that would do it.
MR. LINDSEY. I am very sympathetic to that point of view. I
don't think that in practice we could withdraw. On the other hand, I
also know that we have a Treasury that likes to intervene more than we
would like it to intervene. What I would like to do is give you, Mr.
Chairman, an extra weapon to say "no."
The only extra weapon that I
can think of, the only extra bargaining chip that we can give you,
given that I don't think we can do what Al wants and given that we are
intervening too much, is the implicit threat that we will view the
price of exchange rate intervention as being an interest rate change.

11/15/94

-54-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I used to comfort myself with the observation
that since sterilized intervention really didn't affect anything, it
probably really wouldn't harm anything either, a sort of a no-harm-nofoul kind of rule. But I have come to the conclusion that sterilized
intervention does have some cost. Al just cited the credibility
issue. Also, I am observing that this Committee has a lot of
discomfort with these operations.
I don't know where that goes beyond
what we are already doing in the sense that we probably ought to keep
these operations to a minimum to the extent we can, unless we believe
that for monetary policy reasons we are going to do some unsterilized
intervention; that's a different story. Also, I would say that I
think this discussion is helpful.
More communication about what we
are doing and why would be helpful. When we do get involved in
intervention, it is very hard from time to time to understand exactly
what prompted it on that occasion when it didn't prompt it on other
occasions.
Sometimes, there doesn't seem to be any particular pattern
or rationale.
I would certainly feel more comfortable with it all if
I knew what it was about the circumstances in question that prompted
the action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to call on Ted because Ted has
been around here in this area longer than all of us put together. I
am curious as to how he would respond to this.
MR. TRUMAN.

On the communications question?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, on this general broad issue--the
principles, which you infer, that various Treasuries have employed
over the years.
MR. TRUMAN. I think President Jordan is absolutely right.
In a sense, we are suffering from the fact that various Treasuries
have had a sequence of ad hoc or at least temporary policies for our
currency. I think that relates both to the international value and
the domestic value. Those two things are bound up and are inherent in
the discussion that we had earlier this morning about whether the
foreign exchange value of the dollar in part should be an overt target
for monetary policy. Given the current way things are structured in
the U.S. government, it is difficult to predict where a particular
Treasury or Administration will be on this matter. Administrations do
change and it is, unfortunately I think, an area where personalities,
or maybe I should say philosophies, matter to a somewhat surprising
degree. The evidence on the effectiveness of intervention is mixed,
but I think the academic profession would say today that the pendulum
has swung back somewhat on the question of the effectiveness of
sterilized intervention, and not just through the signaling channels
connected to monetary policy but also the signaling channels connected
to other policies.
I think it is fair to say that, as on many other
issues in economics, experts lie all along the spectrum. [Laughter]
I
think that's right. I have felt that over the years the Federal
Reserve has on balance been a very positive force in trying to
modulate the excesses of various Administrations.
It has not always
been easy and often the Federal Reserve has found itself leaning to
one side of the boat because the Administration or particular people
in control of the Administration were leaning to the other side of the
boat.
This has involved a certain amount of moving from one side to

11/15/94

-55-

the other, though I think the basic objective has been to make sure
that if the instrument is used, it is used sensibly, not overused, and
one does not exaggerate its effectiveness or ineffectiveness.
To comment if I may on Governor Lindsey's price message, that
is certainly in one set of circumstances something we do and have done
implicitly in one form or another. There is another side to it, if I
may go back to the late 1970s. The way I saw the heavy intervention
in that period, which was promoted by the Administration at the time,
was that that was the device which in the end was needed to convince
the Administration that what they saw as bitter medicine had to be
taken in October 1979; it was necessary. It took 18 months to
convince the various people in the Administration, as well as maybe
some people within the Federal Reserve, that that was necessary. It
is difficult to come to the question of disorderly markets narrowly
defined. I don't want to get into this. I think you might not want
to use monetary policy, so that it would be only a club in the closet
under the right circumstances. I think the various German and other
officials who have been involved with us have used it that way.
One further comment: I haven't gone back and checked the
record precisely, so I apologize if I go back and find that I am
mistaken. I would not characterize this Administration as being
particularly trigger-happy in this regard. They have intervened
relatively few times. Aside from the Administration in the period of
the early 1980s, they are probably the least active. The one
difference of strategy that the current Administration has followed,
consistent with what the Chairman has said and probably not
accidentally, is that when they wanted to operate, they have wanted to
operate in significant volume to get the market's attention. Governor
Mullins commented at one point that one could view intervention to
some extent as a type of circuit breaker in the market. If you hit
the market hard enough, it forces the market to stop under some
circumstances and it gives the market the opportunity to stop and say:
Do they know something we don't know, which could be monetary policy
or a variety of other things? In order to do that, you need the right
scale of circuit breaker to get their attention. I think this
Administration has tended to be much more deliberate in its policy of
wanting to operate on a larger scale. But in terms of the number of
days of operations, they have tended to be toward the lower end of
recent experience. We are less than two years into the Administration
and all this could change, but that's something I wanted to point out.
MR. JORDAN. I have a reservation about Larry's suggestion
about the linkage of a visible domestic policy action tied with
intervention promoted by the Treasury. That's because of the
asymmetry that would be involved if we were to get into a world where
confidence shifts around and capital flows were starting to put some
very substantial upward pressure on the U.S. dollar. If we had a
Treasury that decided they wanted to rebuild the cookie jar or the war
chest, I certainly would not want to couple cuts in the fed funds rate
with their mandates to intervene in the opposition direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I am sure it is no
secret to the Committee that this kind of a debate

-56-

11/15/94

They know very well
that there is not wild-eyed enthusiasm for intervention on this
Committee. In fact, that they know that is a very helpful tool for us.
We don't need
that
you are describing; it is already there.
MR. BROADDUS. Can I just make one very quick final comment,
and I appreciate you letting me make my other comments earlier, Mr.
Chairman. Let me just say that I am not a Fortress America guy. I
don't want to be arrogant, but for me one of the highest priorities we
have is always to protect our independence in the conduct of monetary
policy. My only concern here is that intervention activities threaten
that at least to a degree, and it is very, very difficult to fine-tune
it.
That's the key point from my standpoint.
I hope that that will
be very much in our minds going forward with all these operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I have certainly heard all the arguments here and I must
say that I have great sympathy. My own view is that I wish Treasury
wouldn't do it and I wish we wouldn't do it.
I think that would solve
a lot of problems because I am not convinced that that's the way to
stabilize our nation's currency. I don't deny that there are
occasions where intervention actually does stabilize the market. The
trouble is I can think of situations where intervention destabilizes
it.
I am not sure that one can argue that there is a net advantage to
intervention. Nonetheless, we do have very practical difficulties,
which I think a number of people around this table have indicated.
This far along in the process, post-1971, we would create some very
extraordinary events if we were to endeavor unilaterally to pull away
from this sort of activity. So we are going to be involved in it and
as a consequence, we are going to need Committee authority on
occasion. I'd like Ted to raise the issues that are involved here in
the event, for example, that we get into these discussions with the
Treasury and they come up with something that we find not fully
unreasonable. That's an odd way of putting it, but that's the way it
comes out and I will ask Ted to outline some of the issues.
MR. TRUMAN. Maybe I'll just add one footnote to the history
before I pick up on your comment. After 1971, of course, we did not
intervene for quite an extended period of time--March 1971 to July
1973.
It was Arthur Burns and President Hayes who essentially
prevailed upon the Treasury to take that small instrument out of the
closet.
It may have been a big mistake but that was what happened.
That's just one example of where, for better or for worse, this
Committee at that time found itself quite supportive of intervention
because it was a question of caring about our currency, at least
that's how it was perceived. As Governor Blinder said earlier in the
monetary policy discussion, we are dealing in an area where we can
sometimes prejudge perceptions with great confidence.
As the Chairman said, the Treasury has talked about a
multinational, multiday operation that would be relatively small in
scale at least by historical standards, but where we might operate
successively for 3 to 5 days. We might imagine the U.S. authorities
thinking in terms of a budget, if I may put it that way, of $6 billion
of sales, half of which would come from the System and half would come

-57-

11/15/94

from the Treasury under normal procedures. If we did that, we would
as a technical matter have to come to the Committee for clearance to
increase the limit on the change in the System's overall open position
during the intermeeting period. The limit is now set at $1-1/2
billion. The clearance would be for a larger reduction in our overall
open position. The clearance is needed regardless of the direction we
are going. We would raise that--up to, say, $3 billion so that we
could accommodate this type of operation. I guess the only procedural
matter would be that if events over the next few weeks lead the
Chairman to think that that is the right thing to do, we would come to
you to get your clearance. This is not, as technical matter, a vote;
it is a procedure that is partly designed to meet, though maybe
imperfectly, the Committee's desire--a desire reiterated by President
Stern earlier--to have some degree of communication about what we are
doing, maybe not why we are doing it.
It may provide opportunities to
ask why we are doing it, as has happened in some of our conference
calls. It is a mechanism that has been set up both to keep this
Committee informed and to review these matters. After it is all over,
you can review whether it was a success or failure or why it was a
success or failure. Procedurally, it does put everything on the
table.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, let me raise one additional issue
here. You may recall that in an earlier discussion, you were looking
for ways to restrict the size of our operations. You wanted to try to
disgorge some of our foreign exchange reserves. When we intervene in
support of the dollar, we are moving in that direction. We are
squeezing down our capability of acting and squeezing down the whole
operation. I am not sure the Treasury thinks this way, but there
really is an asymmetry here whereby we should be more resistant about
actions in which we are buying foreign currencies to support them
because that expands our reserves. Whereas were we to do anything to
support the dollar, even if it failed, we would accomplish something-namely we would reduce our foreign exchange reserves.
SPEAKER(?).

And at a profit.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, at a profit.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. It sounds to me that you are saying that we are
acting in order to restrain our ability to act, and I am not sure that
that makes a lot of sense. Ted referred to opportunities to discuss
proposed operations in conference calls. Now, one of the great
beauties of the U.S. Constitution, which makes our foreign policy
adversaries furious, is the Senate's right to say "no." My real
question for Ted is:
Do we have the right to say "no"? If we had
that right, in other words if actual vote approval of this Committee
were required, the sticks in the closets would be quite numerous and
that might be quite an appropriate move.
If it is just to notify us
and have us ask questions, I think that's a different issue.
MR. TRUMAN. This is obviously a matter for the Committee to
decide. The historical antecedents of the procedural instructions
were in fact to provide greater restraint on our interventions than
had existed. For example, on the domestic side there is a limit on
the intermeeting change in the System's overall holdings of U. S.
government and Federal agency securities, but that limit is very
substantial and is occasionally raised. On the foreign side, the

-58-

11/15/94

procedural instructions are written the way they are because it is
also judged that in some circumstances--given the international nature
of these discussions since they don't just involve the United States
Treasury but often at least two or three other central banks--they
should provide the Chairman with some degree of flexibility to act on
behalf of the Committee as long as it is consistent with the foreign
currency authorization and the foreign currency directive. We have
subsequent discussions and provide a way for the Committee to be
informed--in contrast to the situation that existed before 1976 where
there could be very large operations and, unless the Committee members
kept score as they went along, they wouldn't know how much had been
bought and sold until the next Committee meeting. The existing
procedural instructions are designed that way, but you can change
them. On balance, I think they work pretty well, but obviously there
has been a range of views on all the issues in that respect.
I think
one of the purposes of having this discussion was in fact, as the Vice
Chairman said, in order to give the Chairman some basis to have
further discussions of this with the Treasury and other central banks.
MR. MELZER. Alan, just getting back to what you said
earlier, my worst fear about what I just heard was that it may work
the first time [Laughter] and give some people confidence that that
can be a substitute for getting the fundamentals right. I'd just pick
up on something you said earlier. Maybe the secret is to keep some
variety in here.
I'd hate to see us get into a mode where there was
some perception that it would be appropriate just because it worked
once. The markets are so much bigger than we and all the other
central banks put together are. Once it becomes known as a mode of
operation and the surprise element is gone, I don't think it could
work on a sustained basis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think that's absolutely right.

Peter

Fisher.
MR. FISHER.
I just wanted to add a footnote to your comment,
Mr. Chairman, about taking the profits on the long position. One of
the things that people in the market do focus on is that the
accumulation of reserves since the late 1980s implies asymmetry in the
U.S. appetite for intervention. That is, we are more prepared to hold
down the value of our currency than we are to defend it.
That in
itself is a major market negative among the analysts who look at our
behavior. That's not a particular reason to intervene on any day or
for any kind of operation, but it is a reflection of the negative
market sentiment about the U.S. authorities in general.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions, comments?

Yes,

Tom.
MR. HOENIG. I don't have a question. In terms of this
conversation and where it has drifted, I am not quite sure what we are
deciding here, but-MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

MR. HOENIG. What I understand, Mr. Chairman, is that we have
been operating in a very restricted way in the sense that if there is
a disorderly market or some other fundamental development, you and
others come together knowing that this Committee is generally

11/15/94

reluctant to intervene. But it depends on circumstances and the
proposed intervention is thought through pretty carefully. I assume
that's how we are talking about going forward from here.
If it is, I
feel comfortable with that.
If we are talking about changing to
large, multiday operations for different reasons than this limited
context, then I would have trouble with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think that's right. I agree with
that. My own personal belief, I think, is probably fairly
representative of this Committee. If anything, I might be more, if I
may put it this way, on the hawkish side in this question. But I
recognize that we have very important responsibilities. I think it is
crucially important for the Federal Reserve as an institution to be a
player here. I think basically that is what Governor LaWare and
Governor Kelley were saying.
MR. TRUMAN. Let me come back to where you started the
discussion with one question that has been kicking around for weeks-whether we should do something not routinely larger but nonroutinely
larger in the interest of varying the tactics. I see some heads going
this way around the table but, of course, that's one risk. I think
the other view of this matter has emphasized that one risk we see is
if we do it once, it might become a bad habit. But depending on how
the market reacts to developments over the next several days or weeks,
a possibility is that we might have an operation that is a little
larger in scale and a little bit more sustained as a way of varying
the pattern of behavior but not necessarily something that would
become a new pattern. I just wanted to make it clear that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. If it is done,
it would be a one-shot thing because if we ever try to do it a second
time, it would fail.
That is what would happen.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MS. MINEHAN.
right, Ted?

Nothing is more sure than that.

It would be in the face of disorderly markets,

MR. TRUMAN. I think I have been around too long to be able
to give you a precise definition of what is a disorderly market.
MR. MINEHAN.
prove we could do it.

I know you can't, but we wouldn't just do it to

MR. TRUMAN. Let me try to do what I just said I can't do.
Disorder to some extent is in the eyes of the beholder. Sometimes we
have a situation where the dollar is weaker than the fundamentals
would justify. Sometimes the weakness has to do with market
conditions. Both situations have been used. Although I know there
are preferences for being more precise, there also are preferences for
being less precise.
MS. MINEHAN. I think there is a distinction to be drawn. I
thought the November 2nd and 3rd interventions were helpful because of
the perception of disorderliness in terms of the Administration's
I think it was helpful in
back-and-forth approach to the dollar.
terms of the country's credibility that we did intervene and that the
intervention was successful.

11/15/94

-60-

MR. TRUMAN.

Certainly, it was successful!

[Laughter]

MS. MINEHAN. That's true. The reason may be, as you said,
that it came at a surprise moment and that contributed to the success.
I would worry if in the absence of a surprise--well, I don't know how
one can know this except after the fact.
MR. TRUMAN. Not to put words in your mouth, we could be
capricious or appear to be capricious about why we are operating. We
ought to have some sense of what we are trying to accomplish and why
we were trying to do it even though it is not always very well
articulated.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
discussion!
MR. FISHER.

the time.

We will all starve if we don't stop this

We need two votes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Whatever you have to say, say it in half
I think President Jordan has the floor.

MR. JORDAN. On this issue of how the intervention is
perceived, the Federal Reserve does not issue statements at the time
foreign currency actions are undertaken. My feeling about
intervention would be significantly influenced by what is said, and I
hope that your contribution is significant not only in terms of what
is done, when, and how much, but also what is said about it.
I don't
have any problem with taking the capital gains from our previous
efforts to short the dollar against foreign currencies. I am not very
happy about the capital gains we are going to take because the only
way a central bank can avoid taking a loss on foreign currency assets
is if its domestic policies have not produced stability and its
currency has depreciated. We have accumulated big capital gains, and
I am willing to cover our shorts, take our gains, and limit our
options to do that again in the future, I hope!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

Peter, you have a comment?

It was really my two votes that I was after, Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We need a vote right now on the issue of
ratifying the actions of the Desk. Let me emphasize that the issue of
ratification is strictly the question of whether the Manager had the
legal authority to undertake the transactions. We are not discussing
the philosophy here. I would like to raise that question and would
somebody move for approval.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. KELLEY.

Move approval.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any objections?
If not,
consider it passed. Now we have another question on the swaps, which
is a one-year extension. Just repeat quickly what the issue is.
MR. TRUMAN.

Reread your recommendations.

11/15/94

-61-

MR. FISHER. We have most of our reciprocal currency swap
agreements up for renewal; those with Mexico and Canada come up at a
different time now.
MR. TRUMAN.

They will come up a year from now.

MR. FISHER.

Yes, a year from now.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I suggest that we take a formal vote on

that.
MR. FISHER. What we have now is no change in the terms and
conditions of the existing swaps with Austria, the United Kingdom,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the Bank for International
Settlements, the Belgian National Bank, the Danish National Bank, the
Bank of France, the Bundesbank, the Bank of Italy, and the Netherlands
Bank. These are all swap lines that have been in place for many
years.
I have no changes to recommend. I seek the Committee's
approval for their renewal without change.
MR. BOEHNE(?).
SPEAKER(?).

Move approval.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would you read the roll.

MR. BERNARD:
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen
to lunch?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]
SPEAKER(?).

Approve
Approve
Approve
No
Approve
Approve
Approve
Approve
Approve
Approve
Approve
Approve

Would somebody like to move that we go

No objection.
END OF MEETING

