Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 22, 1994
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 22, 1994, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Broaddus
Forrestal
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Parry
Phillips

Messrs. Hoenig, Keehn, Melzer, and Oltman,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively
Ms. Minehan, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, Goodfriend, Promisel,
Siegman, Simpson, Stockton, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

-2-

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Bennett, Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald,
Lang, Rolnick, and Scheld, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Boston, Kansas City, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, and Chicago respectively
Mr. Cox, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas
Mr. Hilton, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 22, 1994
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Good morning everyone.

We welcome Cathy

Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
but if you do, so be it!
MS. MINEHAN.

I trust you won't dominate the meeting

I trust I won't either!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
of the February meeting?

Would somebody like to move the minutes

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

So move.

Without objection.

Peter Fisher.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter? I assume that the
econometric model that gave you that forecast has a number of linear
equations in it.
[Laughter]
MR. FISHER.

Yes, undoubtedly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move approval of
the Desk's foreign exchange transactions since the last meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Is there a second?

Without objection.

Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one question?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

MR. LINDSEY. I'm sorry I didn't do it in a timely fashion.
There was some talk in Europe that was critical of the hedge funds of
banks for contributing to the instability. Do you think that worsened
the situation or had no effect?
MR. FISHER. There were some days on which the criticism of
hedge funds or leveraged funds or derivatives worsened the impact.
That impact wasn't very long-lived, but there were a few days when
comments by officials, especially the ones by unnamed officials
allegedly getting tough on hedge funds or derivatives, were
counterproductive. I wouldn't put that as a dominant effect but at
the margin it was a factor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
next.

Okay, I'd like to call on Joan Lovett

3/22/94

MS. LOVETT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions? If not, would somebody like
to move to ratify the actions of the Desk over the intermeeting
period?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And to increase the temporary leeway.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
SPEAKER(?).

And to increase the leeway.

So move.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mr. Truman.

Without objection, both are approved.

MR. TRUMAN. The subject is the permanent enlargement of the
Mexican swap line. I hope the background material that was circulated
to you was reasonably comprehensive and comprehensible and that,
therefore, I can be brief. As was explained, there are two themes to
this discussion. One is the Mexicans' desire for a substantial and
permanent enlargement of their current swap lines with the Federal
Reserve System and the United States Treasury; those lines are $700
million and $300 million respectively. The second is the United
States Treasury's desire not only to be responsive to the Mexican
request but also to set up a consultative mechanism on macro policy
issues among the three NAFTA countries, which makes a certain amount
of sense.
Specifically, what is proposed to be put in place, which is
now thought would occur sometime in the second half of April, would be
a consultative mechanism among the three NAFTA central banks and
finance ministries and an announced increase in the swap lines. What
is being thought about is for the United States Treasury and the
System to increase our combined lines to either $5 billion or $6
billion, though I think there is a preference for $6 billion. The new
swap lines would be divided half and half between the System and the
Treasury. Activation of those lines, of course, would require consent
as is the case at the moment. And normally that consent would have to
be linked to our satisfaction with the economic policies and
reasonable agreements on repayment. Indeed, it's contemplated that
all or most of any drawings would be collateralized. It is
contemplated that there would be a parallel, though somewhat smaller,
increase in the Bank of Canada's swap line with the Bank of Mexico,
though the size has not been decided. The thought is that there would
be some staff meetings with the Mexicans and the Canadians over the
next month that would refine this proposal and then we would come back
to the FOMC for action, probably by telegram. No action is needed
today, but it was felt that a discussion would be helpful. As you
know, Mexico has been the principal user of our swap network over the
past decade or so. The size of the actual swap drawings has often
been augmented by special arrangements. A change in the swap line at
this point would clearly be linked to NAFTA and to the shift in
Mexico, as of the first of April, to an autonomous central bank. It
is not, I should emphasize, linked in any way to the recent pressures
on the peso. I would be glad to answer any questions.

3/22/94

MR. FORRESTAL. I have two questions, Ted. First, is this
proposal contingent in any way on Canada's moving? Second, are these
conditions, for example the collateral and consultative apparatus,
unique to this arrangement or do the other swap agreements have those
as well?
MR. TRUMAN. On the question about Canada, I think it's
required that the Canadians come in at some point. They actually do
have a swap line now. Whether they will agree on the amount that the
Treasury is thinking about, which is C$1 billion to C$2 billion or the
size that the Mexicans are thinking of, which I was told is C$3
billion, I think is another matter.

As far as the conditions are concerned, all swap lines have
at least implicitly a condition in terms of the Committee being
satisfied that any drawing would be supported by the economic policies
of the drawing country. So, in that sense it's the same, and I'll
come back to that in a minute. As for the collateral, normally we
don't have any language to that effect in the actual swap line
agreement. The reason for that in this case is that the Treasury has
had in the past quite elaborate conditions in its own swap line with
Mexico and in its other arrangements relating to outstanding swap
lines. My suggestion, or my inclination anyhow, would be essentially
to leave our swap line the way it is, except to say that the amount X
would be raised to Y. We would rely on provisions of the Treasury's
agreement for these conditions. I think that's a cleaner way to do
these things. So, in principle there could be, as there has been in
the past, activation of one line without activation of the other. But
when an activation took place, then one could decide what conditions
were warranted. We have over the years--both with Mexico and with
other countries in the more distant past--always wanted to make sure
that if a country was going to draw, we had some assurance that they
would be able to repay us from one source or another. But the details
of the conditions specified in advance have varied depending on the
circumstances.
MR. FORRESTAL. But I take it these conditions are
satisfactory to the Mexican authorities?
MR. TRUMAN. I assume so. We haven't had a full set of
discussions, so I can't say that with certainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. First, just a small item of clarification. In
your memorandum you say Canada's line would be increased to between
C$1 billion and C$2 billion, but it is already C$2 billion so I
assume-MR. TRUMAN. No, Canada's line with Mexico would be increased
from its current C$250 million to between C$1 billion to C$2 billion.
MR. JORDAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
line with Canada.

Okay.
It hasn't been proposed yet to increase our swap

3/22/94

MR. JORDAN.

Our own with Canada?

MR. TRUMAN.

Right.

MR. JORDAN. With regard to Mexico, I have very mixed
feelings. On the one hand, I have trouble with all the swap lines,
their utilization, and the conditions. I'm still not satisfied in my
own mind as to what is or is not an appropriate use of swap lines per
se. And in that respect there is no reason to treat Mexico as a
second class partner versus other countries; they are a very major
trading partner of ours and I assume in the spirit of NAFTA there is a
sense of bringing them into the big leagues. Now, whether they really
ought to be on the same level with the Germans and the Japanese I'm
not so sure. On the other hand, when I look at the utilization of our
swap lines with Mexico in the past, it's a very troubling pattern. It
tends to occur at six-year intervals, including 1976, 1982, and 1988-very questionable utilizations. And now it's 1994 and I would predict
that if we do this, the line is going to get used and we are going to
have trouble saying no. It might get used with a supplement even if
we don't approve a permanent increase and there are going to be some
very serious questions about the appropriate use of this facility in
that kind of political environment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. I didn't have a question, but a comment if
that's appropriate now. I have a lot of sympathy with what Jerry just
said. I think Ted has presented a number of plausible reasons for
enlarging this swap. I think the memo that he distributed was very
helpful and it showed that this facility has been used constructively
on a number of occasions in the past. The drawings generally have
been paid back promptly and U.S. taxpayers have not lost anything.
So, from that kind of perspective I think we can make a case for
increasing the line.
But it seems to me that there are a number of broader issues
here that Jerry has alluded to that urgently need attention. The 1951
Treasury/Federal Reserve Accord established the principle that the Fed
needs to be meaningfully independent within the government in order to
conduct our monetary policy effectively. I think we all know that
that independence is indispensable if we are going to be able to
discharge our fundamental responsibilities successfully. We also know
that this independence is granted only grudgingly and it's under
constant scrutiny in the Congress and elsewhere. Consequently, I
think we ought to be very reluctant to take any action that might have
even the appearance of abusing this independence lest we lose some or
all of it.
Now, with all of this in mind, enlarging the swap line with
Mexico worries me a great deal. As I understand it, the line was
initially established back in 1967 to help deal with balance of
payments issues and specifically to help support the then-fixed
exchange rate between the peso and the dollar. That rationale no
longer exists; in fact, the materials that Ted distributed make it
explicit that this facility would not be used for this purpose. So,
it seems clear to me that any loan to Mexico in the current
circumstances in essence would be a fiscal action of the U.S.
government. And fiscal actions--expenditures of the government--are

3/22/94

supposed to be authorized by Congress and Congress is supposed to
appropriate the funds. So, whatever the general merits may be of
making loans to Mexico, I don't think we should be involved without
explicit Congressional authorization, Mr. Chairman. So, I would
oppose an increase in the swap line.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I'd also like to make a comment. I
think that one of the functions of the Federal Reserve is to seek
monetary stability in a broader framework than just the American
economy itself because of the obvious interlinkages of world markets,
as we have heard this morning in Peter's and Joan's presentations. I
think that has a great deal to do with why we created swap lines with
the major trading partners of the United States and countries that in
the past have been a very important part of the world's interlinked
financial system. Mexico, because of a very much better performance
over the last twelve years, has now reached a stage where its economic
performance seems to me to justify being included as a major partner
of the United States and the other participants in the world economy.
It also is a country, being on our border, in which serious financial
instability would have a very definite possibility of spreading across
the border and creating problems in our own markets. So to me it is
appropriate to have the swap line used in times of market instability,
which may or may not be related to years in which there is a
presidential election, as long as we are careful that it is not used
to prop up the value of the Mexican peso when all the fundamentals say
that that would be inappropriate. I think it's very consistent with
our general responsibilities. So, I don't share the view that it is
something that is inconsistent with the role of the central bank and
therefore would demand approved funding from the Congress. I think
it's just as much a part of the responsibilities of the Federal
Reserve as the swap line with Germany is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Well, I must admit that I can support the
recommendation. What concerns me most, however, is its potential use,
a concern related to Jerry's. I recall the paragraph in the Maroni
memo referring to the fact that in 1988 the swap line was used for
window-dressing operations to enhance the announcement of the
country's reserves scheduled to be made by the Director General of the
Bank of Mexico on August 4 and the President of Mexico on September 1.
I think of swap lines as being used to deal with disorderly markets.
I think someone who wants to could make a case that perhaps they were
being used for political purposes. The kindest light one could put on
it is that they were used to prevent the occurrence of disorderly
markets, a view with which I'm uncomfortable as well. It's not so
much the authority that bothers me; it's the potential in my view for
misuse of the Mexican swap.
MR. TRUMAN. Their argument at the time obviously was that
announcing a drop in their reserves would cause problems on the
financial markets and that was the reason we went along with their
request.

3/22/94

MR. PARRY. Hasn't there been a tradition to use swaps to
deal with disorderly markets or do we also use them to prevent
disorderly markets?
MR. TRUMAN. I think they have been used for both purposes.
At times when we have been involved, there have been so-called windowdressing operations. There were some in the 1980s. During the 1982
period they were driven by a slightly different set of considerations
that had to do with domestic currency cover concerns. I think it is
right to question--and I would put it the other way around--whether
central banks
I
think it's fair to say, however, that all central banks do this these
days though they tend to use other mechanisms to window-dress the
reserves rather than central bank swap lines. You could argue that
the use of central bank swap lines, which ultimately becomes public,
has done to
seems much more forthcoming than what
manage their reserves over essentially the past 20 years when they
have
MR. PARRY. But these Mexican swap lines were used in 1976,
1982, and 1988 as well. The political aspect seems apparent.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there have been occasions on which they
have been drawn other than in Mexican presidential election years.
But it is true that those last three have been election years.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I have to admit some ambivalence
toward this. I think that to use the swaps, as the memos themselves
imply, to influence exchange rate levels is risky business. I do
agree with Bill McDonough that they can be used to stabilize markets.
My question is about the size of the proposed increase. From the
material the rationale for the number that we are shooting toward now,
the $6 billion total, wasn't clear to me other than perhaps that the
economies are larger. This is a larger number but it's not
necessarily the right number for any particular reason. Is that a
fair interpretation?
MR. TRUMAN. That's a fair interpretation. The $5 billion
number was a number that in fact the Mexicans put forward a year ago
when they approached us and they had done a rough back-of-the-envelope
calculation of the increase in swap lines since the swap network was
first established. One can come up with these numbers for various
countries in a lot of different ways but it's fair to say that the
largest increase in our trade since 1967 has been with Mexico, both
globally and bilaterally. That's where the $5 billion number came
from; the $6 billion number came from the fact that that was the
number we contemplated providing last November in the context of
NAFTA. So that's the source of those two figures. Neither is based
on fine scientific analysis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I have a question and a comment. Ted, is it
accurate to say that Mexico has been the only country since the early
'80s to actually draw on the swap lines?

3/22/94

MR. TRUMAN.

Yes.

MS. MINEHAN. So the conditions that we impose on Mexico in
some sense do not involve treating them like a second-class citizen;
those are the only conditions that are really operative at present in
terms of our swap lines.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, we went the same way in the past. The
most recent other drawing was in the early '80s by Sweden. And we
asked ourselves the same questions at that time, about how long the
drawing was going to be outstanding, what the conditions were, and how
they would contemplate repaying it. So in that sense we asked the
same questions as in the Mexican case.
MS. MINEHAN. I would generally agree with President
McDonough that this is a legitimate function of central banks in
general. But I would be concerned, to whatever extent we enter into
this swap agreement with Mexico, that we do so on a businesslike basis
for us. In that regard I'd be a little nervous about relying on the
Treasury's collateral. I'm also bothered, as other people have been,
by the history of the drawings and the amount of money that seems to
go from one source of funds to another source of funds to pay each of
them back. And I would be concerned if we didn't take measures on our
own in terms of this very substantial expansion of the line with
Mexico so that if it were to be drawn upon we would have independent
means of securing our own exposure.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, maybe I have not been clear on this. What
I was suggesting, just as a matter of convenience, was not that we
would rely on the Treasury but that the Treasury could put the
conditions in their swap arrangement because they have done that in
the past. We have not put such conditions in our agreements in the
past, whether it's the $6 billion line we have with the Bundesbank or
any of the other lines. And when it came time for a drawing, then we
would draw on those conditions rather than have the lawyers specify
all those things in advance and have to rescramble them when the time
came for a drawing. I was speaking just in terms of convenience from
our side.
MS. MINEHAN.

So you would contemplate that if they ever

needed-MR. TRUMAN. They would have to come and ask to draw on the
swap line and we would have to approve it. And at that time we would
say, "Well, yes, we will approve it as long as we make these
collateral arrangements." That's what I would contemplate rather than
pre-specifying those conditions. But we'll do it either way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I would support the proposal. I think I heard
Al Broaddus saying that since the line wouldn't be used to peg the
exchange rate then it is likely to be used for some other purpose that
would be less legitimate and outside of our scope. However, a
crawling peg is a peg when you reach the limit of the crawling peg.
And at that point it does become an exchange rate stabilization tool.
Also, I would like to associate myself with Jerry Jordan's
introductory comments where he pointed out that if we have problems

3/22/94

with swaps, we ought to deal with that as a generic matter and not
deal just with the case of Mexico.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

What are the consequences of not approving this

request?
MR. TRUMAN. I don't know for certain; that's why we are
having this discussion, if I may put it that way. If the weight of
opinion in the Committee was against going ahead with this request, I
think we would inform the Mexicans and the Treasury in advance so that
they didn't embarrass us and themselves--particularly themselves--by
announcing something they couldn't deliver on.
I think the consequences would be that the Treasury would go
ahead and enlarge its own arrangement, presumably substantially.
Whether they would go all the way to $6 billion and leave us at $700
million, I don't know. But something like that might happen. And
that would affect to some extent, I think, our relations both with
Mexico and with the United States Treasury at this point. But it
wouldn't be the end of the world.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, there are these two issues. One is the
wisdom of swaps in general and how well they've been used. Then there
is the question of whether Mexico ought to be treated differently.
The $6 billion is in line with trade flows and various other economic
ways of measuring these things. So really it's the second issue of
whether Mexico should be treated differently; I think we are not
really talking about the wisdom of the overall swap arrangements
today. So then my specific question is--and I don't think you really
answered the question, Ted--what are the consequences of treating
Mexico differently? What are the consequences of nonapproval? I'm
not clear in my own mind what those consequences are. I don't come to
these discussions on intervention and foreign exchange markets and
swaps with any ideological baggage. I just want to know what the
practical implications are of our actions or lack of action.
MR. TRUMAN. I'm sorry I didn't answer your question. I'm
If
not sure what you mean when you say "treat Mexico differently."
you mean by turning down their request, there have been a number of
countries over the years whose requests, either to join the swap
network or to enlarge existing swap lines have been turned down. So
nonapproval of their request would not be unprecedented from that
standpoint, though in most cases the countries that were turned down
were discouraged before they had gone very far into the process. But
it would obviously have adverse implications at least in the short
term for our relations with the Bank of Mexico--and I think it is not
irrelevant in that regard that the Bank is now entering into a new
status--and also would have some adverse implications for our
participation with the Treasury and the Canadian authorities on the
macroeconomic policy coordination process. I can't speak for the
Treasury, but my guess is that they would be less inclined to pursue
the arrangements they are now contemplating if we were to back down.
We do have a long-standing relationship with Mexico and they have
called upon us in the past for assistance. There have been some
debates about whether it has been appropriate, but it's fair to say
that the Federal Reserve has taken the lead in many cases in helping

3/22/94

Mexico over the past 20 years. So, nonapproval would really have some
implications for our relations with that country and that central
bank.
MR. BOEHNE.
$6 billion?

What are the consequences of something less than

MR. TRUMAN. It's doable but I'm not sure it's worth arguing
about, if I may put it that way.
MR. BOEHNE.

All right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just add a point here. When
Treasury approached us, we toned them down a good deal; we set up a
lot of road blocks in periods when they wanted to move. And we have
that capability of restraining actions which I think this Committee,
myself included, feels uncomfortable with. If we decide that we want
to disengage, we will lose whatever power in that area we have to
influence the system, and that has pluses and minuses to it.
Obviously, we can't acquiescence in a system that is inappropriate.
But there is an interesting tradeoff here, which I think we have to be
aware of, when one asks what the consequences are. I think one of the
consequences if we pull away from this is that there will be a set of
policies in this area that we would find less agreeable. It would be
worse for the country. It might be better for the Federal Reserve;
that's a possibility. But I think we have to keep that in mind. I'm
not saying that anytime somebody comes up with one of these proposals
we should dive in. I feel increasingly uncomfortable because my
inclinations, frankly, are similar to much of what I just heard. But
there is a lot riding on how this whole thing comes out. If we say
no, there will be both pluses and minuses I might add.
MR. BOEHNE.
bigger show?

So this is really the price of admission to a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's a partial price, I would say. We
have never been in a position with this Treasury of essentially
thwarting something about which they feel strongly. Basically
Secretary Bentsen, I think, feels very strongly about this; he was an
ardent supporter of NAFTA. It is his belief that American interests
in the international financial arena rest to a large extent on our
extending those interests throughout Latin America and enhancing
America's international trade position through a NAFTA-type agreement
in that part of the world. This is part and parcel of that operation.
And in many ways if we pull away, I think we lose a good deal of
influence in trying to determine how that all comes out. There is a
limit. I'm not saying we should merely do what the Treasury says
because in fact if we had done what the Treasury probably had in mind
before we put our hands up, I think we would have been acquiescing in
a very loose policy. One second, Bob Parry is first.
MR. PARRY. I certainly would not favor disengagement and I
don't have problems with the numbers that are being proposed. Is it
feasible to have an agreement among the Treasury, Mexico, and us--and
for that matter others with whom we have swap arrangements--that the
swaps would be used to deal with disorderly markets? I would feel
much more comfortable.

-10-

3/22/94

MR. TRUMAN. Well, let me make two points. This Treasury
certainly agrees that we do not want to get engaged in using the swap
line to peg the exchange rate. That's point number one. Therefore,
in the circumstances, we are dealing essentially with pressures on the
exchange rate, which as President McTeer explained, can exist even
with a crawling peg or a floating exchange rate. We ourselves drew on
swap lines in the late 1970s when we were operating with floating
exchange rates because we were intervening. Presumably the
discussions, including the ongoing discussions associated with the
consultative mechanism, are designed not to surprise ourselves, so to
speak, when these things come up. On the question of window-dressing
itself, I think it is fair to say that it's a little difficult-particularly for me speaking as an outsider--to bind all future
members of the FOMC. But I think it would be perfectly appropriate,
based upon this discussion, to convey to the Mexicans in the staff
level talks that we are going to have in the next few weeks that there
is extreme reluctance to use the swap line for window-dressing
purposes. And, therefore, since they have to come and ask our
permission to begin with, they should know in advance that that's an
even harder sell, if I may put it that way, than dealing with more
garden variety disorderly markets.
MR. PARRY.

That's helpful to me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. I guess I'm somewhat confused because the
comments around the table seem to address different parts of this
issue. Are we discussing the merits of swaps, period? Are we
discussing the merits of any swap line with Mexico? Are we discussing
just a request for an increase in the swap line with Mexico? Or are
we discussing the use of the swap with Mexico? Or all of the above?
It sounds like all of the above to me. But it seems to me that this
discussion may be long overdue if we have a whole array of these
arrangements in place with various countries, so perhaps we should be
trying to delineate or define better what our standards are for
engaging in swaps. That's point number one. And point number two is
then insuring that any swap arrangement meets those criteria.
I certainly have great trouble with the use of the swap
either for pegging exchange rates or for window-dressing purposes. I
think that's inappropriate. On the other hand, it seems to me that
Mexico has, within certain limits, handled the previous drawings quite
responsibly even though there may be some question about the purpose
of one or two of them. They handled them responsibly in terms of
their meeting the conditions of the swap, if I have the right
impression. So, if we are going to focus on the use of the swap line,
accepting that swaps are appropriate in certain cases, then maybe what
we need to do is to define what we regard as an acceptable use of the
swap. We have heard all the things we don't think are acceptable.
What is an acceptable use of the swap other than to address disorderly
markets? That is not a question, I guess, but rather a general
statement of my confusion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. To continue Governor LaWare's train
of thought, it would appear that at some stage we may need a greater

3/22/94

-11-

and deeper philosophical discussion of swaps. But that isn't really
what we should be talking about today, it seems to me. We do have
swap facilities. Also, we are not discussing whether we should have a
swap facility with Mexico; we have one. So the only question before
us is to give the Board's staff advice on how to proceed in the
discussions. As Ted pointed out in his opening remarks, he's not
asking for a vote; all he's asking for is some guidance. I am very
much in sympathy with what the Chairman said about the role of the
Federal Reserve among the American monetary authorities--the Treasury
and ourselves--that it is important for us to continue to have the
very positive influence that we have had. And having participated in
that responsibility myself, I think we have used it very wisely and
constructively both at the level of the Chairman and the governors and
Ted and the New York Bank when it has been involved. I think it would
be very unfortunate if the Federal Reserve were not involved at this
particular time given what is soon to be an important event in Mexican
history. And that is that in a country in which the power of the
government is almost unmatched anywhere in the world, they have
decided to have a truly independent central bank. That's a major
structural reform which it seems to me that we as the central bank of
the United States should be supporting by responding to a request
which in any case appears to be reasonable.
As for what purpose swaps should be used, again I'd suggest
that we look at the record of the American monetary authorities, which
is very tough-minded and very good. Ted has been a kind of permanent
feature for many years and anybody who thinks he has been a pussycat
in these matters would be very confused. Our experience with the
present Treasury so far is that they seem to have a rather serious,
sensible attitude toward international cooperation on monetary
matters. The difficulty with saying swaps can be used for X, Y, and Z
is that nobody can define a disorderly market. You know one when you
see one, but they take on various forms. I think our conversation has
been very good in reminding Ted of the views of the Committee, which
he probably already knew and shared anyway. It reminds us all that
the view of the Committee, in my phraseology, is that the swap
facilities should be used wisely and well. But figuring out exactly
what that means is best done at the moment that a request comes in,
which also in my view supports the Federal Reserve's traditional
position that instead of putting a lot of conditionality into the
agreement we should establish the conditionality and the whole
financial arrangements in light of what's going on at the time of the
request. Then we can be very tough-minded; we can be very specific
and demand what's appropriate at that time, which is very, very
difficult to anticipate in advance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry, quick question?

MR. PARRY. Yes, point of clarification. You are quite
correct that it's sometimes difficult to define what is a disorderly
market, and everybody would agree that we should give the authorities
the judgment on that issue. But the issue is whether the authorities
should attempt to prevent what might turn out to be a disorderly
market versus dealing with a disorderly market.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Sure. Just a very brief response:
I think where honest people could differ is if we were moving toward
what we were very certain was going to become a disorderly market very

3/22/94

-12-

quickly--for example, if we and the other central bank involved knew
that the reserves were really moving out. Then we'd have to decide
whether use of the swap line was appropriate. We wouldn't want to
fight the market and defend an artificial exchange rate. But we might
be inclined at least to entertain a request for a drawing on the swap
facility. I'm not sure the answer ought to be "yes." It may very
well be that the answer is "no."
MR. PARRY.

I hope so.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. But since disorderly markets are so
hard to define, to have the combination of, say, Summers and Truman
raise their hands and say this is a disorderly market and then we
debate whether they are right or not is not something I think we want
to get into.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, this is a much more profound
issue about the nature of the Federal Reserve System than I think we
realize. It really gets to the issue the Vice Chairman was raising
earlier as to what type of institution we want to be. And I sensed
this whole philosophical debate in the discussion we have been in the
process of going through dealing with the issue of supervision and
regulation and a consolidated bank regulatory system. I think one can
make a very strong argument for the central bank as a narrow
institution that basically maintains strictly central banking
operations. In that narrow sense, it's not obvious to me that we
would be involved in swaps and it's not obvious to me that we would be
involved in currency intervention. We would restrict ourselves
strictly to domestic monetary policy--and this gets to this other
issue--with an add-on of other functions like supervision and
regulation and the like.
What this question is really all about is the stance of the
central bank in a broader context, in other words a role in which we
do get involved in issues which are in many aspects at the Treasury's
lead. If we want to influence those or want to affect them, it's
obvious if we try to do that, as we indeed have been doing, that we
run into certain types of questions about the nature of central
banking per se. I think the issues that are being raised here are
quite legitimate. They are not issues that relate directly to this
narrow question, however. They really are fundamental to the nature
of what type of central bank we wish to be. And there are strong
arguments on both sides. I have seen the influence of this
institution in this Administration and in previous ones and I would
hate to give it up. I think we are a force for good. And if we
decided to pull in our horns, I think we would be doing a disservice
to the nation. I fully recognize the concerns that have been
expressed today, and I'm as uncomfortable as any of you. And unlike
Ed Boehne, I do carry intellectual baggage into this discussion. I'm
afraid my views are more like those of Presidents Jordan and Broaddus
than anything else, but I do recognize that there are other issues
involved. Anyway, President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, I was simply going to say that going
forward we need to keep in mind that there is a tradeoff between the
good we can do with a somewhat broader function and our independence.
I think we always need to have that in front of us. But the other
point is that as a Committee we need to take a fundamental look at

3/22/94

-13-

some of these basic philosophical issues. The problem I have with the
current proposal is that it's difficult to disentangle the proposal
from the broader issues. If we do this now, then it's going to be
somewhat more difficult subsequently, at an early date, to look at the
broader issues because the current proposal takes us down a particular
path. That bothers me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. The questions I had in mind have been largely
answered by your remarks just now and by Bill's remarks before,
putting this matter into a broader context. I think your remarks are
extremely important. The reason is that the way we conduct ourselves
this year with regard to this issue and how that's viewed when it gets
scrutinized by others could tell us a lot about whether this is or is
not a desirable thing to do. We need to know if it is accepted on
Capitol Hill, at the Treasury, and by others subsequently.
One other comment is that I'd be very careful about going too
far with the linkage of the timing of this with other developments. I
think NAFTA was a wonderful development, as I'm sure everybody else
does, and what the Mexicans are going to do on April 1st I think is
terrific. But I wouldn't want to link this too closely to that
because I don't know whether Costa Rica or Chile or who will be next
in line or when. But to say that joining the free trade agreement and
broadening participation in this sort of thing means that as soon as
they make the central bank independent they can join the swap club is
not a message we want out there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I am in general very supportive
of your comments, and I have the exact concerns that you and my
colleagues have. But two points came up in this discussion that
troubled me. The first is the use of the phrase "this Treasury."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Well, if I read this morning's paper correctly,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What did you see in the paper this

morning?
MR. LINDSEY. Apparently there was some talk in the
Washington wire or one of those columns that he's going to be out but

-14-

3/22/94

that Mr. Altman will not be the successor, Mr. Rubin will be.
just part of it. Is that malicious gossip?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's

That's U.S. news.

MR. LINDSEY. That's U.S. news. It has nothing to do with
the point except that I want to make certain that we are clear in our
own minds that we are not making a deal with "this Treasury," "this
Secretary of the Treasury," "this Deputy Secretary of the Treasury,"
or "this anything." So we should not cloud our judgment because we
will be in bed with other Treasuries and other Secretaries of the
Treasury as well.
Parallel to that is the phrase that was unmentioned and that
is "this Mexican government," which is very much like "this Treasury"
except that it is much more volatile than "this Treasury."
"This
Mexican government" may very well be replaced and we don't know who
the replacement is going to be.
So before we jump on board with
our very warm and legitimate feelings toward "this Treasury" and "this
Mexican government" we ought to realize that's not who we are really
signing on with.
The other question I had--this is actually a question rather
than a statement or speech or whatever--is how do we say "no"? What
I've felt very reassured about is double bullet two on page 3 of the
memo and that is that drawings on the Federal Reserve swap line would
continue to require the agreement of the FOMC. I assume, therefore,
that when these unstable market conditions occur the Chairman would
call a conference call and we would discuss it and vote on it as
needed. Is that correct?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, although it depends on the circumstances;
but yes in principle. In the past that's how things have happened and
I would expect no matter who is the Chairman that's how things would
be done.
MR. LINDSEY.

Well, this Chairman will be with us a long

time.
MR. TRUMAN. We are not always perfect at this, but in the
past efforts have been made by the staff, particularly in the case of
Mexico because the Mexican swap line has been more actively used than
the others, to keep the Committee informed about developments and to
try to anticipate possible requests. There have been discussions and
consultations with the Committee when there have been approaches to
us. Maybe I shouldn't mention it, but the recently released
transcripts included a conference call in October of 1988 about a
special swap arrangement which in the end never was implemented, but
that was discussed extensively by the Committee at that time. And I
would presume that that's the way things would happen in the future.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, I think the real question to ask is how
hard do you think it would be under real live circumstances for us to
say "no"? Say, for example, we are coming up on two weeks before the
Mexican election and there is a legitimate run on the peso--a

3/22/94

-15-

disorderly market because it looks as if someone else is going to win
or whatever. That is a real live case. It's hard to separate out the
politics from the economics. And if we have a disorderly market,
could this FOMC easily say "no"?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think it would be difficult to say "no"
if they came to us, as they have in the past, and asked for a special
arrangement, too. Obviously, you would confront a slightly different
situation if they have a $6 billion--in our case $3 billion--swap line
with us; it may be slightly more difficult to say "no" to an actual
drawing than it would be to set up some special arrangement. But we
can say "no." In 1982, for example, we said "no" repeatedly. We were
dealing with a set of circumstances which were quite different from
what one would hope to see today or in the near future. But we
repeatedly said "no." We did allow them to have a few window-dressing
operations, but that was part of a strategy that set out to get them
in the position so they would go to the International Monetary Fund
and they would change their policies.

So I think the Committee
and the Chairman of the Committee would have to make those decisions
as they came to them. In some sense, you'd have to make those
decisions anyhow. We can't disengage from Mexico; I think that's the
point that President McTeer made basically. Mexico is there, and we
are going to have to deal with its central bank and all its problems
regardless, because we are neighbors and have to share largely the
same space.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer. And I hope you have
the last word because we are running up against time.
MR. MCTEER. I have just a fairly narrow question. This says
we are considering a substantial enlargement of the Federal Reserve
and Treasury swap lines with Mexico. We are the central bank, the
Treasury is the finance ministry, and Mexico is a country. I see in
the footnote, though, that the swap line is with the Bank of Mexico
and with the Mexicans. Is it central bank to central bank-MR. TRUMAN. In our case it is central bank to central bank
and will remain that way. In the Treasury's case, currently it is the
Treasury using the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as its agent with
both their treasury and the central bank of Mexico. I assume they
will continue that practice, but that's a question the Treasury has to
address. But as far as we are concerned, the only issue that would
come back to the Committee would be whether to enlarge our swap line
with the Bank of Mexico from $700 million to X.
MR. MCTEER. Along the lines Larry was getting at, I think
it's reassuring that we are dealing with the central bank rather than
the government or the treasury.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anyone else want to have the
ultimate last word? Let's then move on to our economic discussion and
Messrs. Prell and Truman.

3/22/94

-16-

MR. PRELL.

Ted will begin.

MR. PARRY.

This is out of order!

MR. PRELL.

We switched.

MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PRELL.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. JORDAN. I attended my first meeting of this Committee
two years ago at the March meeting. Over those two years I've been
tracking the migration of the staff forecasts on nominal and real GDP,
prices, and so on meeting to meeting. And at my first meeting in
March of 1992, the projections for 1993 that the staff had at that
time were for lower inflation than is now forecast for 1995. We
started getting forecasts of inflation for 1994 in August of 1993 and
through March of 1994 the forecasts for 1994 were below the current
forecasts for 1995. And now I look at the forecast that we have for
1995 and this trend of inflation in the out years revising upward
worries me. If it's causal, then maybe I ought to leave the Committee
and these forecasts will go back down again!
In trying to understand this and how you make assumptions
about policy that go into putting together the forecasts, Mike, you've
said in the past that you try to read what the Committee is saying and
thinking with regard to its objective, in order to try and ascertain a
policy consistent with achieving that objective. So I went back
through last year's Greenbooks to review the comments with regard to
inflation, and what caused me to do this was something that was
missing from this Greenbook. Beginning in March of 1993 the
Greenbook's statements with regard to inflation were as follows: "we
expect it to slow over the forecast period;" in May of 1993,
"resumption of disinflationary progress;" in June, "lead to some
further disinflation;" in August, "tempering inflation expectations
and downward pressure on wages and price inflation;" in September,
"disinflation trends reemerged;" in November, "further progress
reducing core inflation;" in December, "progress toward price
stability;" and in January of 1994, "movement over time toward price
stability." None of that type of phrase appeared in this one. In
fact this one, very pointedly I thought, shifted instead to "holding
on a track consistent with containment of inflationary pressures." Is
that a deliberate, very significant shift, or maybe a new reading of
what this Committee has as its objectives?
MR. PRELL. Well, as I noted, I think we have provided a
baseline against which you can apply your own objectives. As I said,
if you accepted the structure of our forecast but didn't accept the
implied result for inflation, it would logically lead you to say that
the monetary policy assumption made wasn't sufficiently stringent. As
to the strategy we applied, I think we could plausibly have read the
forecasts that have been made and the statements that have been
enunciated by members of this Committee as suggesting that we would
have given you something useful if we had put in, in terms of our
analysis, a tighter monetary policy and therefore a somewhat slower
growth and lower inflation result over the next two years. In the

3/22/94

-17-

present circumstance, I think we have put in a tightening of monetary
policy that does not seem grossly at odds with the kinds of signals we
pick up from statements that have been made and the degree of
aggressiveness with which you've moved at this point. We have given
you an alternative that is perhaps more comparable to what many
outside forecasts that you might look at embody at this point in terms
of the increment to short rates. That's a hard call to make. It's
hard to say what people are thinking just today.
As to the changes in our forecasts over time, I think what
happened basically is that we made some mistakes. Sometimes we made
mistakes, in a sense, in our policy assumptions; the Committee didn't
do what we anticipated. I would have to admit, too, that we have had
some upside growth surprises over time. But perhaps even more
important, at certain junctures we didn't anticipate how much
unemployment would decline for a given amount of growth. And what we
find ourselves with today is what we think is less slack than we might
have anticipated in those earlier forecasts and less downward pressure
on the inflation rate. So we are not anticipating, without very sharp
constraint on aggregate demand, that we'll get to the low 2 percent
inflation range within the next year or so. That was perhaps a
complicated answer, but you've raised a whole bunch of questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about unemployment
that I don't think is related to that excellent memo that deals with
some of the problems with the new series. It may be a bit related to
your answer to Jerry. Looking at the unemployment rate and the amount
of slack implied in labor markets, it looks as though you have either
a new Okun's Law relationship relative to your previous forecasts or
some kind of an intercept change that resulted from observing where
the first quarter's unemployment rate is. Real growth, if you compare
the two forecasts, is less than it was in the prior forecast and the
unemployment rate is also a fair amount less. Is that just an
intercept change or some conclusion that Okun's Law is operating in a
different way?
MR. PRELL. I think you've put your finger on what is a
significant question and, if we had wrestled with it for a while
longer, perhaps we might have come to a different conclusion. You've
highlighted the key point, and that is that we have taken seriously
our view of what has happened recently--I mean the drop in
unemployment--not seeing clear evidence that it is just a fluke. And
we essentially used this as a jumping off point in this Okun's Law
assessment. If one used a different jumping off point for that kind
of simulation, it is arguable that perhaps the unemployment rate path
could be a couple of tenths higher than what we have. But this is
always difficult. It goes back to the very problem that I mentioned
in responding to President Jordan's question. It has proven very
difficult in recent years to get a fix on that Okun's Law relationship
and where we are in terms of cyclical or trend behavior of labor force
participation in particular. So I think there is a significant area
of uncertainty in this whole relationship.
MR. PARRY. And when you do that, does that raise any
questions or issues about one's view of NAIRU?

3/22/94

-18-

MR. PRELL. No, I think this is separable. But again, going
into this deeply, one gets into questions of labor market structure
and behavior. It's not entirely separable from those features of the
economic system that relate to how much pressure we get on wages and
prices at given measured levels of unemployment.
MR. PARRY. Well, to the extent that the NAIRU doesn't
change, it clearly has significant implications.
MR. PRELL. Well, all things equal, if we held to our
assumption of the NAIRU of 6-1/2 percent or a shade less and we had
unemployment at 6.8 percent, and looked at those numbers very, very
finely, that would be enough slack, presumably, to give us some modest
edging off in the inflation rate over the coming year or two.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mike, I note that in the forecast there is a
roll-back at the long end of about 1/2 percentage point, but suppose
that doesn't happen. How would that change your forecast?
MR. PRELL. My life is flashing before me in the transcripts
of the meetings that were released recently where we got into extended
discussions of these sorts of hypothetical cases. It's a fair
question; it was back then, too.
[Laughter]
I think we made some
significant mistakes in our assessments of what the term structure
would do a few years ago. It depends, obviously, on what circumstance
gave rise to that. If it were in essence a decidedly greater degree
of risk aversion on the part of investors who have been burned
recently and are demanding a much larger term premium, all other
things equal, it would make capital more costly to firms who wanted to
buy equipment and so on. And I think it would tend to damp aggregate
economic activity relative to our current projection. If it were a
reflection of underlying stronger demands for capital based on higher
expected returns, then I think in a sense it could be the bond market
vigilantes keeping things under some control. Whether on net we would
have a higher GDP outcome or not, I don't know. But it would be a
different situation.
at all?

MR. LINDSEY. Let's assume the first; could you quantify it
How sensitive is the forecast--

MR. PRELL. I think 1/2 percentage point at the long end,
even perhaps modifying the rather strong interest-sensitivities in our
model, is non-negligible in terms of economic impact. So I think we
are talking about potentially a few tenths on GDP over the next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
would like to start the tour de table?

If not, who

MR. FORRESTAL. I'll jump in first, Mr. Chairman. In the
Atlanta District, economic activity continues to look quite positive.
Retail sales, for example, have shown very good gains in both February
as well as in early March. Businesses are reporting increased traffic
and the expectation is that the rest of March will be equally good.
In fact, they are reporting their expectation that the rest of the

3/22/94

-19-

year will continue to be good. Home furnishings and durable goods
sales continue to be strong year over year, although they are not
quite as strong as they were at the end of last year. But even with
these good sales, businesses are continuing to keep their inventories
quite lean. Tourism has picked up in the region with central Florida
being the beneficiary of most of it, although I would note that we
have had record crowds at Mardi Gras this year in New Orleans and that
convention activity has been at record levels. That's boosting hotel
occupancy rates as well as the retail sector. And as I've been
reporting for several months now, District casino activity continues
to grow and the states are the beneficiaries of that as their
Treasuries are continuing to grow.
Looking at the production area, our manufacturers' survey for
February reported increases in production and shipments, but the
expectations for six months out were not quite as optimistic as they
had been. It's only marginally lower. Pent-up demand for new cars is
stimulating production for automobile suppliers, although I have to
report that the Saturn factory near Nashville announced some
production cutbacks. But I think that's probably more related to that
particular line of car than a reflection of cutbacks generally in the
automobile sector because, as I've said, the demand for new cars is
certainly stimulating production. Building products producers say
that they are beginning to reach capacity constraints because of
strong residential building.
In real estate, single-family sales remain quite strong and
inventories are very, very tight in many areas. Building costs
continue to climb, as both building materials prices and wages of
subcontractors have increased, although most builders have been able
to pass along most of these cost increases. In the Gulf of Mexico,
the rig count jumped to 132 in February; that's compared to 95 a year
ago and 119 at the time of the last FOMC meeting. That's actually the
highest level in almost two years and it's almost entirely associated
with gas production. Commercial real estate is also improving but
gradually. Absorption and occupancy rates are slowly rising. And we
find that concessions for office space are almost nonexistent now in
the District. New construction is fairly limited to retail and buildto-suit as well as public works activities. In the financial area,
commercial loan demand is showing some signs of picking up, and
residential mortgage demand continues to fuel the real estate lending.
And it's not just refinancing, it's actual originations.
Employment in the District continues to outpace the national
average. Wage pressures continue to be evident only in construction,
although we are hearing some reports of pressures beginning outside of
the construction area. Manufacturers are reporting some more price
pressures for raw materials, although they are not expecting those
price pressures to continue over the next six months. The producers
of building products and furniture continue to report increasing raw
materials and finished goods prices. And lumber prices remain quite
volatile, with cost-of-lumber adjustments now a common feature of new
residential building contracts. Retailers didn't report any price
pressures from their suppliers and none of the contacts that we talked
to plan to raise prices in the near future.
In conversations with business people over the last four or
five weeks together with reports from our directors, I would say that

3/22/94

-20-

the attitude is quite positive and very bullish throughout the entire
District. And those who are doing business nationally and
internationally are equally bullish about prospects not only for
demand but for inflation as well.
As we look at the national situation, our forecast for real
GDP growth is stronger than the Greenbook's, although as we get
further out in the forecast horizon in 1995, it begins to come down
closer to the Greenbook forecast. The reason for the difference is
that we think the momentum that was generated in the fourth quarter,
and perhaps a little in this quarter, will take a little longer to
play out than the Greenbook assumes. Our forecast for inflation is,
in spite of that higher growth, a little lower but the CPI in our
forecast picks up later in the forecast horizon. I think the risks to
our forecast are, frankly, on the down side and I tend to look at the
Greenbook forecast as representing sort of a lower bound of where we
ought to be. So both in terms of the District and the nation, I think
we are in reasonably in good shape.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The tenor of the Third District's economy has
changed during the last several months. Economic growth now resembles
the type of growth typical of an expansion rather than the lackluster
performance that we have been experiencing in the mid-Atlantic region.
Manufacturing is clearly strong in the District, with much of the
strength of the fourth quarter carrying over into the first quarter,
and expectations seem very positive for the remainder of the year.
New orders are up; steel and auto production schedules are strong.
One major railroader told me that his company is running flat out and
adding locomotives and crews as fast as possible. And for the first
time I heard from a sheet steel maker that they plan a significant
increase in their inventories because they are concerned about the
reliability of deliveries.
Residential real estate sales remain strong and industrial
properties are selling well. Although commercial real estate remains
soft in Philadelphia, it has become very strong in the suburbs, with a
noticeable improvement in south Jersey. I would say that strength is
coming on sooner than most of us had thought. One of the major real
estate firms told me that they are hiring additional commercial real
estate agents and not all that long ago they were laying them off and
didn't expect to be hiring them back for some time. And there is
sufficient demand to warrant new commercial construction in the
suburbs starting, I would say, within the next year or two.
As for retail sales, autos and other big ticket items are
selling well. Where there is still a note of caution is with smaller
retailers and smaller items. They clearly have been hurt by weather.
Their feeling is that their sales will pick up, but there is a natural
worry because their expenses have been continuing and they haven't
been selling. They feel pretty good, but they'll feel better when the
customers start coming back in when the snow melts.
Labor markets clearly have strengthened in the District. I
see more help wanted signs in retail stores than I've seen for a
while. But there are few, if any, signs of wage pressures developing.
On the price side, I have not seen any general price pressures

-21-

3/22/94

although most business people tell me that the demand is strengthening
to the point now that they think there may be some opportunities for
price increases in the next few months. They always talk about how
long it has been since they've had a price increase and their optimism
for getting one to stick, I think, has increased. One can sort of see
it in their eyes!
As far as the national economy goes, there are always
uncertainties in these kinds of forecasts. There have been very few
meetings where somebody has said, here it is, the economy is either
going to go down or up and there isn't any doubt about it. There are
always risks. I think our job is to assess those risks. My sense is
that the greater risk to sustainable growth is too much strength
rather than too little demand. I feel that way for several reasons.
The most important thing in any economic expansion is not pinpointing
this item or that item, it's the cumulative momentum that carries us
from one quarter to the next. And I think that momentum is very well
entrenched. We also have a highly stimulative monetary policy. Most
of the drags to demand that we have been trying to get over in recent
years are largely behind us. And there seems to be an attitudinal
change now which looks at sales and other data as a sign that things
are going to get better rather than worse. I think that psychology is
an important part of this momentum.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the District, there is
no question that the underlying level of economic activity has been
and remains strong. And despite the miserable weather that we have
had in the Midwest most sectors, with the obvious exception of housing
construction, have come through very, very well.
There is little that I can add to what you already know about
the automotive sector. The second-quarter production schedules have
been set preliminarily at 9 percent over last year. This increase
would be even greater except that some of the manufacturers are
dealing with capacity constraints with some of their better selling
models. Still, the production increase in the second quarter will be
less than in the first quarter, as Mike has pointed out. Therefore,
the automotive industry's contribution to the second-quarter GDP will
be lower than was the case in the first quarter. The capacity issue
in the automotive industry, though, is an interesting shift from an
industry that for years has been experiencing plant shutdowns and
layoffs. Now in some cases, they are struggling to keep up with
consumer demand, which of course is particularly the case for light
trucks. To address their problem Chrysler, for example, has announced
a $1.8 billion capital investment program. And we are told that it's
very likely that this program will be larger as they get further into
it. Given what Chrysler has been through over the last 10 or 15
years, it seems almost incredible that they are now the industry's
star profit performer. I must say that for the auto industry, all the
way through from the manufacturers to the suppliers to the dealers,
attitudes at this point are really very positive. The heavy truck
business has only gotten better, and Class 8 sales estimates for 1994
have been increased to 185,000 units. The current order flow is the
highest that they've had in 15 years and it's potentially a record
year for some of the major manufacturers.

3/22/94

-22-

The steel industry is running essentially flat out even
though the current capacity utilization number is 93 percent. That
number is somewhat misleading; several companies are really producing
at what they feel is their capacity limit. Some of the major
customers of the steel industry, and the auto companies are a specific
example, have become concerned about the ability of the industry to
meet their demand. Ironically, steel imports this year will increase
and likely significantly, but a large part of the increase will come
from the domestic companies that will be purchasing foreign semifinished products to meet domestic demand. There is another increase
in steel prices coming this summer. Some while ago, U.S. Steel
announced a 2 percent increase that was scheduled for midyear. It
kind of hung out there for a while and others didn't join it; but now
it looks as if the others will support that price increase.
Retail sales have remained on the strong side. To the
amazement of one retailer I've talked to, their comparable store sales
in February were 17 percent higher than last year, with good demand
for higher-priced items. They also worry about the ability of their
suppliers to deliver, and in several instances the suppliers for this
particular company are adding to their capacity.
Despite this very strong level of economic activity I just
don't sense that the price pressures are quite as heavy as I might
have expected. Major companies, particularly those that buy under
contract, are continuing to push their suppliers very hard and they
are continuing to get results from this. Labor contracts continue to
be very restrained, and wage increases are easily dealt with by
productivity improvements, which continue to be very impressive.
Having said that, there clearly are signs that in many cases prices
have at least stabilized and that some are showing slight upticks.
That's particularly true, of course, for steel-related products. But
while prices in the manufacturing sector may be firming, these
increases have been offset by moderations in the service sector. So I
think, net, our outlook for inflation continues to be a constructive
one.
With regard to the national economy, our forecast is very
much in line with the staff forecast. And I think at this point the
risks, if any, are as Ed Boehne has just suggested--namely that
perhaps the numbers will come in higher than our current expectation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. In our District, we certainly have not seen
any significant weakening in business conditions recently, aside from
some temporary setbacks which seem clearly to be related to the
weather. Business is basically good across all sectors and I think
it's fair to say that most of the people we have contact with, our
directors and others, are reasonably optimistic about their prospects
for the remainder of the year. So the overall picture generally is
pretty good and I won't belabor that.
In contrast to some of the other comments we have heard, I
think the major, most striking development in our region has been the
increasing number of reports of rising prices and increased concern
about inflation generally. We see that in our directors' meetings; we
hear that from some of our other contacts.

3/22/94

-23-

as some of you know,
and consequently he has contact
with a number of industries that he rents to, in addition to his
direct contacts with the construction industry. He's a well informed
and I think generally perceptive observer of short-run economic
a couple of weeks ago, he
developments.
emphasized the fact that suppliers that he has contact with across a
broad range of industries are indicating that they are seeing price
increases in a range of 3 to 5 percent for a number of industrial
supplies and materials, and moreover that these price increases are
now, for the first time in this cycle, really sticking. Some other
directors and some of our other business contacts are telling us that
they are seeing increased prices for steel, plastics, and corrugated
paper, and for the first time in a long time, some of our directors
are telling us that they are raising their own prices in a broad range
of industries from textiles to trucking. So we see a little less
favorable news on the inflation front in our region than some others
have noted.
With respect to the national picture, let me make just a
couple of comments about the staff projections and analysis. I have
mainly two points. First, I have some trouble with the downward
revision in projected real GDP. Projected real GDP growth for the
first half has been reduced in this Greenbook from an annual rate of
3.5 percent to 2.8 percent, and for the year as a whole from 3 percent
to 2.7 percent. These are significant reductions. I recognize that
these reductions are predicated to some extent on a now more rapid
tightening in policy than was assumed in some of the earlier
projections. But my feeling is that we are still more likely to get
something like 3 percent growth for the year as a whole. I was
especially struck, Mike, by the projections for consumer spending, for
which I think you have a projected growth rate for the first quarter
of 2-1/2 percent and something like 2-1/4 percent for the year as a
whole. We just don't see that happening. If I calculated correctly,
even if we don't get any change in real consumer spending in February
and March, we would still have a rate of growth in the first quarter
of 3.6 percent at an annual rate.
Second, and probably more fundamentally, we have some
concerns about the Greenbook's discussion of the recent behavior of
long-term interest rates and the interpretation of that movement.
Over the last five months, the 30-year bond rate has risen about 120
basis points, with corresponding increases in other long rates.
That's one of the largest movements in long rates in such a brief
period since the end of the 1981-82 recession. In my view it strongly
suggests that inflation expectations have risen by more than a
marginal amount. And I think that interpretation is widely shared by
financial market participants, as evidenced by their comments reported
in the press and in market newsletters. The Greenbook, in some
contrast, at least in some of the sections of Part I seems to dismiss
or at least de-emphasize this inflation expectations interpretation of
the recent backup in long rates. It seems to offer two alternative
scenarios. The first is that the rise in rates may reflect, at least
in part, higher actual and expected real short-term rates down the
road because of the stronger economy and the reaction to our action
back in early February. But over at least the last six weeks or so
since we took that policy action, some long- and intermediate-term
rates have risen significantly more than short rates. I guess that

3/22/94

-24-

would imply on this explanation that expected real short rates way
down the road have increased, and I just think it's unlikely that the
economic news and policy developments have increased expected real
short rates 20 or 30 years out in the future. So I don't think that
explanation can account for a great deal of the significant backup in
the longest maturity rates. The second explanation, if I understand
it correctly, is that the rise in bond rates may have little to do
with economic fundamentals such as inflation expectations and may have
resulted primarily instead from what, for lack of a better term, I'd
have to refer to as irrational market behavior--some kind of bandwagon
effect with overshooting to use the term I think you used. That may
well be true; I wouldn't deny that. But it's a hard argument to get
your arms around because it's really more a psychological argument
than an economic argument. So it seems risky to me, to put it mildly,
to dismiss or de-emphasize at least the possibility that the reason
for one of the biggest backups in long rates in a long time has to do
with inflation expectations or some worsening in those expectations.
In any event, I think this question of how to interpret this move in
bond rates is one we need to give some weight to when we get to our
policy discussion later in the meeting.
MR. PRELL. Chairman Greenspan, could I inject a couple of
points of clarification here?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

MR. PRELL. One, for what it's worth, the level of GDP is
about the same in this forecast as in the last. As currently
estimated, we got more growth in the fourth quarter than we
anticipated and, in essence, the lower growth rates simply offset that
surprise. The second point is one of arithmetic on consumption in the
first quarter. We don't know what will happen in March; we don't even
know for sure what happened in January and February at this point.
But in your calculation I think you were probably using the currently
published estimates of real PCE for January.
MR. BROADDUS.

Right.

MR. PRELL. The retail sales revisions for January were
dramatic, and they would substantially lower the number one gets doing
the same February/March arithmetic. So that's the key explanation for
why we have as seemingly low a number as we have. On the interest
rate story, I think you did touch upon the various elements in our
thinking, but you went a step further in describing what has happened,
covering things we didn't say explicitly in the Greenbook. You
referred to the 120 basis point rise in long rates since October. I
guess basically we find it hard to believe that circumstances have
changed in such a way as to raise intermediate- or long-term inflation
expectations by anything approaching 120 basis points. We don't find
evidence in the surveys of that kind of movement; we don't see
evidence in other asset prices and so on that really suggests that big
a move. But we don't rule out at all--I suggested this I think in my
comments--the distinct likelihood that an elevation of inflation
concerns did play a role in the recent backup of rates, particularly
since early February. Basically what we said is that, given our
expectations about what kind of news will be coming forth over the
next several months, there will be some allaying of those concerns,

3/22/94

-25-

and thus a part of the backing down in rates is due to some reduction
in those inflation expectations.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, that's fair. The point I was addressing
particularly in the Greenbook as distinct from what you said this
morning--I think the emphasis was a little different--is that you had
a statement saying "we are inclined to think that the emergence of a
large inflation premium per se can explain relatively little of the
That's what struck me when I read
recent surprise in bond yields."
the Greenbook and that's really what I was addressing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, information we received about the
Twelfth District's economy since the last meeting suggests that the
economy has strengthened, although I would point out that California's
economy continues to lag. The District outside of California is
experiencing very strong growth. District employment growth outside
of California was 4.1 percent between January 1993 and January 1994.
Nevada, Utah, Idaho, and Arizona all ranked in the top five states in
employment growth during the last year, and strength in these states
is widespread and is absent only from the mining industry.
Construction is very strong outside of California, with double-digit
construction employment growth in most states. Moreover, strong
permits and nonresidential awards suggest that activity will continue
in the months ahead.
California continues to show mixed signals. Payroll
employment declined again in February. Employment is off about 1.2
percent in the past year and since July of 1990 it is down 644,000.
But it appears that real estate conditions are improving somewhat.
Residential sales in California were up 20 percent in January from the
level of a year ago, which could have something to do with weather.
Contacts also report more multiple offers for housing in many parts of
the state. And the commercial real estate picture is improving, with
stabilizing rents and slight declines in vacancy rates reported.
There are a few prominent forecasters that people follow for
California. One is UCLA and the other one is Salomon Brothers. Both
of them recently have revised upward their forecasts for the state,
predicting that economic recovery will begin in the second half of the
year primarily as a result of the improved picture with regard to real
estate and also the infusion of earthquake relief funds.
Turning to the national economy, I agree with the Greenbook
forecast as far as GDP is concerned, with it averaging approximately
2-1/2 percent over this year and next. It's worth emphasizing, of
course, that this forecast assumes a rise in short-term rates from
current levels. The strong growth that we saw in the last half of the
year has all but eliminated the gap between actual and potential GDP,
as mentioned by Mike Prell, and has brought unemployment close to most
estimates of the natural rate. The further growth projected for this
year would seem very likely to eliminate any gap that might remain.
It seems, as Ed Boehne and others said, that there are few
downside risks to this forecast and conceivably there could be some
upside risks. The Greenbook and the financial markets presume a
significant increase in short-term interest rates this year but, even
if these come about, I wouldn't expect to see any further progress in

3/22/94

-26-

bringing inflation down. Therefore, my expectation for CPI inflation
over the forecast period is very similar to the Greenbook average of
approximately 3 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Well, I have a somewhat less bullish report
than the rest of you. But it's also a little less bearish than has
been the usual case for the First District. Sizable data revisions
and recent data trends suggest that the New England economy is doing
better than most observers, including ourselves, recently thought.
Upward revisions to the payroll employment numbers were substantial
and now show that the region began a gradual recovery in the summer of
1992 or about a year earlier than the originally published data had
shown. Services are the most notable source of employment growth.
Service jobs in the region now exceed their pre-recession peak by
about 6-1/2 percent. Other indicators--unemployment rates, help
wanted advertising, housing permits--are consistent with a gradual
economic recovery in the region. After a very severe recession, New
England's recovery finally seems to be tracking the nation's. Now
despite the net increase in overall employment, large employers in a
number of industries continue to announce layoffs, and manufacturing
employment continues to decline. The shrinkage in defense spending is
hurting the region. The computer companies are still struggling.
Interestingly, however, the region is benefiting somewhat from the
strong performance of the U.S. auto makers despite having no assembly
plants. Companies making various rubber, metal, and textile products
have seen increased demand from the auto industry. Most manufacturers
have ambitious capital spending plans, but few if any have plans to
resume hiring.
Although a few First District manufacturers report scattered
increases in input prices, selling prices are not going up.
Competition is intense in almost every industry, so there is no
automatic passthrough of higher costs. In addition, companies appear
to be using technology more intensively to improve productivity. And
the products they sell also may be more durable and last for longer
periods before replacement is needed than before. One major dealer of
heavy trucks reported that it is common now for truck trade-ins to
occur after 600,000 to 700,000 miles owing to improvements in
technology and durability versus trade-ins at about 250,000 to 300,000
miles less than a decade ago. Severe weather has depressed retail
sales and construction in New England but manufacturers and
manufacturing hours were generally unaffected.
On the national side, we see a deceleration from the pace in
the latter part of 1993 similar to the Greenbook. At issue here is
how much slack does the economy have before it reaches a point where
inflationary pressures increase considerably and how fast will it move
to that point. As the staff noted in one of their briefing papers,
reasonable people can differ on the amount of labor market slack, and
at the margin we do. Our view is that the NAIRU is perhaps 25 basis
points lower than the Board staff estimate or at the low end of the
range. We also see the growth rate of potential GDP as slightly
higher, so we come out with an estimate of a higher capacity for
growth than the Greenbook. On the issue of how fast the economy will
close the gap, we have been impressed by the amount of longer-end
interest rate movement that has occurred since February and the

-27-

3/22/94

constraining effect that has. On the other hand, our estimates of the
future drags from the external sector are less than those of the
Greenbook and we see somewhat stronger consumer durable goods
expenditures and state and local spending and perhaps higher inventory
investment. These forecasts of slightly greater speed are marginal,
however, and we are in complete agreement with the Greenbook
assessment that there is no near-term threat of rising inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Our reports on the Ninth District have been
positive for a long period of time now and nothing has really changed.
In fact, it appears that there has been a further step-up in activity
pretty much across the board both by region and by sector. Attitudes
are positive; employment has continued to increase; expectations about
1994 for the most part are positive, and this is a continuation of
what has been going on for quite some time. If we are looking for
negatives, one thing that has become more pronounced in recent months
is that the phenomenon of Canadian shoppers coming across the border
to spend their money has diminished, in part because of changes in the
exchange rate and in part because of changes in Canadian policies that
have made that more difficult and more expensive. One other factor
that is of some interest relates to housing activity. We have had
brisk sales for quite some time now and we are getting reports from
realtors both in the major cities and in some of the smaller cities as
well that the problem they face is a lack of supply of unsold homes.
That ought to augur well for construction going forward. So the news
in the District certainly remains positive and if anything has
improved even further.
With regard to the national economy, our model, although its
structure is quite a bit different from the one that underpins the
Greenbook forecast, produces a forecast that's really quite similar.
My own view is at least a little more optimistic about the pace of
real growth, which is to say that I think we might do a little better
than those two forecasts. But I think the more salient features of
the outlook have to do with the lack of disinflation, the lack of
further progress in bringing the rate of inflation down both in our
forecast and in the Greenbook forecast, given the monetary policy
assumption.
On this question of slack, we have done some analysis of the
past several years that confirms my impression that the labor force at
least for a time in the 1980s grew more rapidly than might have been
expected. Participation rates rose; the rate of increase in
participation rates appeared to be above trend at least for some time.
That's not a situation that is, of course, sustainable forever, so it
does not particularly surprise me that we are getting slower growth in
participation rates now. And if all of that holds together, I think
it does tell us something about how much slack or how much capacity we
can expect from the economy going forward. If one wanted to be a
little more optimistic about all of that, one would factor in the
international situation because it does appear that there is a good
deal more slack elsewhere in the world, certainly in the other
industrial economies, than there appears to be here at the moment.
Despite all this and despite the strength in the regional economy,
while there may be a minor increase in reports of greater wage or
price pressures, there is nothing very broadly based or very

3/22/94

-28-

significant there yet, at least as far as the anecdotal information
that we are picking up is concerned. There may be a smattering of it
but there is nothing that leads me to believe we have seen any
significant change in that arena at this stage.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Before commenting on the District, I want to
report on the presentation I heard yesterday on small businesses. I
think most of you know the National Federation of Small Businesses has
over 600,000 members. I normally don't pay too much attention to
their surveys, which they do once a month, but I was struck by the
extraordinary upward movement in a number of indicators recently.
Most of the indicators started to turn either in July or by October
and they have moved quite sharply. As an indication of the thinking
of these small businesses the levels are quite impressive: Planned
capital outlays are the highest since 1989 and 1990; job openings are
the highest since 1989; plans to hire are the highest since 1990; and
plans to raise prices are the highest since 1991. With regard to the
general outlook for business conditions, the response chosen was that
now is as good a time as any since early 1990. I have no idea about
the statistical reliability of that survey, but I thought it was so
upbeat across the board that it was notable.
Turning to the District, everything there also tends to be
uniformly positive; in fact, it would be hard to find something that
stands out in our District that is of a negative nature. What is
interesting to me is what is not there. A year ago, I was still
hearing, and I think many of you were hearing, a lot of talk about
anemic recovery, sluggish pace, use of the term "recovery" more than
"expansion," and worry about its sustainability. That's completely
absent in the commentary I'm hearing now. The talk is more about how
much more up side there is. There was another question in the small
business survey about various concerns the firms had:
taxes,
regulations, and so on. A couple of years ago one of the highest
concerns was demand for their products, and that has pretty much
dropped out of what is being reported now. And that's consistent with
what I'm hearing in the District. In the Greenbook, it was said that
motor vehicles production would add 1-1/2 percentage points to growth
in the first quarter, but that that stepped-up production is
transitory and would be fully reversed in the second quarter. That's
not what we are hearing in our District. The auto companies in Ohio
and our part of Kentucky are not indicating in their reports to us
that a drop-off is imminent. Maybe that has something to do with
seasonality; I don't know.
On the national level, I have the same kinds of concerns that
Al Broaddus expressed about the use of higher real interest rates both
in the Greenbook and in Mike's presentation. To say that we are
counting on higher real interest rates to damp aggregate demand and
then try to talk about what we mean by these higher real interest
rates just doesn't square with past experience. Normally, we wouldn't
expect in partial analysis a steeper yield curve to be associated with
a less expansionary monetary policy. In fact, the contrary. We
normally would expect that as an expansion matures, the yield curve
would naturally flatten and very often invert before we get to the end
of the expansion. To say that we have moved to a much steeper yield
curve recently and, therefore, policy is more restrictive, I think

-29-

3/22/94

needs more explanation. If we say that the run-up in interest rates
is too big to be explained by an upward revision of inflation
expectations over 10 years to 30 years, we have a similar problem of
saying that the expected real return to real productive capital over
the next two to three decades has been revised up by 80 to 100 basis
points. So what we wind up with is that we are using the term real
rate to include things other than real rates of return to real
productive capital, mainly risk. And we really ought to make three
separate distinctions there:
the inflation premium, what really is a
real rate in one sense, and what is simply a risk premium that may be
fostered by people's concerns about policies, political developments,
and whatever else. And that's a different way of looking at things
than you were telling us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The Second District is mirroring
what Cathy Minehan said about the First District. It has begun to
participate in the economic recovery, led by very strong exports,
especially to Canada, and what you are all very familiar with, the
strong performance of the financial sector. So wages are beginning to
move up. General economic performance is doing rather well and the
feel of the District is considerably better.
Regarding the national scene, our forecast has somewhat
higher growth and somewhat, but not very much, higher inflation than
the Greenbook. My main concern, to borrow a notion from Ed Boehne, is
whether there is anything around that could break the momentum of this
recovery, and therefore have even the Greenbook forecast wind up being
a bit optimistic. I think there are two possibilities. I certainly
would not label them as probabilities but I think we need to be
attentive to them. There has been considerable concern about what
would happen if all the people who have moved from bank deposits into
mutual funds of various types were to become sufficiently nervous that
they started pulling their money out of the funds. What would that do
to markets? I think perhaps a more likely event would be not that
they would pull their money out of markets but that as they got their
reports on what really happened to them in February and so far in
March, which by and large they haven't received yet, they would become
aware that they are not as well off as they thought they were and
therefore they would become less likely to spend. We could have a
diminution in consumption as a result.
The other possibility, and I certainly do not wish to be
alarmist, is a major problem in the financial markets. I think we
were quite fortunate in that the financial markets, which were very,
very rocky in the first days of March, settled down rather quickly.
But we were working the phones at least as actively with the money
center banks in New York and with the central banks of Europe-specifically including the Bank of England, the Banque de France, and
the Bundesbank--as we ever have in earlier better known episodes of
financial problems. An indication of what was going on is that rumors
began to spread very rapidly in London on the Wednesday of that week,
the 1st of March, about possible very large losses at two money center
banks, J P Morgan and Bankers Trust. As a result, on the New York
Stock Exchange that morning neither stock could be opened. Eventually
Morgan could be opened. In the case of Bankers Trust, the chairman
had to make a public statement that his corporation was profitable for

-30-

3/22/94

the year to date. I remind you that this is a bank that has a AA
rating and had a 26 percent return on equity in 1993. It may be that
the good news is that the rumors were about two banks that are perhaps
most skilled at funding themselves and therefore can handle adversity
with unusual ability. But these kinds of rumors were there. And
let's remind ourselves that in our ongoing concern about derivatives
and the lack of transparency that goes with them, the thing we have
been most concerned about is exactly that--that we could have a rumor,
well founded or ill founded, about a major market participant and that
it would spiral into a liquidity problem. That danger was there. It
was resolved and resolved with almost no publicity, which is the best
of all worlds. But certainly if we have more market turbulence and
this kind of thing is repeated and is not resolved quite so quickly or
quite so quietly, it could be enough to shake people's confidence to
the point that spending would be less, capital investment would be
less, and we would have a lower track for the economy.
My own conclusion is that even though one always operates
with some degree of concern about where the economy really is going, I
personally have much greater uncertainty about whether the economy
will perform about in line with the Greenbook forecast; yes, it could
be a bit stronger but it is not at all impossible that it could be
somewhat weaker. And, therefore, in my own notions of what that tells
me about policy, it is that a certain amount of caution should emanate
from the uncertainty. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. The national economy, as we all know, has been
expanding rapidly and that's a phenomenon we would expect to see
continue on a path above that shown in the Greenbook. For example,
industrial production over the last three months ending in February
grew at an 8.4 percent annual rate; payroll employment grew at a 1.6
percent rate from November to February which was in line with the
growth over the previous nine months; and the unemployment rate,
adjusted for changes in measurement, seems to have declined in an
amount about equal to 1 percentage point over the last year.
In the Eighth District, we would expect economic performance
in the first quarter to be affected somewhat adversely by unusual
winter storms, especially in the southern and eastern parts of the
District. But, nonetheless, District activity and employment have
grown faster than in the nation as a whole over the past year and
especially in the most recent three-month period for which we have
data--ending in January. So, obviously, the full effects of those
storms wouldn't be reflected in that data yet. Employment reports
recently have been dominated by expansion in industries as diverse as
appliances, finance, poultry processing, trucking, bicycles, and
autos. Particularly noteworthy are double-digit annual rates of
growth in employment during the most recent three months; this would
be in the electrical and transportation equipment industries and in
construction. Recent announcements that Chrysler will reopen an old
plant in the St. Louis area and that Ford will expand its production
line also in St. Louis, along with the previously announced 1995 plant
reopening by GM, indicate a dramatic resurgence in investment and
employment in the transportation sector over the next few years.

3/22/94

-31-

The continuing strong performance of the District and of the
national economy as well reinforce my concerns about the inflation
outlook. Over the past five months both consumer and producer prices
have accelerated from their pace over the previous five months.
Producer prices for finished goods, for example, increased at a 1.6
percent annual rate since September 1993 following a 2.7 percent rate
of decrease over the previous five months. Consumer prices
accelerated from a 1.8 percent to a 2.7 percent rate over the same
period. In addition, and that's why I mentioned industrial production
and employment trends earlier, I think the potential for bottlenecks
and price pressures is growing. Capacity utilization has reached the
level recorded at the previous cyclical peak in July 1990, and labor
market conditions adjusted for recent changes in survey methods are
rapidly approaching the degree of tightness that existed at that time
as well.
Not surprisingly, I think inflationary expectations have also
increased, as reflected in the 25 basis point upward shift in the
yield curve following our last meeting. This was on top of a 50 basis
point steepening that had already occurred between October, when long
rates touched their lows, and our February meeting. One final note on
this score would be the question:
Is a significant increase in
inflationary expectations plausible when price levels were declining
as recently as last year? And my answer would be, "you bet."
If you
look at the postwar period, there essentially have been nine periods
of declining inflation. And in the four quarters following those nine
periods, the average increase in inflation rates over those fourquarter periods was 2.2 percentage points. So it's not at all
implausible, given what's going on now, that there are significantly
higher expectations with respect to inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Eleventh District employment growth has been
greater than the national average for some time, but so far this year
it has been below the national average. I suspect that that's because
much of the country is recovering from recession while the Eleventh
District is just recovering from sluggish growth. On the other hand,
hours worked in manufacturing in the District continue to be at record
levels; the weekly figure is 43.2 right now. In addition to a weaker
rubber band effect in the Eleventh District, low energy prices and the
absence of a major automobile manufacturing sector probably have
something to do with our relative weakness. We apparently don't
benefit from manufacturing of automobiles and we don't have a parts
industry like the Boston District does.
The actual pickup in major economic activity from NAFTA still
seems to be in the future, although there is a lot of activity going
on with companies positioning themselves to do more trade and new
entrepreneurial start-ups trying to figure out how to trade. There is
some confusion on just how to do it and some lag in the ability of
public authorities to teach people about the proper paperwork and so
forth. All indications are that NAFTA trade is going to be a very big
deal soon. You probably heard that Dallas was chosen as the Labor
Secretariat location for NAFTA, a good right-to-work state getting
that honor.

-32-

3/22/94

Construction of homes has been fairly strong in the District,
creating some shortages of building materials, particularly bricks but
also glass and other materials, and some shortages of skilled
construction workers; we have reports of some upward pressure on
building materials prices and on blue collar wages relative to white
collar wages. As for news from board meetings, I guess the most
significant news I'll admit is that the Houston Board, which
perennially is our most negative board in terms of its assessment of
local economic activity, reportedly had a very upbeat board meeting
last week. They are talking about a lot of new strengths in the
Houston economy, which has been the weakest major metropolitan area in
the District. Loan demand has picked up considerably and the larger
banks are reportedly seeking loans very aggressively. A couple of
weeks ago we had a meeting of our Advisory Council on Small Business
and Agriculture and
--used to report that when he tried to get a loan from a
bank it was not "no," it was "hell no." He now reports that it's not
"yes," it's "hell yes."
[Laughter] If you're looking for potential
weaknesses in the economy, I would just offer the possibility that a
lot of people refinanced their house in 1992 and 1993 and when income
tax time comes there may be some negative surprises for them in the
next month.
With respect to the national economy, I have no comment on
the Greenbook except that it contains more "blue" than usual.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To begin with our
District, I will tell you that it's growing at a strong pace now.
Recent employment numbers show a growth rate for the District as a
whole above 3 percent. This is showing up in manufacturing not only
of nondurables, which I've reported on before, but of durables as
well, reflecting our auto industry and our aircraft industry, which
for our region has shown some expansion. Construction in the region
generally is very strong. I spoke with
in the Kansas City region just last week, and

he indicated that the activity prospectively for the next 90 days is
as high as he's ever seen it, higher than the 1985-1986 period. As a
result of that, they are seeing some strains in terms of getting
access to labor, but not necessarily in wages yet, and also in
materials.
Agriculture is stable; there is a tradeoff between some
increases in price in the grain side which is in effect hurting the
cattle side to some degree. Energy in our District is still modest,
with oil being a negative but natural gas being a positive, and there
has been some drilling activity as a result of that. Banks
financially are strong and are also seeing an increase in demand for
loans. And their attitude toward making loans I would say is very
positive. Just to talk a little bit about prices in the region, we
are not seeing systematic increases yet in the data. Land prices are
increasing but at a rate only slightly above the inflation rate in the
last survey that we did, and the same is true in some of the labor
markets. However, on the anecdotal side, I'm getting increasing
information that some price pressures are beginning to emerge. The
same
that I talked to said that they
are seeing materials prices move up sharply. He quoted a figure as

3/22/94

-33-

high as 15 percent in some of the materials that they were bidding
for. In land prices, I've reported at other meetings that in the
rural areas of Nebraska, Kansas, and Wyoming we have seen land prices
move up. In some cases, we have seen them rise sharply and the
impetus is not from outside buyers but from neighboring operations
trying to expand. So we are beginning to see that.
On the national level, we continue to view the outlook as we
did at the last meeting in that we see inflationary pressures that are
increasing more rapidly than shown in the Greenbook--not by a lot but
I think by enough to matter. We see that widening as we go out into
1995. There are three reasons for that in our judgment. Number one,
generally we expect growth in GDP to be above that in the Greenbook.
Secondly, we see the unemployment rate coming down more than the
Greenbook; the difference is small but combined with faster GDP growth
it's important. And finally, as you know, we view the natural rate of
unemployment as being somewhat higher than the Greenbook. So the
combination of all those factors, in our minds, adds up prospectively
to the emergence of significant inflationary pressures. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As was said early on,
our job here, of course, is to assess risks. And I think most of what
we have heard today has been centered around the risks that we see in
the upside direction. I certainly can't disagree that that is
probably the most likely scenario, but I would like to inject a couple
more notes of caution into that if I may. I don't disagree that these
risks are probably the most compelling argument. But I do think there
are good reasons not to assume overly confidently that that's the only
scenario. I think there is a probability that's considerably above
zero that we may be a good deal further away from this full
utilization flash point than we think we are.
First of all, the Greenbook forecast points to a considerable
slowing in the real economy. It describes the consumer as neutral
going forward from here. I'm not sure what that means, but I agree
with it.
[Laughter]
I have spoken before about the very heavy debt
load that consumers have; as of now it's all still there. And as Bill
McDonough mentioned a few minutes ago, we may have some nasty shocks
in the wealth effect area that people are about to find out about.
Indeed, going forward from here, I think almost all of the major
sectors are projected to slow. After this quarter, unemployment
ceases to go down in the Greenbook projection and capacity utilization
stops going up. I find it hard to ascribe very much of that in 1994
to the effects of a slowly rising federal funds rate, though there may
be some effect at the margin. Now, more slowing is projected for
1995, and I can associate that a bit more with a rising funds rate.
In short, that projection just doesn't look anything like a runaway
boom to me.
The foreign economies, particularly the G-7 countries, have a
very slow recovery under way, if indeed it is under way. And the
projection is that their under-utilization gap never does close at all
over the forecast period, and their inflation stays low and indeed
gets lower as time goes on. This tells me that our net exports are
going to be a continued heavy drag; there is going to be continued
heavy pressure for other economies to export to the United States at

3/22/94

-34-

very attractive prices, and I think that implies a rather strong
pricing discipline on our own domestic producers. I'm not sure the
International Finance staff here would agree with that; I think they
believe that effect is more limited, and historically I'm sure that
they are correct. But in the foreseeable future, I think foreign
competition will continue to have a strong disciplinary effect on
prices in the United States.
In the area of productivity and unit labor costs, we have
recently been seeing a rate of growth in unit labor costs that has
been substantially below the inflation rate. In 1993 it was .9
percent. The Greenbook projects that to jump a lot next year to 2.9
percent, which would be very adverse if it happened. But even if it
does happen to that extent, I still don't see 2.9 percent as being an
inflationary flash point. But is it going to happen? The reason
given for that very adverse development is that productivity has been
running much better than trend, and it's got to get weaker in order to
come back to trend. That just might be a tad academic. It may be
that the folks out there in the real world who are fighting to make a
living may not realize that they've been performing way above trend;
they may feel they have to keep it up in order to survive.
[Laughter]
My impression is that they are doing that. So it's possible that we
will continue to see a substantial improvement in productivity that
may be more secular than cyclical, as the case may be.
Interest rates cut both ways. On the one hand, I would
certainly agree that real rates are low and stimulative, and that's a
very important point. But on the other hand, this 70 to 100, maybe
120 basis point increase in long rates that we have seen, however you
want to measure it, is a powerful restraint. We can talk all day
about whether they are real increases or not real increases and to
what extent one way or the other. But the fact of the matter is that
it's a large increase and it points to very substantial restraint
right now. The Greenbook projects that long rates are going to come
back down in association with a rise in the short rates; that's
happened before and conditions may exist today where it will happen
again. But it's hardly a cinch bet. That could be an important
constraint.
Finally, there is the matter of inflation trends themselves;
they are still improving. Three years into an expansion, the 12-month
change in the core CPI last month, the latest figure, was the best we
have had in a long time. I realize, of course, that when we talk
about trends we're looking backward and we need to look forward. One
reason that these trends have been looking so good in the face of an
expansion has been the fact that we have had a weak recovery, but then
one reason the recovery has been weak is because there was a weak
recession before it; we started out at pretty good levels. Trends
change slowly most of the time. The first thing they've got to do is
to stop moving in the direction they are already moving, and in this
case they haven't yet. Then later they may reverse. Certainly, there
is evidence that that's going to begin to happen. The last time we
met I used the phrase "there is dust on the horizon." Certainly, some
prices are rising; there is no doubt about it. Maybe this trend will
reverse faster than trends usually do, but I don't think it is
completely insignificant that so far that is just not happening. The
trends are still in the direction of slowly declining inflation. Over
the previous 12 months, the PPI change was almost flat. The core CPI

3/22/94

-35-

last month, as I mentioned, was the lowest it has been in a long time,
at 2.8 percent and on a downward trend so far.
Is there danger that we are going to get behind the curve or
alternatively, if we do move now, that we could conceivably choke off
the expansion? I seriously doubt both of those. But I do think it's
possible that we have a situation here where the economy, at least for
a while, is behaving in some new ways. It could be that if we are not
being pushed hard right now to move--if we are not in danger of
getting behind the curve--that it might be worth keeping our powder
dry for a little while to see how some of this plays out. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. That's a nice sequence and I'd like to associate
myself with a lot of what Governor Kelley just said. I want to add to
that my perplexity about the projected relationships between four
elements of the forecast. The first is the presumed direction of
policy and the trajectory of interest rates associated with that
policy. The second element is GDP in the context of that policy and
in the context of what we presume to be potential for the economy. In
its effort to tie all of that into the projection for the CPI, the
staff has come up with a projection for the balance of 1994 and well
into 1995 that has the CPI running at a higher rate than it did in
1993 and 1992 and the GDP running at a lower growth rate than in 1993
and 1992--in fact tracking very close to what we presume to be the
potential for the economy. Those things don't make much sense to me.
Either the staff has underestimated GDP and it is going to come out
higher than projected and therefore the CPI numbers are more
reasonable, or it has underprojected the CPI. If it is the former,
then the question that I would raise is whether we have the right
monetary policy. If in fact we are projecting a monetary policy
involving rates that are rising gradually to a certain level with the
result that the economy is growing at a relatively sluggish rate and
there is no projected progress against inflation, then clearly, given
the stated objective of stable prices, do we have the right policy? I
don't have the answer to that at the moment, but in the context of
some of the things that Governor Kelley was saying, I just don't feel
comfortable with the conclusions that one seems to be forced to draw
from those projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. There has been a lot of discussion
about where we are right now with respect to the real economy. It
does appear, no matter how we measure things and how January and
February actually come in, that the economic strength is broad-based.
And as part of that strength, we are seeing strong productivity
improvement, which really bodes very well for strength in housing and
in household spending. Certainly, the labor markets are a bit
difficult to read right now given the changes in the survey method.
But even with that difficulty, it does appear that there is some
improvement in the labor markets. We are even getting some
improvement with respect to the deficit. There hasn't been much
discussion of the deficit recently; in fact, I don't think anybody has
even mentioned it today but that's something one should chalk up in
the positive column. Moreover, the capability for financing growth
seems to be continuing to strengthen. Certainly, there is uncertainty

3/22/94

-36-

in the secondary markets, both the bond and the stock markets, but the
overall cost of capital remains relatively low. Banks are in a strong
position to finance further expansion.
In terms of the outlook, I certainly can't disagree with the
notion that whether we characterize this as an expansion or a
recovery, it is sustainable and it may well be at or above potential.
Perhaps somewhat like Mike Kelley, I've been asking myself whether or
not this is a picture that's too good to be true. I do think that
there are some checks on potential runaway growth. Maybe this is the
proverbial soft landing that Mike Prell referred to. Re-engineering
is definitely entrenched in corporate culture. The focus is on cost
savings and improved productivity. There is a flip side, of course,
with respect to job quality. Even though we are seeing job growth,
the question remains as to what kind of quality there is. So in a
sense that is a check on growth. We have a low saving rate; Larry
Lindsey has spoken about that recently. I have a hard time believing
that current household consumption levels can remain at the same rate
given the income growth rates that we have seen recently. There is a
continued international drag; with our trading partners being weaker,
we are certainly the ones that are leading this growth.
With respect to inflation, certainly the recent history is
excellent, but again we have to focus on the future. It's hard to
know when there is a problem with respect to when are we shifting from
disinflation to either a flattening or an increasing trend. Certainly
we can look to some of the underlying price series, including
commodity prices. While commodity price run-ups are not sufficient to
cause CPI increases, they would be necessary. So, while the increases
we are seeing may not work their way into the CPI eventually, I
certainly think it's a signal that should put us on alert. There are
some vulnerabilities with respect to future price movements. Low crop
carryovers this spring make food prices quite vulnerable to whatever
is experienced with respect to the 1994 harvest. Oil prices have been
obviously benign. They have been the very thing that has kept our
recent inflation performance very good. I guess I have a healthy
skepticism. Maybe I stood in some of those oil lines too long to be
comfortable with declining oil prices. We are still not sure how the
health care reform movement is going to shake out. The economy has
been running ahead of potential, and if it continues at that same
pace, eventually at some point we are going to see price pressures.
We already are hearing some anecdotal discussions of bottlenecks and
supply shortages. So I think there are some vulnerabilities even
though price increases haven't yet shown up in the inflation
statistics.
In terms of assessing the risks to the economy, I guess I
come to the conclusion--and maybe it's because I've spent a lot of my
life in the markets--that perhaps the markets themselves may be one of
the sources of vulnerability. I think they are undergoing a great
deal of sorting out right now. Market adjustments are not
instantaneous, though if everybody heads for the door at the same
time, we could get a massive movement. But given the very complicated
sets of portfolios now in markets--and I don't mean just hedge funds
or pension funds or financial institutions, but portfolios throughout
even the manufacturing sector--I think the price movements that one
can get as interest rates change may be somewhat exacerbated when it
occurs. The steepness of the yield curve in fact may be exacerbating

3/22/94

-37-

the problem. We were going through a shift in expectations with long
rates coming down; maybe the decline overshot last fall; I don't know
that we are ever going to know that fully. But the process was under
way last fall and long rates were shifting down. When the Fed
tightened, to use a bad analogy, that threw a monkey wrench into the
gears of the market system and participants are having figure it out
and work out a new direction. Part of the problem is that it is not
clear what unwinding of portfolios and adjustments are being made.
Sometimes we get mixed signals because portfolio positions are very,
very complicated. The markets themselves I think are certainly a
reflection of this changing, shifting portfolio adjustment process
that is occurring. This whole process is compounded by other kinds of
uncertainties, domestic/political uncertainties, Korea, potential
trade wars with Japan and China, and trading partner weaknesses. For
me the bottom line is that the markets don't need any more uncertainty
with which to deal. So whatever we do, we shouldn't let the markets
get in the way of economic recovery or expansion, however we
characterize it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think we have heard today a
very optimistic view outside of New York and Washington and a very
pessimistic view from those of us in New York and Washington. I hope
it's natural for people in Washington to be pessimistic; you just have
to live here and watch it.
[Laughter]
But I've decided that everyone
is right. I think the reason comes down to the fact that the real
after tax return to riskless saving is negative. And that is our
problem. The natural response to that situation is that people first
of all go into durables and housing, as they have been doing. Indeed,
I think the last time that the rush into real assets was as great was
probably 1979 when the real after tax return to riskless savings was
also probably as negative or more negative than it is now. The other
things people do are to take on more risks, avoid the tax man, and go
abroad for new opportunities.
I just want to throw out a few fun facts. In 1993 the rise
in the dollar value of the Hong Kong stock exchange was almost half
the rise in the dollar value of the New York stock exchange. Hong
Kong is an emerging market and they have lots of reasons to be
optimistic about China, but the fact that it grows half as much in
dollar terms I think suggests that people are running overseas in
search of higher returns. I'm a little more concerned when I see that
the rise in the value of the Bangkok stock exchange was $51 billion
compared to $432 billion in the NYSE and that the Ankara stock
exchange--I wonder what percentage of the American people could
identify Ankara on a map of the world--was $42 billion, almost a tenth
of the increase in the value of New York stock exchange stocks.
Home equity loans and mortgages in general because of their
tax favored status have reached levels that clearly suggest that the
funds are being used for consumption purposes and not simply for
buying new homes. They may also be used to fund tax sheltered
investments, which have also reached new record shares of total
saving. In addition, at the end of the year margin debt hit a level
as a ratio to disposable personal income not seen since the month
after the Chairman joined the Board of Governors, and we know what
happened shortly after that! Margin debt fell precipitously, we know

3/22/94

-38-

that. Again, people are reaching for risk; it is also a tax favored
method of borrowing because up to a limit it is tax deductible. I
think, therefore, that we can have a booming economy and at the same
time have the very high risk situation that Bill McDonough talked
about and that my colleagues on the Board just discussed. Both are
true. The answer, I think, is to raise the real after tax return to
riskless saving. My preference for how to do that would be largely in
the fiscal policy area, but I'm not going to hold my breath. So,
although I'm leaping to the next agenda topic, I would go for what we
can do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
shorter than usual.

Let's keep this coffee break a little
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. JORDAN. Don, in the early part of your remarks, you made
reference to the credibility of the Committee's commitment to, you
used the word, "contain" inflation, and later in your remarks you
said, "to contain inflationary pressures or to reduce them further, if
that is your objective." So, again, you were using the words that
Mike used earlier in his remarks about containing inflation, and I
don't know what happened to the rhetoric about the objective of
reducing inflation, a route moving toward price stability. If it's
the staff's interpretation that this Committee has changed its longterm objective based on what we submitted in the February meeting,
then I think maybe in our May meeting we ought to schedule a
discussion as to what are the long-term objectives of this Committee
to give you guidance as to what kind of policy input we need.
MR. KOHN. I'm not sure I can add very much to what Mike said
in response to your previous question except to say that my words in
regard to alternative C were meant to suggest that strong action--50
basis points now and likely considerably more down the road--would
probably be more consistent with getting inflation down than the more
gradual, though not very gradual, path in the staff forecast. I think
it's the same issue. In effect, the staff forecast has inflation
leveling out at 3 percent. In the judgment of the staff, given our
assessment of spending and inflation pressures, stronger action may be
needed to bring inflation down. And that's what I tried to convey-MR. JORDAN. Did I read too much into your expression "or to
reduce further, if that is the Committee's objective"? It sounds to
me as if you are doubting that that is our objective.
MR. KOHN. I was just suggesting that that's the alternative
you ought to consider if you really want to bring inflation down and
make measurable progress. That would be one reason for looking at
alternative C.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Recently, growth rates of the narrow measures of
money have slowed and the broad measures, if you adjust them for stock

-39-

3/22/94

and bond flows, have slowed. The only measure that has accelerated
has been the monetary base and that's entirely in currency. Where is
the currency going?
MR. KOHN. We don't have current data on that. We do have a
sense that the flows overseas are large. I don't think we have a good
fix on where they are going, especially since where they might go
initially--suppose they went to Switzerland or something like that-doesn't indicate what the final destinations might be.
MR. MCTEER. In the last couple of months, interest rates
have risen a good bit and all the monetary aggregates that count in
this country have slowed. Would you say we have had a significant
tightening already?
MR. KOHN. I tried to suggest that some of the slowing might
be in response to the rise in interest rates, though ordinarily we
would think that it would take longer. On M3 in particular, we have
these institution-only money funds that are very sensitive to small
changes in interest rates, and we think that accounts for a
substantial part of the minus 7-3/4 percent M3 in February. On M2 and
on M1, I think we have a somewhat different phenomenon. A lot of that
is in the mortgage prepayments and, in fact, they have come off, as
you know, as mortgage rates have risen since last October. That has a
temporarily depressing effect on M1 deposits, which we expect to come
back. So if anything, I would think that M1 has dipped below its
longer-term trend or what we might expect over the longer run and
might come back a little. But with higher interest rates, we would
certainly expect M1 in particular to slow substantially from the 10
percent plus pace of the last few years. That would be our analysis.
M2 is more questionable. We think that M2 does respond at least for a
while to higher interest rates, but then we have questions about the
effects of higher interest rates on the flows to the stock and the
bond funds. So the effect of higher interest rates, particularly if
accompanied by rising bond yields and capital losses, on people's
preferences for M2 versus bond and stock funds may muddy those waters.
But we would expect higher rates to damp M2 growth a little, at least
for a time.
MR. MCTEER.

It sounds as if you're saying the signals are

jammed.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If nobody else has questions, why don't
I get started. I'd like to take a minute to put the current period in
some historical perspective. We have had extraordinary financial
turmoil, and it's worthwhile to go back in time and see where it came
from and where it's likely to go. My impression is that we are
looking at the aftermath of the 1987 stock market crash, which is the
first and perhaps the only major stock market crash in history that
actually was beneficial to the economy. In other words, it appeared
to me in retrospect that the crash stripped out a high degree of
overheating and sort of got right to the edge of where the overheating
got into the muscle of the economy and stopped. We came out of it
with a very shaken environment but one which recovered relatively
quickly. As a consequence of that, from the 1987 stock market crash
on, all the key risk spreads started to narrow. We saw it in, say,

3/22/94

-40-

the rates on six-month commercial paper versus the Treasury bill rate;
we saw it in BAA corporates versus Treasuries. The only abnormality
is the junk bond trend which was affected by the emergence of that
market. But there has been a general decline in those risk premiums,
which has led increasingly to the view implicit in the market that
there is a risk-free environment and one that incoporates, as we have
noted previously, extraordinary rates of return on stocks and bonds.
Those returns not only have been significantly higher than average but
remarkably stable. There has been very little volatility in the stock
market until recently. And as a consequence of that, we saw the
emergence of a huge mutual funds industry, which was able to promise
above average yields and stable yields. I don't know the size of the
industry now--$2 trillion or something like that--but it has become
the major player in the marketplace.
Everything we know about markets is that abnormal rates of
return, especially those built on capital gains, cannot persist.
Indeed, the closest example of this in recent times was the preSeptember 1992 hedging, or I should say investments, in a number of
European currencies. You will recall that the Swedish kronor was
yielding significantly more than most money market instruments and the
deutschemark. So everyone figured that the kronor was locked into the
deutschemark, and investors took positions in the Swedish kronor at
high interest rates, hedged it in the deutschemark/dollar market, and
got blown apart. This sort of led to the beginnings of the ERM
falling apart.
I think we are looking at something not terribly
significantly different in this current situation. Prior to our move
on February 4th, the market had drifted into a state of somnambulance
at low risk premiums, and there were steady upward price pressures.
While we all recognized at the time that the stock market was a little
dicey and we were worried about the mutual funds, I don't think we
were aware of the apparent underlying speculative elements involved in
the markets on a worldwide basis that I think our February move
unearthed. I think it was a wakeup call which basically got everyone
to look up and say: How long can this go on? And if our wakeup call
had not occurred on February 4th, there would have been another wakeup
call coming some other time within days, weeks, or months. I believe
we in effect dislodged a brick from an edifice when it was vulnerable
to being hit by something. What actually eventually hit it was the
Philadelphia Federal Reserve's February publication. That morning the
CPI came out at zero and the bond market took off; it rose to 6.39
percent on the 30-year bond, which was 10 basis points above its level
before we moved, and by the end of the day the Philadelphia Fed index
for February came out, it closed at 6.54 percent. Now, it wasn't the
Philadelphia Federal Reserve index itself that moved the market; that
was a catalyst. The way we knew that is that when the March index
came out and the index turned around, the bond market tried to rally
and it rallied for about 10 minutes and got its head cut off. So
really, these are secondary catalysts to a far more fundamental
restructuring that's going on. Views of the market structure are
undergoing a major review at this stage and portfolios are undergoing
dramatic changes. We have seen some increase in yield spreads but
they are still quite low by any historic standard, which suggests to
me that the adjustment process in the capital markets, in the
portfolios of pension funds, mutual funds, and individual households,
still has a long way to go. I'm not saying that means that interest

3/22/94

-41-

rates have to adjust; I mean that portfolios are out of kilter and are
still being adjusted.
When we moved on February 4th, I think our expectation was
that we would prick the bubble in the equity markets. What in fact
occurred is that, as evidence of the dramatic shift in the economic
outlook began to emerge after we moved and long-term rates began to
move up and hence the discount factor on stocks began to move up, we
were also clearly getting a major upward increase in expectations of
corporate earnings. While the stock market went down after our
actions on February 4th, it has gone down really quite marginally on
net over this period. So what has occurred is that while this capital
gains bubble in all financial assets had to come down, instead of the
decline being concentrated in the stock area, it shifted over into the
bond area. But the effects are the same. These are major capital
losses, which have required very dramatic changes in actions and
activities on the part of individuals and institutions. I believe
there was a view that the capital gains in the bond markets were
largely permanent because the economy was perceived as coming off a
relatively high fourth quarter but would begin to ease at a somewhat
faster pace, and it didn't do that. And this development created a
very significant shift as to where the capital losses occurred,
although it may not have significantly altered what the actual
possible losses overall would have been, combining the stock and the
bond markets.
With the improved economic outlook, risk premiums have
remained quite low. And the reason they are continuing quite low is
that the risk to the economy is not perceived to be a crucial one. So
even though we had some pickup--for example the risk spreads of the
six-month commercial paper vis-a-vis the bill rate have gone up
moderately--it's the first rise in a long time and the spread is still
basically low.
There is a very strong view, which is reflected around this
table, of a very solid economic outlook. Indeed, I'm hard pressed to
remember when the outlook itself looked as unequivocally expansionary
as it does today. We are always able to find reasons why it's going
to cave, and there are lots of different figures we can adduce. The
only real danger to this economic outlook, as I see it right now, is
the financial structure. And that, as I think the Vice Chairman said,
has a low probability of inducing a downturn. But if the financial
system were to be ruptured, it would not be terribly difficult to
bring the economy down very quickly. If you want precedents for that,
I suggest that you merely go back and read the business annals that go
back 50 or 100 years. They show economic conditions looking
absolutely terrific three weeks before the roof caves in. So the
outlook is one thing; history I think has to temper it. Nonetheless,
there is no doubt about the very strong underlying forces in the
economy.
The one area, as I think I said at the February meeting, that
has potential upside risks is the inventory situation, which continues
to be fairly tight. I think the lead times are probably just now
beginning to move out. Somebody here mentioned steel mill inventories
picking up; I've heard some of that myself. We are beginning to get
the first signs that the inventory numbers may be moving up, and if

3/22/94

-42-

that's the case, that would maintain a higher level of economic growth
than I think we otherwise would have gotten.
There is no question that we have cut the tail of the
probability distribution for the economic outlook, even though in a
modal sense the outlook itself is not all that much higher than it was
six months ago so far as 1994 is concerned. There was a good deal of
concern six months ago that the economy might fade very fast. The
truth of the matter is that it has not. And in the event, even though
the modal expectation hasn't changed, the probability distribution has
changed, and I think that's a major factor that has moved into the
bond market and the whole constellation of interest rates.
I thought the most interesting aspect of the discussion
around this table today was some element of surprise--and I don't know
how to phrase it but it involves almost everyone with the exception of
Al Broaddus. Everyone is concerned about a pickup in inflation,
tightness and stringency picking up, and the fact that commodity
prices are moving, but there is no apparent acceleration in wages or
final goods prices.
This raises a very interesting issue that we ought to think
about. I don't know where it leads us, but a year or so ago I raised
a question about the absence of financial tinder--meaning credit,
debt, and money supply--in the economy, even as the economy was
picking up and we were beginning to see some shrinkage in excess
capacity. But a year or so ago, we had soft inflation and excess
capacity. Looking strictly at what the data show to date, the
inflation rate, if anything, is somewhat less than we had expected.
We have very detailed data for January and February, or more exactly
probably half-way through February. We have very detailed data on
daily spot prices of a lot of things. And we have some data from
purchasing managers' reports which have never been terribly useful
with respect to inflation. We have very clearly seen some pickup in
underlying commodity prices; we have seen very little evidence of
accelerating inflation in any of the data on final prices. Even the
February CPI, in which the core rate was up .3 percent, is not a clear
indicator. I'm not inclined to pick pieces of it and isolate them,
but there was a .6 percent increase in owners' equivalent rent, which
was way above average. If you bring that down to average, that takes
off another tenth of a percentage point.
The reason I raise this question is that we have an economy
which doesn't look like anything that we have experienced in the last
30 years. In the last 30 years, when we saw a tightening of slack in
the system, we also saw a pickup in credit demands and we had
inflation. That, however, has not been the universal experience in
this country. If we go back to the 1920s, there were several periods
of significant tightness in markets but no significant credit
expansion and no inflation; that was also the experience even in the
1950s. I raise this issue because we are pretty far along in this
business cycle. So why is inflation not showing its head a little
more? Now, the next set of numbers may come out and I'll be sorry I
said this, but the earlier experience raises the question: Is it
automatically the case that when the economy is tightening up that
inflation takes hold?

3/22/94

-43-

I would submit that looking at the simple short-run Phillips
curve, which is what we are doing, without a credit variable in it,
may be misspecifying the process in question. As we all know, the
shrinkage of credit has basically reflected balance sheet strain in
the latter part of the 1980s and has at the same time been associated
with extraordinary weakness in all of the aggregates. To be sure,
there has been a pickup in credit--in loans and debt, but from very
low levels and the numbers do not support, at least historically, any
significant inflation pickup. I must say that I find this whole
process very puzzling, because it does not seem likely to me that it
can continue in this way. I'm sort of waiting for the credit numbers
to really begin to move, for the patterns to begin to look like those
I have found so familiar, being a business forecaster for a number of
decades.
There is something different going on. I don't know yet what
it means, but there are two facts that coincide with one another that
at least should raise our awareness. One is that we are not yet
getting final demand price increases, and it may very well be that we
are getting extraordinary productivity increases that are keeping unit
labor costs down and the competitive pressures there. That is why, of
course, commodity prices, which are clearly going up, are not working
their way through the system in a direct manner. This is the type of
situation where we are looking at a credit picture and a lack of
inflation that is more reminiscent of the '20s than of the last 30
years. And that is something we ought to keep in mind, because if we
are basically going to presume that there is an automatic
relationship, I think there is at least a question as to whether that
is true. I'm not sure that really affects what policy should be
because I don't think there is any question that at some point and in
some manner, if we have accommodative monetary policy at the central
bank, credit has to become excessive and it has to become inflationary
or all of our concepts about how the monetary system works will have
to go into a radical revision, which I can't at this stage even
remotely contemplate.
Where this leaves me, putting the inflation issue aside for
the moment, is that I think we have to restore policy to neutrality as
fast as we can. What I really have in mind here is to eliminate the
excess degree of accommodation, which I assume is basically feasible.
If we were dealing strictly with the economic outlook as it stands
now, there is no doubt in my mind that this economy could absorb a
very large increase in interest rates without a problem. The
difficulty I have is that I don't think the financial system can take
a very large increase without a break in its tensile strength--which
we strained significantly the last time but did not break. It's a
risk, frankly, that I think we should be quite concerned about.
So, we have the issue of, one, moving as fast as we can and
two, doing it in a manner that doesn't break the markets. But as I
see our objectives here, there is another characteristic as well. One
of the elements that I think we have all been observing with respect
to the markets--and one of the reasons why there has been such a level
of instability in the markets--is that when we were perceived as
moving on the basis of economic data, the markets had a certain sense
of what it was we were doing. Now, Jerry Jordan doesn't like that
approach to policy and I have considerable sympathy for his point of
view, but it did give the marketplace a semblance of knowing what we

3/22/94

-44-

were doing. Now they are worried that they don't know when we are
going to move, so we have this Sword of Damocles hanging over the
market. They don't know whether we are going to move in 2 days, 5
days, or 12 days; they have no basis to judge and they are
understandably nervous. So the question is, having very consciously
and purposely tried to break the bubble and upset the markets in order
to sort of break the cocoon of capital gains speculation, we are now
in a position--having done that and in a sense succeeded perhaps more
than we had intended--to try to restore some degree of confidence in
the System. And that means we have to find a way, if at all possible,
to move toward a policy stance from which we will not be perceived as
about to move again in any short period of time.
That essentially leaves us, as far as I can see, with two
options: moving the funds rate up 25 basis points or 50 basis points.
I don't think we have an option, incidentally, of doing nothing.
There is no case that I feel comfortable with for doing nothing, so I
would frankly reject "B."
But leaving that option aside, I do think
we have an interesting choice. A 50 basis point increase would move
the funds rate to 3-3/4 percent. In my judgment that would not be
perceived of as neutrality or where we ultimately have to be. My own
view is that eventually we have to be at 4 to 4-1/2 percent. The
question is not whether, but when. If we were to move 50 basis
points, I think we would create far more instability than we realize,
largely because a half point is not enough to remove the question of
where we ultimately are going. I think there is a certain advantage
in doing 25 basis points because the markets, having seen two moves in
a row of 25 basis points at a meeting, will tend almost surely to
expect that the next move will be at the next meeting--or at least I
think the probability of that occurring is probably higher than 50/50.
If that is the case and the markets perceive that--and they perceive
we are going to 4 percent by midyear, moving only at meetings--then we
have effectively removed the Damocles Sword because our action becomes
predictable with respect to timing as well as with respect to
dimension. My own impression, if we decide to move in that direction,
is that the last move we might want to make--say, for example, the
funds rate was at 3-3/4 percent and we decided 4-1/4 percent might be
neutrality--is that perhaps we should add 50 basis points at that
point. That would ring the gong as the end and we could in effect
withdraw from the race, provided that during this period rising
inflationary pressures did not actually start to become real as
distinct from prospective.
So, I must say at this point, having struggled with this
issue for quite a long time and having given considerable thought to
trying to convince myself that 50 basis points might be the best move,
I come out thinking that while 50 basis points has a very good logical
argument for it, it's too soon. It doesn't quite get us there and I'm
not sure that it gains the advantages that we would want. My own
inclination at this stage--I may sound a lot surer about what I think
ought to be done than I am because we know the markets are very
tricky--is to do 25 basis points today, but go asymmetric because the
chances of our lowering rates in the intermeeting period ought to be
zero.
There is the possibility that the numbers may turn out to be
a lot stronger than we are projecting--remember that the Greenbook has
industrial production effectively slowing in March. In fact, the

3/22/94

-45-

weekly data results for March point to a decline, not a rise, so there
is also the possibility that this expansion could slow and ratify the
Greenbook projection. If that in fact turns out to be the case and we
get a removal of any significant pressures, then we have the
opportunity of maintaining a slow pace in moving up into a neutral
policy area because that has been our program all along; this had
nothing to do with inflationary pressures. If, however, wholly
independently of our process of going to neutrality, we begin to see
that this economy is not slowing--or more specifically, if we see that
inventories are really beginning to move up, because that's where I
think the vulnerability is--then we will have a second set of
decisions to make. We would still have the path to neutrality to
implement, which as far as I'm concerned we have to get to, but we
would have an added factor on top of that--an additional tightening
superimposed on our move to neutrality because, in effect, we would be
seeing an economy that is actually beginning to heat up. My own guess
is we are not going to see the economy heat up until the funds rate
gets to 4 percent, meaning that I think we have enough time to move
meeting by meeting, which gets us to a 4 percent federal funds rate at
midyear. Then I think we will be in a far better position.
That's the way I came out. I took a lot longer to discuss
this than usual because I've been thinking about it longer-productively or otherwise, I'm not sure. But I lay it out as it seems
to me and frankly am very interested in any counter-arguments or
issues that people would like to raise, not only with respect to the
policy but with respect to all the pieces. Where I come out really
depends on this evaluation of the outlook because what concerns me at
the moment is not the economy; the economy looks terrific to me. I'm
worried that we could break the back of this financial system and find
out in retrospect not only that this situation has the negative
characteristics of some of the data of the 1920s, but we could also
find out that the experience of the 1987 stock market crash, which was
benevolent, is not something that is likely to be replicated. Ed.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the case for a less accommodative
policy today is quite persuasive. We did press hard on the monetary
accelerator to get the economy moving, and now as the economy
approaches cruising speed we have to ease off the accelerator to avoid
having to slam on the brakes down the road. The real issue--the major
issue as you point out, Mr. Chairman--is how much to move. I prefer a
1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate compared to
1/4 because I think we have some distance to go to get to a neutral
policy, and it's better to cover that distance earlier rather than
later. Also, I think a 1/4 point increase is so small, given where
the economy is, that it will set off almost immediate speculation
about the next move. So we will just repeat what we have gone through
in recent weeks. I think a more decisive 1/2 point increase can
reduce uncertainty, especially if accompanied by an appropriate
announcement.
Now, there are always risks to decisive action. One risk is
that we might be overestimating the strength of the economy, and a
less accommodative monetary policy might damp its growth too much.
Given the underlying strength that we see, that appears to me to be a
small risk, and the best protection against that kind of risk is a
willingness on our part to reverse course if need be. I think the
greater risk is that we may have gone too slowly in raising rates for

3/22/94

-46-

this stage of the economic recovery. Historically, waiting too long
to adjust rates has been a greater risk, and I think it's the one that
we need to be especially sensitive to in this current environment. I
am sensitive to the financial risks that you point out, but I must say
that in one form or another that has been the argument around the
table for not moving in the past when we should have moved. It also
may be that this point is significantly different from other points
historically, but my guess is that if we push on this economy, we will
get inflation and we will end the growth. So one can come up with
lots of arguments, some subtle, some not. I think the important thing
is to stick to the basics and go to the heart of the matter. We have
an economy that is telling us that we need a less accommodative
monetary policy, and in my view we ought to move in that direction
decisively. It's surprising , but when people do things decisively,
they end up getting better results than if they try to outsmart
themselves and consider all the angles in the curve. So, I think we
ought to go to the heart of the matter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think that robust growth in real
GDP in recent quarters has sharply diminished the slack in both labor
and product markets. And if growth does not slow as much as
anticipated, we could be facing significant upward pressures on
inflation. Despite the action taken at the last meeting, the real
federal funds rate still appears to be, in my view, unsustainably low.
I think those who favor moving toward a neutral policy stance should
therefore support a significant increase in the federal funds rate.
Even if a neutral stance were to require a real funds rate of only
1 percent, we would still need a large increase in the nominal rate to
reach that level. Those who favor such things as nominal income
targeting rules should also support a significant increase in the
federal funds rate. We have looked at various nominal income rules,
and they suggest that we fell behind the curve at the last meeting and
that we now need a large increase to catch up. And finally, financial
markets appear in my view to be expecting significant increases in
interest rates over the next six months. Thus, I feel that a 50 basis
point increase is needed. An increase of 25 basis points would
probably not be sufficient to prevent an increase in inflation and
certainly would not be sufficient to make further progress in reducing
inflation. Therefore, my first preference would be Bluebook
alternative C. However, since I believe that whether we do things
today or a couple of weeks later doesn't make all that much difference
in terms of impact on the economy, I certainly could accept 25 basis
points today if we had asymmetric language to the up side and at least
the possibility that a move could come prior to the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Let me just say that I agree 100 percent with
Ed Boehne. He said it very well; he really reflected my position
completely. I have just a couple of comments. Again, as I suggested
earlier, despite the good news on current inflation at this juncture,
we can see clear signs that an inflationary psychology is building,
and I think that's reflected most clearly in bond rates. You
mentioned historical perspective. From an historical perspective, I
would like to suggest that the hallmark of our monetary policy
strategy in the 1980s was that when these kinds of episodes occurred

-47-

3/22/94

and we got into this type of situation, we reacted. My own view is
that maybe not all, but a significant part, of the substantial
progress we made in that decade in bringing inflation rates down from
close to 14 percent to close to 3 percent currently, reflects that
strategy, and I would be reluctant to abandon it. Moreover, if one
looks at that period in some detail, when we were willing to move more
aggressively--and I would say that included the spring and summer of
'83 and the spring and summer of '84--we got pretty good results and
rather quick results with respect to inflationary psychology and bond
rates. In contrast, when we have moved more slowly, such as in the
early months of 1987, the results have not been as favorable. So,
against that background, I think we need to move aggressively now to
deal with this growing inflationary psychology. I have a very strong
preference for alternative C. Are there risks in doing that? Yes,
there are. But my own feeling is the same as Ed Boehne's--that the
risks are at least as great in not taking this action; I think there
is a good chance that we would be seen as too cautious and too
tentative.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think I'm with you with a
modification. We definitely want to send a signal to the market, and
I think that there are two ways of doing that. One, which is not an
option before us, is to go to a number that is a credible--a round
number that people would say is the natural rate. One might
contemplate a 75 basis point increase to 4 percent. I'm not
recommending that, but one could suggest that. It would be clear to
market participants that we had stopped. Going to 3.75 percent in my
mind doesn't indicate anything. It doesn't suggest that we are going
to stop at 4 percent; it doesn't suggest we are going to stop at
4-1/4 percent; it doesn't suggest that we are going to stop at 4-1/2
percent. It does suggest that we have another increase coming down
the road. Since I don't think a 75 basis point move is credible and I
don't think 50 basis points sends the signal of certainty, I found
your suggestion of 25 basis points probably preferable. But where I
disagree is on the asymmetric directive because the great benefit of a
move at this meeting with the intent that we are probably going to
move at the next meeting and at the meeting after that is precisely to
remove this uncertainty that we are going to move on some odd Thursday
in April, which is one of the things that was spooking the market last
month. So, while I have no disagreement at all that we want to get
there as quickly as possible, in my mind a move of 25 basis points
now, 25 in May and 25 on July 5th seems to be a pattern that will get
us there in splendid time. No one can accuse us of upsetting the
markets, and we will establish more certainty in the market that we
are headed to a fixed point that is higher than I think we would
achieve with 50 basis points. So I would vote for 25, symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just respond to that because I
have great sympathy for the point you are making. Ideally, we should
be symmetric for exactly the reasons that you state. The problem that
I have with it is that I'm thinking of two separate potential monetary
policy paths, which may be additive. In other words, if the situation
is evolving in a relatively stable manner, then the symmetric language
reinforces the fact that we are moving only at particular times. The
probability of our easing is very small, and I think we can probably
handle the problem that you raise in the way the minutes are written.

3/22/94

-48-

In other words, the minutes could reflect our thinking that the
asymmetry is not a break from this pattern but a wholly different
option in the event that our evaluation is inappropriate. That's the
way I would look at it.
MR. LINDSEY.
next meeting.

But the minutes won't be seen until after the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's true, but nobody will know the
directive was asymmetric until they see the minutes.
MR. LINDSEY. I know, so what we are talking about is how we
are going to look in the future?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. As far as I'm
concerned, the asymmetry is there only in the event that the economy
or inflation begin to look much stronger than we at the moment
anticipate. Now, if that occurs, one other possibility is that we can
leave the directive symmetric and decide to go with a conference call.
That's another possibility.
MR. LINDSEY.
consistent.

I would prefer that.

It's more internally

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the equivalent, as far as I'm
concerned. In fact, we are in such an important period of the
expansion that I think the more we talk with each other, the better
off we are. I find consultation frankly quite useful. President
Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. With regard to the early part of
your remarks, I agree very much that we need to think differently
about what influences the purchasing power of money. It has never
made sense to me to think that growth per se reduces the purchasing
power of money. That's really a phenomenon of the last few decades,
when we got into this notion of demand management, which I have
increasing trouble with as the way to think about how monetary policy
or fiscal policy influence the purchasing power of money. Of course,
I have a lot of problems with Phillips curves and gap or slack type
models. When we think about individual sectors of the economy,
agriculture being the most notable, if we have a spontaneous increase
in output--what we would call bumper crops or economists would call an
exogenous increase--that reduces prices of agricultural products.
That's true, really, with most sectors of the economy. Otherwise we
call it a productivity increase--something we can't explain is called
a productivity increase. That's the nature of a capitalist system;
that's what you would expect to happen in the market economy. That
is, the inherent resiliency to expand, removing the depressing forces,
does not mean per se that the purchasing power of money should erode
at a faster rate.
That view says to me that we don't want asymmetry if there is
a possibility that asymmetry would trigger an action related to growth
because it would characterize this Committee as basically not liking
growth. We see the economy growing fast, and therefore we are going
to react against that; I have a lot of problem with that. I thought
Mike Kelley's remark about caution in interpreting where we are was
very useful; it's very worthwhile to think about that. Mistakes are

3/22/94

-49-

made in conducting monetary policy. Occasionally, somebody has to say
"Oops." We know that's going to happen; policy mistakes will be made.
So it comes down to a question of which mistakes we find most easy to
correct or least damaging to the economy once we realize that we have
made a mistake. That's similar to the comments that Ed Boehne was
making about where the risks are. If we assume that the economy is on
a satisfactory path now, a gliding path toward some notion of its
capacity and inflation is not accelerating and later we find out we
were wrong, that is a very costly thing to correct. Whereas if we
assume that we have stayed too easy too long and we need to move very
quickly to get to this ideal neutral policy stance, and we find out we
were wrong, that's a relatively easier thing for us to correct,
politically and in other ways.
In a world where we do not have monetary aggregates to guide
us as to the thrust of monetary policy actions, we are kind of groping
around just trying to characterize where the stance is. I don't know
where neutral is. But if I were out in the northern part of Gary
Stern's District, I wouldn't know where the border between Canada and
the United States is. For that matter if I were in a sailboat in the
middle of Lake Erie, I wouldn't know where the border is located. But
that doesn't mean that it's not a very useful idea to think that there
is a border there. And it's a useful idea to think that there is such
a thing as a neutral policy stance. I feel very strongly that we are
nowhere near a neutral stance and that we ought to be aggressive in
moving toward it. The only way I would be comfortable with 25 basis
points is if I were assured that it was going to be accompanied by an
action of the Board on the discount rate. Absent that, I think it
would be a mistake to go 25 basis points at this time. And I think it
would be a mistake to go to asymmetric in any case.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Well, maybe you stand where you sit on these
issues. Being in the First District and not being surrounded by signs
that are as optimistic as those that give rise to the optimism in the
other Districts, we at the Boston Bank have had a lot of arguments in
getting ready for this Committee meeting. But they tended to be more
about moving up 25 basis points versus doing nothing. I think we
could buy into 25 basis points. We think that would be more smoothing
to the markets and would be expected as opposed to a stronger move
that might not be expected. We also believe that with higher rates
there is the possibility of a weaker economy than the Greenbook
projects, and we would not like that to occur. So by and large we
would be in favor of the 25 basis point increase. We would also be in
favor of a symmetric directive or a conference call if we want to make
a change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, from our point of view, in terms
of the evidence we have seen, there is a very good economic case for a
move of 50 basis points now. I think we need to get to the higher
level sooner rather than later. Based on listening to your remarks on
the markets, however, I'm inclined to go with Governor Lindsey's
proposal. If we are trying to bring some certainty to the markets, I
think an asymmetric directive would be wrong because when it is read
after the May meeting, it would reintroduce uncertainty in the period

3/22/94

-50-

between that meeting and the July meeting. Such a directive means
that we might do something between meetings and I think it would
confuse people. So, I would favor a symmetric directive to go with
the 25 basis points. And if the the numbers on the economy differ
from our expectations, we can have a conference call and make the
decision at that time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as we try to make a policy
decision, I suppose all of us to some extent are guided by the
forecasts. As I look at the Atlanta forecast, I see very rapid growth
for 1994, much stronger than the Greenbook, and inflation at the end
of 1995 at clearly unacceptable levels. But as I said in my opening
remarks, I don't think that's the likely outcome. I think growth is
probably going to come out somewhere between the Greenbook and the
Atlanta forecasts. But there is some reasonable probability that the
Greenbook forecast could materialize. And, therefore, some caution is
needed in that regard. I think gradualism has served us very well on
the down side. I would also add that I don't view a 1/4 point
increase as very insignificant at this level of interest rates; it
really means something in the market. In my judgment, a gradual
approach will create greater stability than otherwise. I also am very
persuaded by your remarks about the financial markets. I remember
very well at the last meeting, when there was an expression of
interest on the part of some to move 50 basis points, that your
language was in effect:
"If we do that, we are going to crack the
markets." We did 25 basis points and I think we came very close to
cracking the markets. Now, I'm not saying that would happen again at
50 basis points, but I think we run that risk and I don't think that's
a risk we should take.
Therefore, I think the 25 basis points is clearly appropriate
in this particular environment. The market is expecting something
greater over the course of the next several months, so I don't think
it's necessary to meet those expectations at this particular point.
When I came into the meeting, I was more in favor of a symmetric
directive and I still would lean in that direction, but I can
certainly support asymmetry. In sum, I think 25 basis points is the
way we should go.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I too believe that rates are too
stimulative and I think we ought to seek a neutral policy stance,
wherever that turns out to be. I also believe that the robust
expansion hypothesis is probably the most likely, however robust may
be defined. And certainly both of those points suggest that the funds
rate should be moved up. On the subject of timing, I do not believe
that the real economy requires a tightening move at this point but I
think the markets probably do; so I can go with 25 basis points. I do
find the 25 basis points argument compelling and I'd have real trouble
with a move of 50 basis points. As far as asymmetry goes, I don't
think for the traditional reasons that that is the best idea on its
merits, but I also agree with Larry Lindsey's suggestion that it would
be confusing. However, I will not dissent over that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But you would prefer symmetry?

3/22/94

-51-

MR. KELLEY.

I would prefer symmetry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, it is a tough call. I can't remember a
time that the call has been tougher than it is right now. I can come
up with good arguments, at least in my own mind, for and against
either 25 or 50 basis points. But on reflecting, I do come down
agreeing that at this time the 25 basis point move is the appropriate
thing to do. I would not be in favor of asymmetric language. I would
be in favor of symmetric language, not because I disagree with the
direction of policy--I think we will be moving again--but because I'd
rather not make it such a regular thing that the moves are going to be
dependent on the timing of meetings of the Federal Open Market
Committee. I would be opposed to establishing that kind of pattern.
Moreover, I'm just in general opposed to asymmetric language. We had
a very bad experience with asymmetric language last spring and,
therefore, I'd prefer to leave the language symmetric. I do think
that the economy is going through a very dynamic phase and that we
should keep in pretty current contact as we go through this period.
Therefore, I'd be in favor of 25 basis points now with symmetric
language but an understanding that probably we would have a phone call
before the next meeting and might make a change at that point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. As most people have already stated, it certainly
seems appropriate to act now. How far we ought to go and how fast we
ought to try to get there, are the difficult questions. My best
judgment is that we'll be at this for some time; it may well be that
the funds rate has to go to 4 percent or more by the time we are done.
But I don't have a strong conviction about how far we will need to go.
As to the timing issue, it seems to me that we are probably going to
be at this until we are either more confident than we are today that
we have established an environment for renewed disinflation or until
we actually see renewed disinflation. It may surprise us and occur
earlier or something else may happen that changes our view about
appropriate policy. But having said all that, I think we should bear
in mind, and I'm certainly willing to be humble about all this, that
the confidence interval around any forecast is very wide. And I think
that argues for caution. So, I'm comfortable with your 1/4 point
recommendation now. I think that is the appropriate magnitude. And I
would prefer a symmetric directive with the understanding that if we
need a conference call, we can have one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. As I've expressed before, my view is that
monetary policy has been in a very stimulative posture over the last
three years and, like Al Broaddus, I think the quicker we get to
neutrality, the better off everyone is going to be. I think the
cumulative effects of that policy stance are being reflected already
in rising prices and certainly in rising inflationary expectations.
My own judgment is that we reacted too cautiously to these
developments at our last meeting, and that contributed to uncertainty
in financial markets and has resulted in higher long-term interest
rates than we otherwise might have seen. I'm not saying that they
would have gone down, but I'm not so sure they would have gone up as

3/22/94

-52-

much, and I think 25 basis points at this stage runs the risk of the
same sort of reaction. Accordingly, I favor moving more aggressively
at this meeting to an increased degree of reserve restraint through a
50 basis point increase in the funds rate. And were it up to me, I
might even be inclined to underscore that with a 50 basis point
increase in the discount rate and basically underline our resolve to
contain inflationary pressures and eventually resume progress toward
price stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I favor 25 basis points, prefer symmetric, and
would urge you to consider announcing our decision.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I certainly think it's appropriate to tighten.
For me the question is how to get there as fast as possible but
without causing disruption in the markets. It seems important to me
that the Fed not add to the uncertainty. So for that reason, I can
certainly go along with 1/4 point increases. But I'd underline your
suggestion of emphasizing in some very constructive way when we are
finished the tightening process. We do not want to get into a
precedent-setting mode because I think when we were easing it was
important to be able to do it at the right time. So I would prefer
not to establish a precedent of just taking action at meetings. I'm
not sure what asymmetric language adds. To me it may well increase
the uncertainty. So, I'd be more inclined not to have asymmetric
language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, not to be facetious, but the 25
basis point approach sounds to me a bit like taking down that Sword of
Damocles and inflicting the death of a thousand cuts on the economy.
It dies slowly in anticipation of the next strike. Instinctively, I
would prefer in the best of all worlds a 50 basis point move for the
simple reason that if we are wrong and the economy is moving faster
than we thought, we would be seen as having been a little ahead of the
curve, and we could still move further. That to me is preferable to
making a move in between meetings in reaction to something that's
published in the press. If we are wrong on the other side and if the
economy is significantly weaker, then we can stop at 50 basis points;
we won't need additional moves perhaps. Or we don't have to stop at
the 50 points; we can add another 25 if necessary. On the other hand,
I have great respect for your analysis of the market risks involved in
a 50 basis point move, and I will reluctantly agree to the 25 basis
points with symmetric language. That's all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I must admit that I
have been absolutely certain about the need for a move of both 50
basis points and 25 basis points at least as frequently as daily in
the last several weeks. But I've come to the conclusion that your
recommendation on the change is the safer course of action for us and
sufficiently bold to maintain our credentials. If the Greenbook
forecast is accurate and if it should materialize quickly as

3/22/94

-53-

projected, I think it would be good for us to give ourselves the
opportunity to see how the economy is evolving, which also leads me to
the 25 basis point increase. Even though every bit of my stomach
lining says we are heading toward a funds rate of 4 percent or higher,
I don't have any concern about waiting past this meeting. So I very
much prefer the 25 basis points just for economic reasons.
The reaction to our 25 basis point increase at the last
meeting, as Peter and Joan pointed out, was added to enormously by the
various other developments that they mentioned. There is a tendency
for financial analysts and maybe ourselves to think that we caused it
all, but we certainly were the first to get things moving. So I think
we got a good deal more market effect and a good deal more tightening
out of 25 basis points than we had in mind when we met on the 4th of
February. As regards the market effect, I don't think we normally
should be deciding monetary policy based on trying to fine-tune the
markets unless one is convinced, as I am now, that the downside
weakness to the economy could come from a crack in the market. As I
said earlier and as you quoted me, I think that's not very probable,
but I think the risk is significant enough that it's worth taking
seriously. Therefore, since I cannot anticipate exactly what the
reaction of the market would be to 50 basis points and since we had
such an overreaction the last time, I think we are better off to avoid
a risk where the risk/reward ratio is very difficult to calculate.
As regards symmetry or asymmetry, your reasoning for the
asymmetric directive in a way introduces a new use of the asymmetric
directive, or at least it's new to me. I think it could be explained
with Don Kohn's usual verbal skills in the minutes, so it is something
that I could live with. Left to my own devices, I would prefer
symmetric; but if you prefer asymmetric, I would support you on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say that I've been back and
forth on this symmetric/asymmetric issue and, as far as I'm concerned,
a conference call serves exactly the same purpose. Indeed, it might
actually be preferable because we do gain benefits from having the
symmetric language in the minutes. So I will support symmetric as
well and would propose 25 basis points and symmetric language. Would
you read the directive.
MR. BERNARD. "In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2
and M3 over the first half of 1994."
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I know we are somewhat bound by
tradition, but there is a sentence that we really don't need about
slightly more or slightly less reserve restraint during the
intermeeting period. Why don't we just drop it? That'll take care of
your observation that in fact it's slightly less probable that an
easing is going to happen. It's the same as being symmetric.

-54-

3/22/94

MS. PHILLIPS.

That probably will cause problems in the

markets.
MR. LINDSEY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only problem is if we change the
directive, is that we don't know the consequences of doing that. So
let's not.
MR. LINDSEY.

All right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But it's an interesting question. Let's
review that in the intermeeting period. Do you want to read the-MR. BERNARD. Yes, Mr. Chairman in the sentence that was
circulated on the trade deficit, there was a slight mathematical error
made where instead of saying somewhat larger than the average of the
fourth quarter, it's supposed to say slightly smaller.
[Laughter]
Speaker(?).

A slight error!

MR. TRUMAN. The trade deficit on goods and services was
slightly smaller in January--I made the mistake.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Forrestal
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Parry
Governor Phillips

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We still have the question of the
announcement, and I call on Don Kohn to discuss that.
MR. KOHN. I'll try to be brief, Mr. Chairman. Drawing on
the work of the subcommittee, Messrs. Boehne, Kelley, and Melzer
considered a couple of options for announcing the decisions of the
Federal Open Market Committee. What they hit on finally was that the
best bet was to announce changes in our instrument settings much as we
did last time but just say what we did. That is, in this case we
could say, using the wording proposed by Joe Coyne:
"The Federal
Reserve decided today to increase slightly the degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action by the Federal Open Market Committee
is expected to be associated with a small increase in short-term money
market interest rates." The thought was that this sort of
announcement could be coupled with additional explanations if the
Committee thought that was necessary in unusual situations, but the
important thing was to get out the fact that we acted.
One option that the subcommittee thought about was releasing
the whole directive, but that has some disadvantages. That would
involve releasing the symmetries and asymmetries right away and
whatever is left of that symmetry/asymmetry flexibility would

-55-

3/22/94

certainly go away because knowledge of that decision does move
markets. So the Committee might be less likely to adopt asymmetries.
On balance, the subcommittee thought it was a good idea just to
release the decision. The reception from the public was good last
time. The Fed looked and was more open. We in effect ran an
experiment that worked pretty well from that perspective.
I think there is one minor note of hesitancy. The Committee
looked at this about a year ago, or maybe a little over a year ago,
and rejected this announcement option. The Committee was concerned at
that time that it would lose some flexibility. There were two
instruments: the discount rate, which rang the gong; and open market
operations, which didn't. The February 4th experience, although there
were a lot of special things involved, does suggest the possibility
that there might be stronger reactions to announced moves both in the
markets and in the public which could complicate the implementation of
open market operations from time to time. So there is concern about
loss of flexibility. But in thinking about this, the balance of the
costs and benefits in the view of the subcommittee had shifted toward
the notion of announcing changes in instrument settings when the FOMC
decided on those changes.
There are also a couple of technical issues. One is when to
announce. The thought was that the best approach would be to set a
more or less fixed time on the afternoon of the day the Committee met;
that would be this afternoon. It should be early enough to allow
trading on the news in the markets but late enough so that the markets
wouldn't sit around wondering how long the Committee had met. That
is, we would have a reasonable prospect of being finished our work
before the usual announcement time. We wouldn't want the usual
announcement time to go by and have the Committee still thinking about
its decision, but people assuming that the decision was for policy to
remain unchanged. So the time should be late enough so that you would
finish the meeting but early enough to be traded in the market,
somewhere around 2:15 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. seems about right to Bill
McDonough and to me. What to announce I think I've already covered.
The subcommittee did not think a decision for no change had to be
announced; only changes would be announced. And as I noted, the
subcommittee thought that an explanation such as we had last time
would be the exception rather than the rule. That would help maintain
a bit of a difference between a discount rate action and open market
operations. I invite any of the subcommittee members to comment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no problem at all with
anything Don said as far as the statement and when to announce it are
concerned. But this Committee is going to be considering other issues
regarding our openness in the months ahead. And I don't see any
advantage to the Committee in separating this issue, which is a proopenness stand from other issues that may incline us toward less
openness if we are in fact going to be producing a package down the
road. So, I would suggest that the Committee not act on Don's
proposal today. But it is certainly in the power of the Chairman to
make any announcement he wishes. My personal advice to him would be
to go ahead and make the announcement. But I think an announcement by
the Committee would be committing ourselves to a pro-openness move

3/22/94

-56-

that would be a card we would permanently lose in the future for
issues on which we might not be as open.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're just suggesting that it would be
in the form of a provisional statement similar to the last time.
MR. LINDSEY.

Or that you make the statement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Meaning in other words that it's not an
irrevocable decision of the Committee but of the Chairman?
MR. LINDSEY.

That is correct.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I wanted to make a couple of comments.
First of all, I favor announcing our actions promptly whether they are
taken at meetings or between meetings. My preference would be to make
this change when we act on the other disclosure issues that Larry
Lindsey talked about, although I can accept separating them. I do
think that there is the possibility that announcing our actions
promptly can have some adverse impact on the deliberative process.
But in the current climate I think the benefit of providing more
information to the public outweighs whatever that cost is. Obviously,
that's a difficult measurement issue.
With respect.to what should be released, and maybe I
misunderstood a little what we discussed in the subcommittee, I
personally would favor releasing only a statement with respect to an
increased or decreased degree of pressure on reserve positions. I
think any statement with respect to the impact on short-term market
rates, in effect, is something that will be decoded. In other words,
we will be using different adjectives to describe what we think the
effect on money market interest rates is going to be and then we'll be
de facto announcing our targets. "Small" will mean 25 basis points;
"moderate" will mean 50 basis points.

I don't know what more than 50

would mean; that doesn't seem very likely!
MR. PARRY. The same thing could happen with the term
"reserve restraint." In saying a slight change, the "slight" may
equivocate--

MR. MELZER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, let me just say that that's an
interesting issue, but that's a very major question and I would hate
to have that decision made at today's meeting. I almost prefer to
stay with Governor Lindsey's suggestion and then when we get to the
final decisions make that judgment.
MR. MELZER. Okay. I'm just expressing some views at this
point. The other point I would make is that I'm not sure I agree with
what Larry Lindsey was saying. We are doing something here that, if
it's done well and announced properly, will have a very positive
public effect. Our practice is going to lock us into that because my
sense is we won't get back to these other disclosure issues for some
months, and there may be other actions to announce in the meantime.
So, our provisional behavior is in effect going to set the precedent

-57-

3/22/94

and lock us into a policy, and it will be anti-climatic when we
announce it. Personally, I think we can get much more mileage out of
announcing the fact that this decision has been made and just get it
done. In effect, we are trading it away anyway, so why not announce
it and try to get some public relations benefit out of it. The other
thing I would say in such an announcement is that we continue to have
our disclosure practices under review, because I think there are some
other disclosure issues that in due course need to be reviewed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I'm not against disclosure but
I would repeat what I said last time, which is that we have not really
had an opportunity in this Committee to discuss this fully. There are
a number of issues surrounding this disclosure matter. Tom has just
brought up one of them; there are others. So from a procedural
standpoint alone, I think we need an opportunity to discuss this
further. If we announce it today, I think we're going to be locked
into doing it. We said the announcement last time wasn't going to be
precedential. If we do it twice, I think we are going to be locked
in.
On more substantive grounds, we haven't really taken into
account the effect of this disclosure on the discount rate, the effect
on our directors. There is a whole host of things that I think we
really need to take into account in a more systematic way. So I would
be strongly opposed to doing anything today. I think we ought to
revert to our normal practice of not disclosing our decision and let
the markets pick this up and then deal as soon as we can with this
issue together with the other disclosure issues, as Governor Lindsey
has indicated.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.
Forrestal said.

Governor LaWare.

I would have said substantially what Bob

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I have a very strong preference to
make an announcement in some form. On this particular afternoon,
whether it's the Chairman or whether it's the Committee making the
announcement has mainly the significance that if the Chairman does it,
it doesn't lock the Committee into having made a decision to do it.
So I think that actually has some merit. I have long had what Ernie
Patrikis after consultation with Virgil Mattingly assures me is not a
legal concern but an ethical concern; and that is, if we go into the
market the way we have done it for years and we "announce" a very
significant policy move by our operations in the open market, the pros
with whom we deal know it before anybody else does. It may be a
minute or two before, but that gives them a market advantage, which I
don't like. To me it's an ethical matter, which I take quite
seriously. That doesn't mean--unlike in the case of the chairman of a
well known committee--that my ethics are necessarily the law of
nature. But that's where I come down on the issue. I would prefer
that we announce our decision and I think it's probably better on this
occasion if the Chairman does it rather than the Committee.

-58-

3/22/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I support the subcommittee's recommendation.
And I think the latter part of Tom Melzer's remarks are right on. We
could say that this is twice in a row, that it's not permanent and
it's just not a precedent, and that we have still have a card to play
and we might not do this in the future. Nobody would believe it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I don't think Larry is saying anyone
will believe it. I think what he has in mind is that it's useful when
we intend to have a whole package to put it all together. That's what
I think his-MR. JORDAN. Are we going to have that package by May?
Otherwise, we are going to be faced with maybe three meetings in a row
of saying that this is a temporary procedure and it's not-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
answer is possibly.

Well, that's a good point.

And the

MR. JORDAN. It's eight weeks until the next FOMC meeting.
It's the longest period we experience between meetings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say we have a good shot at it by
May. In fact, precisely for that reason it would be useful.
President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. One of the benefits of an immediate announcement
is that it eliminates any perception of leaks, so I would suggest that
we always do it at the end of the meeting rather than have a hiatus.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BROADDUS.

President Broaddus.

I would favor announcing it now.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I'm very much in favor of announcing it. Whether
it's an announcement from the Chairman or the Committee I think is
immaterial. If we do it today, which I think we should, we will have
established a precedent and we will have to continue. But I think
it's a constructive change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think we should announce it on
the merits of the case. The time is here to do that. As far as today
is concerned, I would be uncomfortable holding this decision overnight
and letting it be announced in the traditional way of Desk action
tomorrow. I think that would be a mistake. I am in favor of letting
it be your announcement rather than the Committee's for the reasons
that Governor Lindsey and President McDonough discussed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

President Stern.

I agree with what Governor Kelley just said.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

-59-

3/22/94

MR. HOENIG. I support the subcommittee's recommendation. I
think we have in a sense committed ourselves to this and I think Bill
McDonough's point is well taken. We should get decisions out to the
market and the public as soon as we are making them, so I support
announcing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

President Parry.

I would favor the announcement.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, this was a very wise subcommittee and I
want to concur with its recommendations.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
subcommittee?
MR. KELLEY.

Who is the chairman of that

The chairman departed the scene!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that everybody?
to announcing. Is that right?
MR. JORDAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Can I ask:
talking about announcing today?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MS. LOVETT.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Jerry, you said yes

Is there an auction today?

Are we

There was; it's over.

It's over.
The auction is over.

Okay, I'd announce.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That's part of the timing issue--to
get it out after the auctions are over.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Ms. Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I must say I am impressed by President
Forrestal's comments.
I would like to see the disclosure decisions as
a package and I would not like to see us committed to announcing every
time. But in general I think announcement is not a bad thing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me make the following request.
I don't deny that it will appear precedential.
In fact, I think it's
naive to believe that if we announce today that it's not going to come
out that way. We do have a marginal value in my doing it and then
making it official at the time we do everything else. It's not that
it's a big deal, but it's a bigger package to announce and it probably
is wise to do that. Unless there is strong objection, that's what I
think I'd like to do.
MR. MELZER. I don't have a strong objection, Alan. How
would Joe Coyne respond to inquiries of "What does this mean?" There
are bound to be some requests; what's the answer?

-60-

3/22/94

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He would basically say the Committee
itself has not come to a final conclusion.
MR. MELZER.

It is still considering disclosure issues?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Okay our next meeting is-MR. BERNARD.

This will be part of a broader package.

May 17th.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
intermeeting period.

May the 17th; this really is a long

END OF MEETING

