Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

November 4-5, 1985

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Monday, November 4, 1985, at 3:00 p.m. and continuing
on Tuesday, November 5, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Balles
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Martin
Partee
Rice
Seger

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield. 1/ General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Broaddus, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, Scheld,
Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held on
October 1, 1985.

11/4-5/85
Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, 2/ Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel,3/ Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, 3/ Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill,2/ Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, 3/ Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, 3/ Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, Ms. Munnell,
Messrs. Rolnick and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland,
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, and
Dallas, respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Ms. Walter, Adviser, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/
2/
3/

Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of meeting held on
October 1, 1985.
Attended Tuesday session only.
Attended Monday session only.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 4-5, 1985
November 4, 1985--Afternoon Session
[Secretary's Note: The beginning of this meeting, which
consisted of the Committee's action to approve the minutes of the
previous meeting and a special staff presentation and discussion of
economic and policy implications of exchange rate adjustments, was not
transcribed. The presentation, by Messrs. Axilrod, Hooper, Stockton,
and Slifman, is included in the Appendix.]
MR. CROSS.
MR. RICE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Sam, what will the BIS do with the deposits of

marks?
MR. CROSS.
MR. RICE.
MR. CROSS.

They will deposit them in banks.
Where?

In German banks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

In Germany?

In Germany?

I think the idea is that the Bundesbank

So I
assume that most of this will get back into Germany.
MR. BOEHNE.
You talked earlier about selling dollars in
markets outside New York as well as in New York. My general sense is
that the extent to which you're intervening in markets overseas is a
I wonder if
good bit more than has been the practice in recent years.
you could comment on the pros and cons of that and how you would judge
the effectiveness of being more active in markets in the Far East, for
example.
MR. CROSS.
Well, I think it can be helpful at times.
For
example, at times when the Japanese were intervening rather heavily in
the yen we were intervening in the Far East, kind of following their
action, to keep some action with respect to the mark.
It showed
evidence of a somewhat coordinated approach. And since we hadn't done
that sort of thing very much, as you said, certainly in quite a while,
that certainly can have an impact in the proper circumstances.
MR. BOEHNE. Have you been as open in these markets as you
are in New York?
Is it as obvious to people in the market?
MR. CROSS.
It's certainly known. We have tried different
approaches in our own market and elsewhere, at times operating through
agents, at times trying to operate as openly and as visibly as we
could--dealing with a whole bunch of banks at once--in order to make
clear to all the participants that we were there and that we were
acting in a firm way. But it depends on the particular circumstances
and the time of day and things of that sort.

11/4-5/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions?
recommendation to renew the swap arrangements.

We have a

[Secretary's Note: Motions to renew the swap arrangements
and to ratify the transactions in foreign currencies were made,
seconded, and approved without objection.]
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any discussion?

MR. BOEHNE. I have a question.
"drop-dead day" or whatever.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
out some gimmick.
MR. BOEHNE.

You said November 15 is

Yes, "drop-dead day"--when they have to trot

Right.

Are there gimmicks there that can be

used?
MR. STERNLIGHT. They did some disinvesting of trust funds a
few days ahead of the normal schedule in order to make benefits
payments to Social Security and other pension recipients just in the
last couple of days--last Friday and today. Conceivably, they could
do some disinvestment of trust funds even further ahead of time. But
that's something they have talked about in their inner circle
discussions at Treasury but have no intention, as far as I know now,
of doing. There was mention, I think, in one of the letters that went
up from Secretary Baker to the Congress about the possibility of
selling gold but they said that the Administration is totally set
against doing something like that. There are probably half a dozen
other things that are conceivable but that they have said they just
don't want to do.
MR. PARTEE.

Have they used up the Federal Financing Bank?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It will be just about used up by the $3
billion cash management bill that they announced early this afternoon
and will carry through tomorrow. I think that will leave about $1
billion.
MR. MELZER. Peter, would you say that the somewhat firmer
and more volatile funds rate is associated primarily with this
uncertainty surrounding the Treasury's financing requirements? Or are
there other factors that are operating now?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
rather minuscule;

Well, the firming of the funds rate has been

it has changed from a 7.90 percent average to an 8

percent average, approximately. It is conceivable that some of the
changing pattern had to do with low Treasury balances in the money
center banks, which may have put them under a little more pressure to
buy in the fed funds market, but I'm not sure it was very

significantly that. I think it may have been more a carrying through
of the slight adjustment that had been made in our degree of borrowing
pressure before the last meeting that was achieving its maturing
effect in the recent period.

11/4-5/85

MR. MELZER. Did the intervention activity create any
difficulty for implementing domestic--?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I don't think so.
We had a good handle on
what it was. Typically, that takes place in terms of the actual
reserve impact with a couple of days' lag, and we were totally on top
of what was happening there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
ratify those transactions.
MR. PARTEE.

Any other questions?

If not, we have to

So moved.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We can go home unless
you want to hear an economic report. Mr. Kichline are you prepared to
give an economic report?
MR. KICHLINE.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.
in the morning.
MS. SEGER.

You want to go home?

I think we ought to have Mr. Kichline's report

I do too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We'll see you all in the morning.
[Meeting recessed]

11/4-5/85

November 5, 1985--Morning Session
MR. KICHLINE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MELZER.

Comments?

Jim, in what kind of shape are inventories in

general?
MR. KICHLINE. We think really quite good. Obviously, part
of what is going on in the aggregate numbers is this auto story:
stocks were run off substantially in the third quarter and are being
rebuilt now. As we go through the various sectors, in putting
together what we know, we think that inventories are about in line in
the aggregate, and in the forecast we just have them rising with
sales.
So they don't really run off any more and they don't
contribute to growth; they're a neutral factor. There are a couple of
areas that I think are important.
I have seen some figures for Sears,
for example, which presumably is pretty close to the industry in
planning. They still feel that inventories are a little on the high
side, are banking on decent Christmas spending, and expect that will
take care of it.
But if indeed consumer spending turned out to be a
little weak, I would think retailers might not be very happy as they
enter the new year.
Still, in that general merchandise area,
particularly with respect to apparel and some soft goods, it depends
on decent sales prospects coming along.
MR. PARTEE.
Jim, that is an extraordinarily low saving rate
in the third quarter.
Would you attribute that mainly to the surge in
car sales and the credit associated with it, or what?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it is two things: one is the surge in
car sales; the other is that income growth was weakening and consumer
spending outside of autos was still pretty good--not that weak. If
you want to take a percentage point or so off for auto sales, you
might do that.
But even so, what we have been looking at is fairly
good consumer spending and weakening real disposable income growth, so
that consumers really have been in a position of reducing their saving
rate, borrowing a lot and so forth, to fund expenditures.
So, I think
it is more than autos.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We did a calculation on that point
that is kind of interesting.
It is not an entirely valid calculation
because you can't hold everything else equal, but with that limitation
it is a valid calculation.
If you use a benchmark of, say, 5 to 6
percent as the average for the preceding quarters and work off that,
the combination of two things--the reduction in farm income and higher
net interest payments by consumers--appears to be worth a little more
than a percentage point on the saving rate itself.
MR. PARTEE.

Higher net interest payments?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARTEE.

things.

Net.

Oh, net interest;

so, payments minus receipts.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The combination of both of those
Again, given the limitation of the way you do your

11/4-5/85

-5-

arithmetic, farm income and interest payments are about a half a point
each.
MR. PARTEE.

I assume farmers aren't spending any money?

Some farmers in New Jersey
Some farmers are.
MR. BOEHNE.
and Pennsylvania and Delaware are going out to places like Iowa and
buying up machinery that is on the block out there cheap and hauling
it back.
MR. PARTEE.

Hauling it back?

Hauling it back. They are buying implements
MR. BOEHNE.
that might cost $50,000 to $60,0000 and picking them up for $15,000,
It is worth the trip out.
$20,000, or $25,000.
MS. SEGER.

That isn't recorded as consumer spending though,

is it?
MR. BOEHNE.

No.

But some farmers are spending.

That's my

point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
business scene?

Does anyone have any more comments on the

I myself just can't see anything out
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
there that is going to get growth up into the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range
For a long time I thought
as opposed to the 2 to 3 percent range.
housing could make the difference in terms of that marginal
contribution, but I can't see that now either. Looking across the
sectors of the economy at this point, it is just awfully hard to find
sources of marginal growth that would get us to a bit more respectable
On top of that, the anecdotal reports that
range on a forecast basis.
I, at least, am getting from business people and directors and so on-for what they are worth--are distinctly on the sour side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. Looking around the District I find, much as is the
case for the national outlook, that the incoming data are not
I see no evidence of accumulating weakness nor signs of
conclusive.
The business investment picture
stronger growth in the months ahead.
has come in consistently weaker than I had expected, both in the
District and of course nationally as well. But I wouldn't see a
change in that outlook. Housing, which Jerry just spoke of, has
responded to the lowering of interest rates with less strength than I
and many of us had expected, and that is in the District as well as
nationally. The real question is with the consumer, and in our
District retailers are encouraged about the Christmas season. Also,
in talking to people in the business community I have noticed what I
think is a change in attitude toward their formerly optimistic feeling
I have long thought that
that the fiscal impasse might be resolved.
it probably would not but in that I differed with the business
community that I talked to; they had been optimistic up until the last
couple of months but I think now their view is that the fiscal impasse
will remain an impasse.
I am not sure that I can take the next step
and say how that will change their planning for the future, but I
think there has been a distinct change in attitude there. I would say

11/4-5/85

that the business people I talk to continue to be guardedly hopeful
about efforts to reduce exchange rates. While they realize the
dangers connected with an overly fast reduction of the exchange rate,
I think they view what has happened perhaps as being maintainable.
And if exchange rates were to back up, I think their reaction would be
disappointment and that might affect their future plans.
My view of the economic outlook is about the same as the
staff's forecast--I don't know whether to describe that as moderate
expansion--in the next couple of quarters. As I look at the 2 to 3
percent number, which may [turn out to] be closer to 2 percent, and
ask myself if that is a good or bad number to be looking at in the
forecast, I am not sure I come to a conclusion. If I talk to my
directors and others and look at the gaps in the economy, I see a lot
of room to say it is not a good number. On the other hand, when I
remember the difficulty of reducing inflation and the high price we
paid, it looks better in that context.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Jim has given us a ritualistic comment that
there has been no change in the forecast and I am going to give the
ritualistic response to that and say that there has been a change in
the forecast in a direction with which I concur--that is to say, it is
more realistic in that the numbers are down a few tenths for the next
five quarters and unemployment is constant or creeping up a bit,
depending on how well the forecast tracks. Like others, I [have
reservations] about the assumption of the saving rate staying at a
little over 4 percent, but we explored that pretty thoroughly and
there is no point in going over that further. It is interesting that
the forecast contains a shift in government spending in the full
employment budget deficit sense, which should be a matter of some
interest with regard to what Jerry Corrigan has indicated as a very
cautiously optimistic outlook with no sector particularly giving a
push. It does not look as though [stimulus] is going to come from the
federal government sector. I am delighted to see the housing forecast
revised downward a little. I like that old joke about the people who
lived in [unintelligible] and everybody knew everybody's story, so
their stories were numbered. I am going to number my comments, so I
will simply say "number 17" rather than make you listen to my
ritualistic housing comment. I warn you, however, that tightening of
credit standards by lending institutions has yet to have its full
effect and that is coming. That is down the road and I think it will
be in 1986 but that--in other words, "17."
MR. PARTEE.

Does that mean that you agree with the forecast?

MR. MARTIN. No, I said "17"
think it is a little too optimistic.

already, Chuck.

That means I

MR. MORRIS. The tightening of lending standards doesn't seem
to have hit the commercial construction market. How do you account
for that?
MR. MARTIN. No, I am talking about housing. I am talking
about that 1.8 million housing figure and that $5.6 billion
residential spending number, neither of which we will ever reach.

11/4-5/85

What I don't understand is why the lending
MR. MORRIS.
institutions are still lending for office buildings at the rate they
are.
I don't quite comprehend.
MS. SEGER.

It's the lags.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I got the answer to that the other
day, Frank. We had the chairman of one of the largest commercial
construction companies in the world into the bank for lunch and I
I said "How come you're still building
asked him that same question.
He said;
"It is very easy;
all these buildings in Dallas and so on?"
the banks keep giving us the money. As long as they give us the money
we will keep building."
MR. MARTIN.

The banks, the thrifts, the life insurance

companies--

MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. PARTEE.

Why are the banks extending the money?

They don't have any other place to put it!

I think it is
MR. MARTIN. I think the reason is different.
because there still is, from the '70s, the expectation that those
office rents and that percentage lease income from the commercial
property are going to increase with inflation down the road--in three,
These people have
I think that's built in.
four years, whatever.
equity positions and they feel that the office rents and the
percentage returns off the commercial property will [provide a good]
In conclusion, I don't think the major issue here is downside
return.
risk. Let me break another rule and say that I think this is a
courageous forecast. I think the staff was willing to revise it in a
downward direction and take the risk that they might be pessimistic.
It has implications, of course, for our next round of discussion with
regard to monetary policy. There is that assumption of somewhat lower
interest rates over the 5- or 6-quarter period--a drop of 150 points
in one case and 100 points in the fed funds rate in the other case.
We have to consider whether the forecast results are appropriate-whether the monetary policy we adopt here is consonant with that 150
I think it's a good
basis points decline over this period of time.
forecast.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I can't bring in any great amount
of optimism to this discussion. Our part of the country, I think it
It is uneven; it depends on where
is fair to say, is pretty sluggish.
you happen to be sitting. We had an unemployment rate for Texas last
month of 8.1 percent, which is very unusual. The unemployment rates
In the various sectors
in Louisiana and New Mexico are even higher.
of the economy, there is really not anything positive that seems to be
happening. We continue to feel that the energy situation will remain
[poor] even though there has been some firming in the price. We think
that is temporary and that the price will start sliding as we get
In our latest survey of our agricultural banks it
through the winter.
is fairly obvious that the tone has changed and that some of those
problems now are starting to materialize.
From that last survey, the
decline in land values now is estimated to be about 10 percent, which
doesn't sound like all that much compared to what is happening in the

11/4-5/85

Midwest. But that is the first time that I have seen a number that
large from our respondents. The only thing that is really happening,
and this was mentioned earlier, is in non-residential construction.
We just had another major office building announced in Dallas by
Republic Corporation; it is going to be a 60- story building that they
are going to build with a developer--Vantage Company--and in the
process they are going to reduce their occupancy costs; they have
really made a very nice scenario on how all that's going to work out.
I was reading in the paper coming up on the plane yesterday that
Prudential, which now owns the second tallest building in Dallas, one
of the newer ones--InterFirst Tower II, which InterFirst sold--is
going to spend $50 million putting a new facade on that building so it
will look prettier. I guess that is a good business decision; I don't
know. But it just keeps on. We set new records in August in terms of
the amount of commercial construction. Even in Houston--and I think I
mentioned this before--there is a $250 million building coming out of
the ground in downtown Houston. But that developer is going to catch
the curve right; he is going to come on stream just at the right time.
I am inclined to agree with Pres in terms of the outlook 3 to 5 years
out: that there still seems to be the conviction that you can catch
the turning point and it will pay off.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the Sixth District is seeing a
definite tapering off of economic activity. Unemployment is up
somewhat. The same sectors that have been suffering over the last
several months are still in difficulty, basically textiles and
apparel. Agriculture, while not as bad as in the Midwest, is still in
the doldrums, and energy is pretty bad. On the other hand, we have
this continuing activity in the commercial real estate sector, which I
find very, very difficult to understand. I get the same answer that
other people get: They're going to continue to build as long as they
have the money to do it; I guess that's the way developers usually
think. But it does seem somewhat irrational in that I think they are
going to pay the price for it along the way. Housing, on the other
hand, has been fairly decent in the Sixth District. All of the
statistical information shows a downturn, but I must say that the
attitude of directors and business people that I talked to is fairly
optimistic. Again, I find it a little difficult to understand where
this optimism is coming from. Even in New Orleans and in Louisiana
generally, which are really in the pits as it were, they seem fairly
sanguine about the situation and are looking for some uptick in
activity.
Going to the national scene, I don't have any strong
disagreement with the staff; I think they are about right. I think
that Jim is quite right to put out some of these warning signals,
particularly with respect to the consumer. Housing is definitely
something that, if it continues, is going to be a source of strength
to the economy. There really isn't much else that one can point to in
the near future that's going to be a positive force. But I'm a little
concerned that housing may not be as strong as the forecast. On the
other hand, I don't really see that we're going to have any
appreciable decline in activity. So, I think the staff's forecast is
about right. I should add--and I meant to note this in my District
report--that people are talking about beginning to see some price
pressures building up in some businesses. They say it's related to

11/4-5/85

the value of the dollar, which surprises me a bit, because that would
suggest that the effect is occurring a little faster than we would
have expected. But they are definitely reporting some increase in
prices coming from abroad.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Who is?

MR. FORRESTAL.
"They" are basically in textiles--shirt
manufacturers and people like that. Their raw material is increasing
in price.
MR. MORRIS. What are the chances, Jim, that you're too
conservative on the net exports side?
You don't show net exports as
being a drag anymore but, certainly, we're not seeing any significant
response to the fairly sizable decline in the dollar that has taken
place.
Now, is this the normal--?
MR. KICHLINE. I think what we have built in here is a
fairly normal historical response.
I'll let Ted answer. I might say
that question catches me a little by surprise because the usual
question we get is: Why do you have net exports rising?
So, I haven't
thought about this one recently.
MR. TRUMAN. I think that's the right answer; that's my
reaction as well. We do have some increase. In fact the percentage
change on the export side we have is an increase of 7 percent in real
terms for goods and services and 9 percent for goods alone. The
import side is essentially flat or a very small decline--less than a
percent in the imports in goods and a small increase in services,
which would depend on more debt.
So it's basically in line with what
we have tended to say--this is the same question about the price
question on the other side.
If you don't think prices are going to
change as much as some people argue, then import prices aren't going
to reflect it as quickly or as fully as with past exchange rate
changes.
It also follows that you shouldn't get the response to the
exchange rate changes as fully or as fast as in the past.
So the two
things are sometimes linked together. We have tended a little toward
the conservative side on prices for various reasons, at least in the
short run.
Until we know what is underway, we feel we shouldn't put a
large number in the forecast. Therefore, we also don't have a large
number on the other, [real, side]; it's somewhat attenuated. But I
think it's not far from what we believe is historical experience,
given the quality of information on trade data at this point, which is
not very good.
MR. KICHLINE. I might say that the net export sector
contributes about a half percent to growth next year. So, we would
have essentially 2 percent real growth fourth-to-fourth quarter if you
held net exports constant. That's the impact of these numbers Ted is
talking about.
MR. MORRIS. On your gradual depreciation path, at what point
will we expect to get a real upward kick from net exports?
Obviously,
it's not in 1986.
MR. TRUMAN.
percent.

Well, I think that's a pretty big kick:

9

11/4-5/85

-10-

MR. KICHLINE. Well, you get a kick early on from service
receipts in the reevaluation in the current quarter. But looking
ahead, where we think this begins to kick in is at the very end of
1986; presumably 1987 is the important year and it's beyond the
forecast horizon. But it's late '86 at best where we see some
particular strength and then we see it carrying on.
MR. TRUMAN. That's essentially a delayed reaction to the
very steep decline because from here on out we have a gradual move.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim a
couple of questions.
Jim, you made some passing reference to the
introduction of IBM's new Sierra mainframe computers.
I was struck by
this weekly publication of Citicorp the other day that estimated there
are 400 or 500 already on order to be delivered in the fourth quarter.
That would cause a pretty sizeable increase in total producer durable
I
equipment expenditures; it seemed huge to me, just looking at it.
The
wondered if you had made any estimate of what that might do.
second thing is that I'd taken some encouragement from the nonfarm
payroll employment figure and you suggested that ought to be averaged
with September, if I understood you correctly. Do you think that is a
seasonal adjustment problem there or what?
Let me comment on the employment figures
MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
first. The problem occurs particularly in manufacturing and
construction. In manufacturing, employment dropped 110,000 in
September, which we really didn't believe; and it rose 60,000 in
October, which we don't believe either. And neither does the BLS.
There are a couple of things going on.
One is that the survey week in
October was the earliest possible that could have occurred. The
seasonals are thinking in terms of declining employment in October,
and it is thought that the survey week was so early it didn't pick up
all of the decline; hence, seasonally adjusted, you get a larger
increase. Now, that's one part, particularly in manufacturing. We
have some other evidence in terms of physical product and other
information that leads us to think there are some distortions. But I
would still say it's a good number in that it is very clear that those
two months together look better than earlier in the year.
With regard to the Sierra, we have seen [shipments] numbers
that range from an impact of $3 to $10 billion annual rate in the
fourth quarter. We have talked to IBM and we have talked to others.

So
they are trying to build up what was a dismal year for IBM's earnings
expectations and make it all up in the fourth quarter, or do the best
they can.
Other manufacturers,
being one, are just not doing very well at all.
So we
think some offsets are occurring there.
In addition, in the fourth
quarter we expect a very sharp decline in business purchases of autos
since some of those autos sold in the third quarter were business
purchases at cut-rate terms.
So the Sierra effect is a little

11/4-5/85

-11-

uncertain.
In our own thinking we picked a low-end number and used a
positive $4 billion annual rate attributable to that, largely offset
by autos and to some extent truck sales, which we think will be down.
As I say, the numbers
If we're wrong--.
But it is a big impact.
outside [forecasters are using] range from $3 billion to $10 billion
annual rate and it depends in part on what you assume is happening
elsewhere in the computer industry.
MR. BLACK.

And also partly offset by declining shipments of

others.
MR. KICHLINE.

That's right, yes.

MR. BLACK. What they must have done in that Citicorp report,
which was not clear to me, was to look just at the gross effect.
MR. KICHLINE.

Yes.

MR. BLACK. It was surprisingly large; I wish I could
I ought to remember it,
remember that percentage because it shook me.
but senility has overtaken me and I can't.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. BLACK.

You need a computer!
I may be too old for that!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. There really is very little to report in the way
of change in our District since the last meeting. Those businesses
that have been showing some strength continue to do reasonably well.
But there is certainly no noticeable improvement for the beleaguered.
The steel industry and most lines of mechanical equipment remain
awfully weak. On the steel side, the import restraints have had some
effect but they have been far from perfect. And pricing conditions in
the industry are very intense. Agriculture, I think, speaks for
itself. The harvests have been late because of wet weather.
Nonetheless, the crop estimates are being increased a bit, so that the
pressure will continue on commodity prices. More positively--we've
commented on the construction industry--certainly commercial
construction in Chicago is very strong.
I saw a presentation the
other day showing that Chicago is going through a building period that
has been unsurpassed since the great fire. An awful lot of buildings
are going up.
Just to add a comment to what Jim said earlier, the
auto inventories really are very low; when they finished this big
sales program they were down to 24 to 26 days' [supply], which was the
lowest inventory level in some 20 years.
So, for the rest of this
quarter and going through January, one manufacturer at least is going
to be running absolutely flat out including their maximum overtime
schedule. They will be running their plants at the absolute maximum
at least through January. Their outlook for '86 with regard to car
sales is pretty good--a bit lower than ours but nonetheless the recent
sales program hasn't had as big an impact on the '86 volume as one
might have expected. On balance, as we look at conditions in the
District, the staff forecast would be rather consistent with the way
that we see it.

11/4-5/85

-12-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
sales yet have we?
MR. KICHLINE.

We haven't had the last 10 days' auto

No, it comes out this afternoon.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. To pick up on what Bob Forrestal said, I heard
the same thing from a major retailer in St. Louis: that in the Far
East the Japanese and others already are beginning to jack up prices
on apparel and other textile goods. One other thing I've noticed in
talking to people around the District is that there seems to be an
interest developing now in bidding on farm land. People have talked
about it before but I sense now that there is some very serious
expression of interest, along the lines of what Ed Boehne was saying
in terms of equipment, for putting together groups to bid on the land,
which I think is a constructive development.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The first I've heard.

MR. MELZER. That's at very low prices. This would be in
Arkansas and northern Mississippi and I'd say prices are probably down
40 to 50 percent from their highs.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, on the one hand, it appears that the
spillover effects of the agricultural problem in our District are
growing in the sense that recent gains in employment in the District
states, to the extent they have occurred at all, have been sluggish.
Unemployment rates in most District states have been on the increase.
On the other hand, if you get away from the agricultural sector, the
tone of the anecdotal comments that I've been hearing is that the
situation isn't great but it isn't bad either. I take that to be
roughly consistent with the kind of forecast reflected in the
Greenbook. And I think the Greenbook forecast is largely consistent
with the incoming evidence that we've been seeing in terms of
employment as discussed, the strength in final demand, relatively
acceptable levels of inventories, and so forth. I guess it's fair to
say that we do have an ongoing construction boom in the Twin Cities.
In both Minneapolis and in St. Paul vacancy rates have been rising,
although they haven't kept up with the Sun Belt, so they don't look
too bad relative to some of the national numbers. Developers that
I've talked to give roughly the explanation that you've heard: that
basically it's an equity play for some financial institutions who feel
they missed out in the late '70s and early '80s and don't want to miss
the next opportunity. Finally, I have not been disappointed, to date
anyway, by the performance in housing. At least in terms of the level
of starts, the first half came in somewhat stronger than I had
expected. The fact that the last few months have been weaker doesn't
really surprise me. I don't think we're very good at timing these
things precisely and I suspect that just as we did maybe a bit better
in the first half, we're now going to do a little worse. But, net, I
don't see any reason to think that anything terribly unusual is going
on so far in the relationship between rates and housing activity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

11/4-5/85

-13-

MR. BALLES. From the Twelfth District, there's a combination
of good news and bad news that we have had now for some long time.
The areas which have been weak and continue to be weak are the
traditional ones that I have talked about so many times: forest
products, agriculture, and oil. And now more recently, somewhat to
our consternation, the electronics industry is in something of a
slump, at least for the time being. On the other hand, there is
considerable strength in defense spending and in the kinds of
companies that benefit from that. I suspect we are on the receiving
end of an unusually big share of that in the West. My staff tells me
that two of our states taken together, California and Washington, have
about 28 percent of defense contracts, so that's obviously a strong
plus in terms of the tone of business, at least in those two states.
Retail trade figures seem to be going very well; most stores have been
reporting year-over-year sales gains of 5 to 10 percent. Auto sales
are going well in most of the states. And of course the service
industries, which are not nearly as identifiable as anything like
steel or whatever, are reporting pretty good news in terms of their
performance. Our staff reports that the market for single-family
housing appears to be relatively healthy, which I was pleased to see.
Whether it's permits, sales, or prices, all seem to be holding up in
most markets, although it differs quite a bit if one moves from state
to state. We do have nine states, but as a generalization this does
not appear to be an area of great weakness at the moment.
In terms of the outlook, our view is not much different from
the Board staff's with respect to the balance of this year. Our staff
is a little more optimistic as we look into 1986, simply in the sense
that we expect somewhat greater shrinkage of net imports--that there
won't be as big a drag on the economy as there has been in 1985. Of
course, this is a judgmental difference, but we think we ought to get
a little more kick out of the improvement in our foreign trade
position coming from the expected decline in the value of the dollar.
That's the thumb-nail sketch from the West.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. John, I don't know whether I should
ask you or Bob Forrestal, but do you know if Boeing is expecting great
things, particularly in the export side, from this new model 747 that
they are beginning to market?
MR. BALLES.

Do you mean the 757?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
highly fuel efficient 747.

No, they have a new model, a very

MR. BALLES. Gee, Jerry, I am not familiar with what that is,
unless it's a 747 SP.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. BALLES.

No, no, it's a new generation of--

I haven't heard about that I am sorry to say.

MR. STERN. Northwest ordered a bunch of them--I don't
remember how many--as part of the $2 billion capital spending program
that they have just initiated. But that's all I know about it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Do you know anything about it, Jim?

-14-

11/4-5/85

MR. KICHLINE.

No, I don't.

I'm sorry.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming in your budgetary
projections about a farm bill?
MR. KICHLINE. We have a $45 billion deficit reduction
package for next year. That's about $8 billion less than the
Congressional estimates. They expected $53 billion or so for fiscal
1986.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Not real?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, what I am trying to tell you is that we
didn't accept the $53 billion figure. We think there will be overruns
in a number of areas. The farm area is a prime one; we don't have the
specific number on the farm bill, but we think that it is going to
come in higher than the Congress had expected.
that's

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] pretty optimistic-[unintelligible]. Why did you lower prices in your forecast?

MR. KICHLINE. Why did we lower them?
by much, a couple of tenths.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER AND MR. MARTIN.
MR> KICHLINE.

They are not reduced

One half percent.

Which price measure are you looking at--the

deflator?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm looking at any of them--gross
domestic business product deflator.
MR. KICHLINE.

All right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's .4 down.

Excluding food and energy.

MR. KICHLINE. A couple of reasons: One is that the incoming
information in a couple of areas was a little better than we had
thought in the third quarter. That's the case for the gross business
product deflator. On compensation and wages, we went through that
again and that continues to look really quite good to us, or indeed
maybe a little better. And with weakness in economic activity, we now
have a little more slack in labor and product markets than we had
before. In addition, taking another look at what we were doing on
import prices, we felt that perhaps there was a reason to say it will
come along a little slower--that is, rising prices from the dollar
would occur later on in the year--so we pushed that back a bit. And
all of those things together add up to .4 on the index.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I just had two comments. One involves housing
and the comment is that the tightening of terms and lending standards
is there and that it is going to get more prevalent. We haven't seen
much of it yet in the statistics but that doesn't mean it won't show
up in 1986.
I just hear too many comments from specific lenders about
either tightening on their own or being forced to by the mortgage
insurers; so I think that that may knock 100,000 to 200,000 off the

11/4-5/85

-15-

numbers we are showing. Also, a comment on office building financing:
If you get into some of the details, what you find is that the banks
are doing the construction financing and they are willing to do it
because there is permanent financing being supplied by the life
insurance companies. Also, there is still a lot of syndication going
on.
There are rich doctors, lawyers and dentists who haven't adjusted
to the new economic realities of a less inflationary environment and,
also, they view this kind of investment as a good tax shelter.
If tax
reform measures actually get passed and the marginal rates are cut, I
think that will kick that in the head real well. So, again, the
combination of the financing facts and the agency rates suggests that
sometime this is going to peak out, although I am not smart enough to
know when.
One final comment about the value of the dollar: The business
people I talked with in the Midwest are certainly not sitting there
worrying about the inflationary impact of further declines of the
dollar because they long ago ceased believing their economists'
forecasts. But one thing they do know is that the appreciating dollar
nearly killed them and they are making decisions right now on things
such as closing plants or moving production abroad. So time is of the
essence here to get the dollar down, because these are decisions that
are not going to be reversed quickly if they ever are reversed.
Somehow or other I don't think that we necessarily appreciate that
fact.
They are not that concerned about what the declining dollar
will do to inflation, but they are very concerned about what will
happen in terms of their survival if it doesn't decline.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you ever find a businessman worried
about his ability to raise prices when--.
They like that.
MS. SEGER. They also buy supplies, though, that are imports,
It's a very competitive world out there.
MR. PARTEE.

They prefer to buy low and sell high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I tried to have a very optimistic view of
the economy all through the summer, thinking that there would be a
pretty good resurgence in the fall.
There were some pretty favorable
indicators at our last meeting, but I must say that this recent set
bothers me.
I am most affected, I guess, by the McGraw-Hill survey
which is down one percent--and nobody mentioned that--in nominal
terms.
Now that's a pretty good survey. It's the oldest, and we
always thought the best, of the private surveys. That's a pretty
poor, unrespectable survey result to be occurring in the fall after
boards have met and plans have tended to firm up for the next year.
That did shock me. The other thing that I worry about is that
personal saving rate; the only thing you can do really is assume that
it won't come back very much. But it's so low that one wonders
whether there hasn't been some kind of a spending desire on the part
of consumers associated with the use of credit that will disappear,
and that in fact the automobile producers are wrong about their
forecasts for next year and it won't be as good as Si, I guess it was,
suggested.
I don't know; that bothers me.
I am not sure, but it's a
very mysterious thing to have a saving rate that low. After all,
there was supposed to be an environment that would encourage saving in

11/4-5/85

connection with supply side economics.
It's totally the wrong answer
that has come out of the data from that point of view.
It's very
difficult for me to incorporate the net export/import picture because
we have had so little experience with that being a large factor.
It
might be that there could be a bigger increase in exports than the
staff has forecast, but the fact of the matter is that for the next
year they have a contribution coming from net exports--that is,
smaller net imports.
It's the first time since 1980 that there has
been any contribution to the economy from that source, so it is a
rather radical change in GNP effect that they have already put in
there. As far as office building is concerned, I think the longer it
goes on the worse it is going to be.
I don't know when it is going to
break, but it is going to break pretty big; and the longer it goes on
the bigger the break will be when it occurs.
So, I'm starting to lose my optimism; I figure at best we
will get the staff forecast for the period to come and it could be a
good deal worse. There is a possibility of a recession and we need to
I said that last time, thinking of it as sort of a
recognize that.
remote possibility. My feeling is that the possibility is a little
stronger now that there will be a recession some time in the next nine
months.
It's a distinct possibility. In any event, I would want to
point out to you--and I think this is what Pres Martin did--that the
staff forecast is well below our bogey for the performance of the
economy. We [as a group] forecast 4 percent for the second half of
the year, I believe, in real terms. Apparently, it is going to be
well below that. We forecast a pretty good 1986, and it looks as
though it is going to be below that by an appreciable percent or so.
So we are below our bogey; that seems to be increasingly clear as the
months go by, and I think we will need to take that into account in
determining what the monetary policy ought to be.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You have made our forecast a bogey.

MR. PARTEE.
I thought it was a minimal acceptable
performance of the economy that we predicted in July. That's the way
it was presented in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, I thought: as a
satisfactory performance. Otherwise, we would have needed a change of
So it was
monetary policy to get a different economic result.
acceptable, but now we have fallen more below that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

You seem to be a GNP targeter.

I think I am, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I am not sure that the Committee has
accepted that. Mr. Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. As far as the District goes, I continue to
think that the tone is a little better in my part of the country than
it is in many of the other Districts. Even in the District, though,
it is usually described as not great but not terrible. But I think
it's generally above the national average.
As far as the economy across the nation goes, I think we are
very much in the hands of the consumer and that gives me some pause at
this stage of the recovery, because I would have hoped that we could
be getting some help from some of the other sectors, notably

11/4-5/85

-17-

investment. But as Chuck pointed out, that doesn't seem to be there;
in fact, it seems to be a drag. Therefore, [the economy] pretty much
is riding on whatever momentum there is that the consumer is going to
provide; and looking at that one can avoid extreme pessimism, but it
If you look at what
is awfully hard to get very upbeat about it.
drives the consumer, the job income side is moderate, but it seems to
me the consumer is held back by the debt situation. Inflation has
been another factor that has either helped or hindered consumer
spending. That seems to be about neutral: it doesn't seem to be
getting any worse and it doesn't seem to be getting any better. But
in a kind of static dynamic view of the situation, we are not getting
any help from there anymore. And that leaves interest rates, which
also have a major impact on what the consumer does, and I suppose the
outlook there is flat to down. We do have some constraints on the
international side [in terms of] what we can do there. But I just get
the feeling that the expansion is much like a person entering his
senior years. He can go on a while longer, but I get the feeling that
he could fall over any time. And while I wouldn't predict a
recession, I get the sense that sometime out there in the forecast
horizon this recovery is just going to fall over.
MR. PARTEE.

He's a lot younger than the average age.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I don't think I shall
burden the Committee with reciting again the problems in our regional
area, other than to tell you that the latest survey we have done at
the banks suggests that farm land prices have fallen another 5 to 6
percent.
MR. PARTEE.

In what period is that?

MR. GUFFEY. That's in the third quarter; they are down in
the 40 to 50 percent range now below the high of 1981. But there is
another activity that I would like to bring to the Committee's
attention. Because of the rather depressed conditions in our region,
and based on the resourcefulness of the people who live in the
Midwest, they do turn to other activities to provide food for the
table. As a result, game wildlife hunting is a big activity this time
of the year and I can tell you that, at least in the immediate area
around the Bank, there is some optimism for the Thanksgiving holiday
because the hunting season opened early. You will find four out of
seven Bluejays and four out of seven Cardinals will be served!
MS. SEGER. I thought you were going to say that they got a
couple of bankers to serve.
MR. PARTEE.

That's an upbeat report.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Let's turn to Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I can be quite brief. It seems
to me that the alternatives presented--not alternative C, but
alternatives A and B at least--are generally consistent with the
growth path adopted by the Committee for the fourth quarter at its
last meeting. One is toward the bottom end of that range and one, in
a sense, is toward the middle or upper end. I should point out a

11/4-5/85

-18-

technical point: that M1, for example, under alternative B we have 5
percent; the Committee said 6 to 7 percent or lower. The hurricane
effect raises M1 growth in September by 3 percentage points and
reduces it in October by about the same amount. So in some sense that
5 percent under alternative B could be construed as 6 percent with the
hurricane allowed for. That's a minor bit of expertise. It does tend
to buttress the point that the differences between "A" and "B"
relative to the growth path adopted by the Committee are small. The
only other point that perhaps one might make in a general way, Mr.
Chairman, is that the weakness in the economy is in those areas most
susceptible to long-term rates, and one could advance very gingerly a
proposition that in providing reserves as they will have to be
provided over this period perhaps there is some usefulness in
providing them through acquisitions of coupon issues, at least to a
degree, to do whatever could be done to keep pressures on long rates
from going up or encouraging them to go down even while short rates
might need to be sustained for international reasons or for reasons of
monetary growth rates.
MR. MARTIN. Steve, let me ask: You pointed out some of the
similarities of "A" and "B" with regard to the aggregates. Could you
help me understand the differences--and I am talking forward now--in
alternative A for the next short-run period versus alternative B? You
have borrowings on page 8 [in the Bluebook] of $450 to $550 million
for "B;" you have borrowings of $200 to $300 million for "A" on page
10. That seems to me a rather substantial difference. Can you help
me rectify this?
MR. AXILROD. Well, that was essentially a difference we
thought was roughly consistent with a drop of a half point in the
funds rate, and presumably to a degree in other short rates. The-MR. PARTEE.

And with no drop in the discount rate, I take

it?
MR. AXILROD. No. But I feel absolutely certain that if the
Committee leaned in the direction of alternative A, expectations of a
discount rate decrease would shortly begin to dominate the market.
And I think the risk, as we tried to indicate, would be that short
rates--at least in the short run--would fall more than is specified.
MR. MARTIN. From midpoint to midpoint, that would be $500
million for borrowing for "B" and $250 million for "A."
So that's 50
basis points?
MR. AXILROD. Well, one model gives you 25 basis points per
$100 million [on borrowing], and we tend to think judgmentally more
like 20 basis points per $100 million. These relationships are quite
loose, so I think that is consistent with what we have there.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.

You suggest a little operation twist.
Well, I didn't mean to be very--

MR. PARTEE. As long as we have some time, would you like to
discuss that a little more? That's an unusual recommendation.

11/4-5/85

MR. AXILROD. We are coming to a period of reserve need, and
I guess I was bitten by fears of the dollar dropping sharply. Working
through that chart show, I think that the dollar is probably sensitive
So in
to both short-term as well as long-term rates in some degree.
providing reserves over this period, I was trying to think of a way
that would minimize the possibilities of adverse expectational effects
on the dollar. So I didn't really mean a substantial operation twist,
but that when the opportunity came it might be desirable to think
about buying coupon issues rather than bills, depending a little on
the circumstances at the time and how people were thinking in the
markets.
MR. PARTEE. Well, there will also be a bunch of Treasury
issues, I assume. Will any of those be coupons?
Yes, there is the
MR. STERNLIGHT. There are likely to be.
normal 3-, 10-, and 30-year issues that would have been up for auction
this week that have been postponed. They just did last week the 4-,
7- and 20-year issues that had been postponed by about a month because
of debt limit problems.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have is the U.S. Treasury.
MR. AXILROD.

The only long-term fixed rate borrower we
I think there is very little in that idea.

You see that was not checked with the Chairman!

Is that because you think long-term rates have as
MR. RICE.
much effect on exchange rates as short-term rates?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, I don't think the difference
in their rate levels will be visible to the naked eye; and I think
yes, that is a possibility.
MR. PARTEE. We did study that operation twist at some
length, and I can't recall that there were any findings of significant
difference.
In fact, I don't think there are many
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
private borrowers out there in the long-term markets.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you have the mortgage borrowers: there are
a lot of those. And they prefer fixed rates if they can get them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
term rates.

It's probably related more to the short-

MR. PARTEE. There's [unintelligible] at least in the home
Consumers have a very distinct preference for fixed
mortgage market.
rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
floating rate.

Some of it is fixed rate and some of it is

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I am attracted to the idea of trying
to do a little something in the coupon end--not because I think it's
going to have any great effect on relative rates--but just because the
thought runs through my head every now and then that at some point
down the road we may feel that we have to do something in coupons for

11/4-5/85

-20-

other reasons, and if we get so removed from that segment of the
market the mere fact of doing something for a particular reason has
much more signal effect to it than we might otherwise want.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we want to do it for a particular
reason, we presumably want to signal.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. RICE.

Well, I am not sure of that.

You mean we may need the twist somewhere down the

road?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

We may need something.

MR. PARTEE. What do you mean: because the Treasury will have
so much difficulty financing? If so, why would they continue to issue
coupons?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't know what the precise
circumstances might be. I think preserving some flexibility-MR. PARTEE.

I understand.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
desirable.
MR. PARTEE.

--in our market presence is

You don't extend that view to agencies, I take

it.
MS. SEGER.
MR. PARTEE.

Like Farm Credit?
Well, I didn't want to mention any particular--

MS. SEGER. It would narrow that spread, if they knew the Fed
was in buying the Farm Credit ones.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only argument I hear for buying longterm issues is that the market expects us to buy long-term issues in
some [unintelligible] or that we expect ourselves to buy long-term
issues and, therefore, we ought to buy them.
MR. BLACK.

Oh, it might be kind of fun!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we buy them once in a while, you know.
For what reasons, it's not quite clear to me.
MR. PARTEE. Steve, you have [forecast] a pretty calm M1
behavior for the remainder of the year. You are not expecting any
year-end surge or anything like that?
MR. AXILROD. Well, it's calm, largely because of the
averaging of the zero to minus one that we are projecting for October.
Growth would have broken out--whether it's "A" or "B"--in between 8
and 9-1/2 percent over that last two months of the year. Those are
fairly substantial growth rates in and of themselves and, as we
mentioned, if rates went down and particularly if expectations carried
them down more, we could get a powerful surge in M1 as rates moved

11/4-5/85

-21-

closer to these NOW account ceilings.
So there is a considerable risk
of a very substantial growth, particularly under "A," I think.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 is very high. Well, I think our
problem on that is relatively simple and difficult at the same time. I
don't attach a lot of weight to small changes in this forecast,
whether it's prices or GNP within the ranges that are set.
I don't
think that we know what GNP is going to be in this quarter. Things
have somewhat less than an ebullient tone to them, so I think: "Fair
enough; one might think of easing slightly if the dollar gave one room
to do that."
I am not sure it does right at the moment, but that's
[unintelligible] a shorter-run perspective. I am considerably
concerned that a continuing sharp decline and a real change in
sentiment there, which I think we're on the edge of, would give us
more difficulties than we bargained for. And whatever we do has to
take that into account. The stronger the dollar is, the more we can
ease; the weaker it is, the more stuck we are.
MR. RICE. But the amount of intervention that has occurred
most recently would suggest that there are still some strong upward
pressures.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's all a matter of judgment. The
intervention that took place when we were intervening heavily is what:
two weeks old?
The big intervention was what: ten days ago?
Since
then the markets definitely have been on the other side. How much of
this is short term?
It could go back the other way; I don't know. I
wouldn't be unhappy if it went back the other way; it will give us a
little more room. But this is all a fairly narrow focus.
Mr. Morris.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I agree with your analysis, Mr. Chairman,
because I don't think we have much room to maneuver here.
If we had
some evidence that the economy was softening, then I think we could go
ahead and move to lower rates, despite the growth in the aggregates.
But I don't think we have anything to tie an easier posture to at this
moment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think there is another element that
could arise.
I don't know what the odds are, but if Congress really
passed one of these budget resolutions that calls for a sharply lower
deficit than I think is at all probable in the current fiscal year,
it necessarily follows that within weeks after they passed this bill,
I presume, they would have to do something to cut expenditures in a
big way.
I might point out that the way some of those bills are
written, it could include the Federal Reserve. Then I think we have a
kind of platform, and maybe a necessity, for seeing that interest
rates go down.
I don't know how much easing that would take; they
might go down by themselves.
MR. MORRIS.
That's exactly the kind of thing--something to
hang our hat on--that we don't have now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the odds are on
something like that happening. I am totally confused by this process;
I don't know whether it is all a game, whether there is any chance
that they are going to get together, or whether they are carefully
making positions that are mutually inconsistent so [unintelligible].
They may end up with a bill that is vetoed.
If it happened that we

11/4-5/85

-22-

got a dramatic difference in the budget, in one sense it would be
constructive and in another sense it may be rather chaotic if they do
it in a hurry. Then I think we have a new ingredient that we'd have
to take into account.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Frank, I don't know. If we have a
continued sub-par performance of the economy, it would seem to me that
On Friday of this week we
that would be a reasonable justification.
will get the McGraw-Hill survey, which I think is going to be a big
news item. In addition, I think the retail sales figure, just because
of car sales if nothing else, is going to be very poor.
I personally think that McGraw-Hill survey will
MR. MORRIS.
That certainly has to be a
reflect the decline in exchange rates.
plus for domestic investors.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that it's going to make much
I don't know how good that
of a difference--maybe in the short run.
Retail sales are assumed to be down because of auto sales;
survey is.
I guess you look at the rest of it.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

I have no idea what that will show.

MR. BOEHNE.
I take it your basic proposition is to stay
where we are now but be alert for opportunities to ease, and that
those opportunities may come from the international side or the budget
side or wherever.
I think that makes a lot of sense.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. RICE.
MR. BLACK.
lunch today.

I think that general proposition is quite sound.
I certainly agree with that proposition.
Maybe we can get the post FOMC questions pre-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.

That's sort of where I am.

Well, let's not assume too much.

I just said "maybe."

I didn't--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, looking at operational policy in our
usual format, I didn't hear anybody talking about anything that
I suppose it's impossible that the
sounded like alternative C.
But I don't
monetary numbers would come out that low. Who knows?
think anybody wants to drive them there, if I heard the conversation
correctly. The difference between "A" and "B" in the actual numbers
I'm not sure is big enough to send anybody very much. We had 6 to 7
percent last time. We're in one of these mid-quarter periods when,
just as a matter of form, I prefer to make fewer changes rather than
more in these targets that we don't meet anyway. But-MR. PARTEE.

We might as well leave it the same, right?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is my inclination unless
somebody--although where we had them was 6 to 7 percent and that may
be a little high.

11/4-5/85

-23-

MR. PARTEE.

That was for Ml?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS.

SEGER.

I think it was--

M2 and M3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
-- 6 to 7 percent for all of them. We can
easily say around 6 percent for all of them without it being a
substantial change.
But in terms of the borrowing and our actual
operations, I heard more worries about being too tight than too easy
purely on the domestic business outlook, which is not the whole
equation, certainly.
From the standpoint of the international debt
situation and a lot of other things if interest rates came down, it
would be nice.
On the other hand, I continue to be impressed by the
amount of credit that this economy is dealing out, including in the
real estate construction area.
I'm not sure that inviting it to spew
out a little more is in the long-term interest of anything.
But there
we are.
Right now, as I suggested before, I would look toward not
making any very startling changes; but if the dollar really gave us
the opportunity or--more remotely but conceivably--if the budget gave
us more opportunity, I'd be alert to go down in the absence of any new
striking news in the other direction.
There's a slightly peculiar
situation in the market right now. We have had borrowing low all week
but the federal funds rate is higher than one would expect, presumably
in reaction to Treasury financings.
I presume that's just a passing
phenomenon and that the market doesn't seem to be taking it seriously.
Well, let's see what others have to say.
MR. PARTEE.
thing isn't it, Paul?

It's

going to be hard to evaluate the budget

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know.
I have no idea what's
coming out.
I don't particularly expect this, but I suppose one
possibility is that they could pass something that virtually demanded
expenditure cuts pretty quickly.
I don't know how you avoid them if
they pass something.
The budget is clearly running above what they
say.
I can see how they might ignore this law next year if they pass
it; it's a little hard to see how they ignore it three weeks after
they pass it.
I have no idea what's going to come out of this.
I
would think from the Administration's standpoint, Congress has managed
to screw it up enough that the bill would end up being vetoed, so you
have nothing.
I would think that may be the most likely scenario--or
that they just never agree so they finally pass the debt ceiling bill
and they give in on the thing.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, that's

possible.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Or they could pass it in the Senate
version and could say that it has no implications for this year so
they'll think about it next September, in which case it would not have
much implication for us either, I guess.
Any one of the above [is
possible], and I have no idea how it's going to come out.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, would that argue for a bit wider
range in the borrowing without having to consult with this group,
considering the wide range of both that uncertainty and the dollar
uncertainty and so forth?

11/4-5/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to leave ourselves
a little range on the dollar side.
I don't mind consulting when the
change gets significant in any event, but a little week-to-week
flexibility or two-week flexibility is useful.
MR. RICE.
than the upper.

Or aiming for the lower side of the range more so

MR. PARTEE.
MR. RICE.

Or changing the range.
Oh, I wouldn't go that far.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

Well, what do have now:

$400-$600 million?

We could talk about $400 to $500 million.

MS. SEGER.

$300 to $500 million.

MR. RICE.
close to--

Aiming at being more comfortable?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
$350 to $550 million.
that neighborhood someplace.
MR. MARTIN.

Or is it as

I think we're in

$350 to $500 million.

MR. PARTEE. We're now at $450-$550 million, and saying we
would like to err toward some ease--if there is an opportunity--and
widening that band on the low side is a good idea.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in case we get too involved in the
numerology here: These are always starting points and if something
else happens, we can go below it or above it.
SEVERAL.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's clear enough.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. One thing that struck me, really, is the
volatility of expectations about the economy around the table.
This
month they tend to be negative, while last month they were very
constructive. Before that I think they tended to be negative. That
only leads me to the conclusion that there is still a lot of
uncertainty with respect to what's going on in the economy, and I
personally wouldn't be inclined to overreact to that.
The other thing
I would say is that there was mention yesterday of expectations in the
market about the possibility of a concerted action among the G-5
countries to get the dollar down. So any easing that is undertaken in
the near term here could be misconstrued in a sense, in the context of
that, and could be potentially very damaging in terms of that thought.
It could cause a more dramatic fall in the dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I might say in that connection, just in
case there's any uncertainty around the table, that this move of the
Japanese to increase their rates came out of the clear blue sky as far
as I am concerned.
I still don't quite comprehend it.
I'm not sure,
but in the larger scheme of things I assume they did it--maybe it will
affect the yen in the short run--given that the Japanese economy is

11/4-5/85

not showing much pep and that they just absolutely are blocked on the
fiscal policy side.
It's not the move that I would have chosen.
MR. MARTIN. It's certainly not consonant with the action
plan: the notion of stimulating housing and infrastructure spending.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
direction.
Excuse me.

It goes I think in the wrong basic

MR. MELZER. The other thing that I have been turning over in
my mind, in reaction to yesterday's presentation, is a feeling that in
terms of responding to a rapidly declining dollar my instincts lead me
to feel that the right national policy response to that is probably
for interest rates to rise somewhat.
Easing in response to a weaker
dollar had some implications that I didn't particularly like. What
I've been thinking about is that we already have had a fairly
significant decline of the value of the dollar and that possibly some
of the general dynamics that were talked about in the hypothetical
presentation yesterday may be coming into play here. We may be
dealing with a sort of natural increase in interest rates and I don't
know, frankly, whether it would be appropriate to lean against that
too heavily. Now, I know there are other considerations. Net, based
on those several considerations, I would be inclined to stay where we
are, with some degree of reserve restraint, and not be looking for the
next opportunity to ease at this juncture.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me introduce another small
refinement, given where the dollar is now and given the greater
hesitancy in the market and all the rest.
It is given that there are
risks on both sides.
But given the risks of this thing getting a
little out of hand--in terms of speed anyway--I guess I don't see much
point in intervening aggressively to push the dollar down or to hold
it down. If the dollar is all that strong, in the short run it might
be that the proper response is through a modest monetary policy change
rather than trying to do it by intervention. It takes a little
flexibility to get it on the monetary policy side.
So, intervening
very heavily increases the risk you are talking about: it freezes us;
it has the opposite effect.
MR. PARTEE.
I get awfully uncomfortable with the idea that
we should put the dollar as the centerpiece of policy.
I think the
economy is the centerpiece of [policy].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I am not sure I see that distinction.

MR. PARTEE.
I don't disagree that the dollar is a
significant variable, but I would point out that the objective was to
get the dollar down. That was a program to which you agreed: to get
the dollar down. And it has come down and, I think, has behaved
extremely well.
I thought for the whole period between meetings that
the dollar had a lifting tendency and that's why we had to do the
intervention.
If it doesn't lift, we don't do the intervention. It
was just very recently that we got a little weakness. And I think the
weakness has come because of the Japanese raising their rates, which
is certainly a contra-economic policy from a world point of view--not
because of anything we did.
So, I don't disagree with what is being
said about the dollar, but I would again want to emphasize that I

11/4-5/85

-26-

think what we need to have is a decently performing domestic economy.
That's the primary objective of monetary policy.
MR. MORRIS.
I can see the case for moving to somewhat lower
interest rates, but I don't see that that necessarily means we
shouldn't intervene also.
MR. MARTIN.
It seems to me--I don't know whether Tom would
agree with this--that we're talking about the immediate 2 or 3 weeks
I would think by the end of
of the 5- or 6-week intermeeting period.
5 weeks we might have enough feedback from the markets and from our
own economy to change our position, which I would certainly agree to.
We don't need to ease this moment but that doesn't say that 5 weeks
from now we might not.
MR. MELZER.

That's right.

Sure.

MR. RICE. Where do you see the natural tendency of interest
rates--to rise right now?
MR. MELZER.
I guess it's relatively minor, but some weeks
back we were running borrowing levels that were well in excess of the
Now we
somewhat lower target and funds were trading below 8 percent.
tend to be running at borrowing levels that are somewhat below the
It's relatively minor:
target and funds are modestly above 8 percent.
15 to 20 basis points.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Chuck, I agree with your point about
the primacy of the economy, but I come out a little differently in
terms of emphasis at the margin. With that primacy in mind I say to
myself: What are the things that are on the table in the very near
term that could really louse up the situation with the domestic
economy in a major way?
And the one that just leaps out at me is the
risk--and everybody puts his own arithmetic on this--of the dollar
If that happens, the one thing we're
breaking out on the down side.
sure of--or at least I'm sure of--is that that would do considerable
damage to the domestic economy and the world economy.
We have had a
If it broke down sharply, yes.
MR. PARTEE.
great big program to bring it down and we have gotten it down a
little. The evidence hasn't been that it is tending to rush away.
I agree with you that that would be a bad thing.
Maybe it will.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

It is down

I don't know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I know.

MR. PARTEE.
Nobody ever told me what the program envisaged,
so I don't have any sense [of that].
MR. MORRIS.

If you attribute it solely to the program.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'm not talking about the long run--

11/4-5/85

-27-

MR. MORRIS. We have had a bigger response than I would have
expected solely from the program.
I think the timing was
MR. PARTEE. Oh, we certainly have.
excellent in terms of making the program look effective. Anyhow,
having been worrying about a high dollar for the last year and a half
or two, I find it a little odd that we're now talking about how
And there is a possibility that it is
serious the possibility is.
going to break all the way down; [I don't know] how clear and present
I suspect that some of Gov. Seger's manufacturers
the danger is.
wouldn't mind a little further drop.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They would like the yen at about 120 and--

The fact is, Chuck, that the markets that have a
MR. MORRIS.
high level of speculative activity tend to overshoot, both on the up
and the down side. And that makes this not something to be concerned
about in a [unintelligible] way.
MR. PARTEE. Are you suggesting that after I have left here,
the Committee is going to keep the interest rates very high to keep
And thus put [the country] in a major
the dollar from falling?
recession that the rest of the world is in-MR. MORRIS.

No.

MR. PARTEE.

With the same bad policy?

I would think that one would describe what
MR. MORRIS. No.
we are talking about now as hoping to avoid the necessity for that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely. The dollar going down isn't a
That's what the people were supposed to demonstrate
free ride.
yesterday. It may have to get down over a period of time; it probably
How it gets there and what the accompanying policies are makes
does.
all the difference.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, go back to that chart nine in
yesterday's presentation. We sit here and we have a situation, which
we have had for a long time, where we have a simply lousy fiscal
policy. Monetary policy is trying to out-muscle and out-maneuver
that, and there is a point here where it just can't be done.
MR. MARTIN. Let me play devil's advocate for just a minute.
We have been talking about what I think is the real risk of a
precipitous decline of the dollar. We had a good staff presentation
yesterday on the same subject. On the other side of this issue is the
lack of real action by our trading partners of any kind of
coordination of policy, fiscal or monetary. And the Japanese
contradiction is exhibit A.
Now, suppose the market players feel that
there is not going to be any change in fundamentals--we all know the
limitation of intervention policy--and the market moves the other way.
Is that of some probability?
It may not be the most probable outcome.
MR. MELZER.

I think that's possible.

11/4-5/85

-28-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then if domestic business looks somewhat
on the softer side, then it is an opportunity to ease--to lower
interest rates.
MR. STERN. That strikes me as a possibility as well. And
that probably would provoke some natural upward pressure on the
dollar.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, then we're in the dilemma that we
have been in for years.
You have a simple choice: What sector of the
economy takes the rap for inflation?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Then they all take the rap.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is all very useful, but I detect that
we have a rather more limited range of possibilities.
I think this
conversation is very relevant, but I don't know whether you want to
extend the general conversation or focus on just what we put down here
for a directive.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far
concerned, I'd be quite comfortable with
Bluebook. That had borrowing of $450 to
with the $350 to $550 million range that

as policy itself is
alternative B as in the
$550 million, but I could go
Governor Martin suggested.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Making it 5 to 6 percent [unintelligible],
I guess--that's one possibility. We could just reduce it from 6 to 7
percent to 5 to 6 percent.
I
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm somewhat agnostic on that.
think the [unintelligible] to me at this point isn't so much whether
it's 5 to 6 percent or 6 percent, it's the framework that we
described: that given the domestic economy, if the opportunity were
I don't
there to try and nudge things down a bit we would grab it.
So, I would
know how you can articulate that in a very precise way.
lean toward the 5 to 6 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What this will be, I suppose, is "maintain
the existing degree...."
It has fluctuated a little.
MR. MARTIN.

We wouldn't want to say "decrease slightly"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If you take the most recent week, it's
down below $400 million, I presume.
The most recent 2 weeks-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think we can quite say that.
We might be able to jiggle "woulds" and "mights."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But all these words imply more precision
than we have had in the last 4- or 5-week period in terms of a precise
level of borrowing. Most of the time we have been below what we are
talking about.
MR. MORRIS.
Since we are having a wider borrowing range,
wouldn't it make sense also to have a wider range for the aggregates-maybe 5 to 7 percent?

11/4-5/85

-29-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't bother me. But I'm just
wondering whether there is some word in that first sentence that
implies something consistent with the existing degree but also implies
a little broader interpretation of what the existing degree is.
MR. AXILROD.

"About"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could say "about the existing degree".
Do we put in 5
We could say "seeks to generally maintain about...."

to 6 percent or 5 to 7 percent?
MR. RICE.
MR. PARTEE.
around 6 percent.

5 to 6 percent.
I would think we ought to put in 6 percent or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we still say "a marked slowing of M1
It's certainly true for the quarter. But it is
growth"? It depends.
not exactly true if you take October as the base. I guess it's over
the period there as a whole.
MR. PARTEE. It's certainly true that we already have had the
number that makes the 3 months slower. I wonder whether we should
leave it out and make it around 6 percent in all three [aggregates] in
the previous sentence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about this but
that implies that we drop out the other part of the sentence that says
we don't mind if M1 comes in quite low. Do you want to drop that out
or not? As I look at it, it might be useful to keep that.
MR. PARTEE. That's right. We could keep that the way the
staff has it here in brackets and still not have that previous phrase,
Paul.
MR. BLACK. We could just say "Growth in M1 over the period
at an annual rate of around 6 percent is also anticipated."
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. MARTIN.
It's 7 percent.
MR. BLACK.

Yes.

I think that's good.

That's not what's anticipated in the Bluebook.
It is if you go with--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 6 percent is what's anticipated.
Well, I am not sure how much that captures what we are talking about:
"The Committee seeks to generally maintain about the existing degree
of pressure."
Then it is "6 percent," "6 percent" again, and "slower
growth would be acceptable."
MR. MARTIN.
greater might."

And "somewhat lesser would" and "somewhat

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is written now there is one
verb for both of them. How do we split it? We used to split it. Now
it seems to take a radical change in language.

11/4-5/85

-30-

MR. AXILROD.
You could say "somewhat greater reserve
restraint might and somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable,
depending on" behavior. That makes it very clear.
MR. MARTIN.

The juxtaposition would delight the Fed

watchers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Boy, I tell you!

That really emphasizes

it.
MR. MARTIN.

They would count the words in prior directives.

MR. BLACK.
I think we create less problems if we always keep
them as "woulds" so it is symmetrical in both directions.
MR. MARTIN.

We don't want to be symmetrical.

MR. BLACK.
I know you all don't. But symmetry is one of my
favorite attributes.
You can't tell by looking at me!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's just a matter of language. We
say: "generally;" "about 6 percent for M2 and M3;" and "6 percent for
Ml."
Then "Slower growth of that aggregate would be acceptable in the
context of satisfactory economic performance, given the very rapid
growth in M1 over the summer.
Somewhat greater reserve restraint
might and somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable."
We
Now, does
leave the range of 6 to 10 percent [for the funds rate].
anybody have improvements on that language?
MR. BLACK.

Make them both "woulds."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one vote for both "woulds."
The
borrowing range we're talking about is roughly $400 to $600 million;
the possibility of making that $350 to $550 million has been broached.
I don't think there is an enormous difference between those two.
Mechanically, it's $50 million.
Is
MR. BLACK. It's more important to me where we start off.
it anticipated that we will start at $500 million?
That was sort of
the tenor of the discussion, as I read it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that depends a little. You
say start off at $500 million; I don't think we will want to go to
$500 million this week when the federal funds rate is high, although
the dollar is [weak].
Even with the dollar weak, with the federal
funds rate as high as it is, we weren't anxious to go to $500 million
this week. It may have been what we had in the path but we-MR. BLACK. I am really talking about the path.
that those points you make are very valid points.

I recognize

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I would say consistent with $350 to $550
million, the center of gravity would be a little less than $500
million but not much.
I would say something like $475 million, which
is right in the middle.
No it's not; it's $450 million. I can't do
my arithmetic right!

11/4-5/85

-31-

MR. PARTEE. I would like to see the funds rate drift down,
maybe an 1/8th of a point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar was not weak, I see nothing
the matter with that; certainly, you wouldn't expect it to stay where
it is now. And I think there is no expectation in the market, as near
as I can see, that that's the appropriate funds rate.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, what do you have in mind when you
speak of the dollar being weak, in terms of this intermeeting period?
Are you talking about stringing ten days together all on the down side
of some magnitude? Or are you going to let it-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have that mechanical a test--that
it takes ten consecutive days of decline.
MR. GUFFEY. I guess when you talk about the implementation
of this policy, I don't know what "weakness in the dollar" really
means.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure I can describe it purely in
exchange rate terms, although obviously a weak dollar means that the
exchange rate is tending to weaken. However, when you try to quantify
that, I don't know. Sometimes it doesn't feel good.
MR. RICE.

A good test is how much intervention.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were actively intervening on kind of
both sides, that would be a good test. Two weeks ago, or whenever it
was that the dollar had a little strong feeling to it, there was a lot
of intervention to keep it from going up. It was clearly, in that
time period, strong. I would say in the last week it has been a bit
on the weak side.
MR. GUFFEY.

The weak side with respect to the yen largely?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be one of my measures. If it
was just the yen and it wasn't infecting the psychology generally and
rates generally, we would have a different situation. But that's not
what we had in the last week. I guess the movement was greatest
against the yen, but it was clearly affecting the others too. I
suppose the preferable thing, if the yen really got weaker, is that
the Japanese might ease up a bit, but I don't think they'll do it.
That might be the better way to do it.
MR. GUFFEY. My point is that I would like to see rates come
down a bit, but it isn't clear to me how that occurs. If the dollar
is a constraint and the measure of the dollar's weakness is feel, how
do you get there?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the dollar is weak, you can see it in
the market, but I don't think you can measure it by the extent of a
mechanical measure or movement.
MR. PARTEE. I find your description too subjective also. I
guess I would just have to vote for an easier money policy instead of
accepting something as fuzzy as you described.

11/4-5/85

-32-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
bad policy.

One way of getting out of it is to have a

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think it's a private policy.
I'm trying
to bow a little toward you internationalists, but I can't bow too much
because I think we need to be easing up a little.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, so we divide it up.
What borrowing
level are we talking about?
Who prefers $350 to $550 million?
MR. BLACK.

What is the alternative, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
anybody thinks of.

I think the alternative can be anything

MR. BLACK. I don't have any problem with that, considered
asymmetrically, but I just don't know on which side the other one is
going to be.
I guess it is going to be a lower level, isn't it?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Somebody expressed an opinion of $400 to
$600 million, staying right where we are.
That's slightly higher but
others may be lower.
MR. BLACK.
If we have the choice of staying right where we
are, that's the one I would prefer rather than this one.
If this is
the higher-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At this point, you have any choice at all,
but I don't know if anybody's going to join you.
MR. BLACK. Well, if we're reasonable about it, I think I'll
join the majority this time. That's what I am trying to do: get
something I can agree with.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who wants it higher? Who prefers
higher than that?
Well, do you prefer slightly higher than $350 to
$550 million?.
I don't hear anybody expressing that. These
differences are very small. The other alternative, I guess is: Who
prefers slightly lower than that?
MS.

SEGER.

I do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK(?).

We have one on each side, so I--

We sit next to each other and balance it out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think $350 to $550 million is the
closest we're going to come to a consensus.

point.

MR. PARTEE.
I think of $450 million as being the starting
I don't know whether that puts me on Governor Seger's side.
MR. BLACK.
MR. PARTEE.

That's the midpoint.
Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I have no problem with $450 million being
the center of gravity. But--

11/4-5/85

-33-

MR. BLACK. Just as an added bit of information, could we ask
Steve and Peter to give us some idea of what they think the federal
funds rate associated with that might be?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think at that level that the funds
rate would tend to be around 7-7/8 to 8 percent. My thinking with
$500 million is right around 8 percent, maybe 8 to 8-1/8 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. An illustration of that, if I am not wrong,
is that when we were above $500 million the funds rate was below 8
percent and now that we are at $375 million, it is above 8 percent.
MR. STERNLIGHT. One little thing that has happened is that
seasonal borrowing has come off some recently, and I think that tends
to make the given level [unintelligible] a tiny bit more.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My guess is that it would be a federal
funds rate slightly below 8 percent--or maybe even more than slightly
It isn't very reliable
--depending upon expectations in the market.
from week to week. If people think rates are going down, the federal
funds rate will probably go down; if they think they are going to go
It sits there for several weeks until
up, it is going to go up.
people change their minds.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I think it is generally about
unchanged and it will be generally about unchanged.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a situation where in the past few
If the statistics are right, the
days it has been above 8 percent.
market is going to be quite easy tomorrow, but that will show up maybe
In the previous two-week period, it was
at 4:30 in the afternoon.
below 8 percent most of the time and showed up in a tight money market
what--at 5:30 in the afternoon?
For a whole day it was above 8
I think we are at the center of gravity as
percent on that Wednesday.
nearly as I can see.
We are left with what flexibility there is
around it.
MS. SEGER. Peter, are you more sensitive to rate movements
again?
I know we are not targeting them, but are you more sensitive
to what happens, say, the first day or two after an FOMC meeting
because every Fed watcher in the world is hanging over his or her
telerate and over the various machines?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

I think there's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the plan gets a little tricky here. I
think we have been avoiding, except in more extreme cases--well, not
that extreme, but 1/4 percent, 3/8 percent above where we would expect
it to be--just intervening on the basis of the federal funds rate,
because then you really feed this notion that we are going to guide
the federal funds rate within an eighth or within a quarter. We got
in trouble in the past with that and I want to avoid it if I can.
MS. SEGER. Well, what if tomorrow at 11:00 a.m.--the day
after the FOMC meets--the fed funds rate is at 10-1/4 percent?
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's also the final day of the reserve
period, and I think that's--

-34-

11/4-5/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At 10-1/4 percent, we'd probably put some
money in, even if it is contrary to what the statistics seemed to
show.
MR. RICE.

Even if it is the final day of the maintenance

period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, if it's 10 1/4 percent in the
morning, I think that might suggest something is the matter.
MR. BLACK.

I think I would even advocate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's an outside [case].
If it were
8-1/2 percent or something, it's a more difficult question. It may
well happen tomorrow that the federal funds rate is 8-1/4 percent,
even though the borrowings are running whatever they are running now-$375 million. Then we have a much more difficult decision to make.
I
We may not do anything, but 8-1/2 percent begins getting marginal;
wouldn't like to do it at 8-1/4 percent or 8-1/8 or 8 percent, just
because we theoretically thought that the funds rate should be 7-7/8
percent--or the reverse when it got lower. A few weeks ago it was
rather consistently lower. We might do it earlier or later in the
I would be less
week, depending upon how the funds rate was going.
than forthcoming if I did not say those judgments as to whether to
anticipate or delay action a little bit partly would depend upon what
the dollar was doing on that particular day.
I wonder whether the borrowing level shouldn't
MR. PARTEE.
be in the directive.
It seems to me that that's what we are
concentrating on now and it's not even specified.
It used to be that
we said the aggregates, which were in there; then we said the reserve
pressures, which were in there. But the fact of the matter is that
this discussion of policy for the last hour has been almost entirely
on the question of what the initial borrowing level will be and it is
not even mentioned in that directive.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.

Not mentioned apparently, that's right.

The emperor has no clothes.

MR. PARTEE.
It might not be a bad time to introduce it,
since we have a pretty wide range: $350 to $550 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know that we want to take such a
radical step this morning at this late hour, but-MR. PARTEE.

I'm just struck by it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the problem with it is that it pins
us to a very precise number. You are right that it is a wide range,
but we don't always have that kind of a range. Our ability to hit
that consistently is not overwhelming.
MR. PARTEE.
in the directive.

Well, that's true of the other things mentioned

11/4-5/85

-35-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well understood. After you put the
borrowing level in there for a while and don't meet it, then you will
be looking for something else.
MR. BALLES.

One more target to miss!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will put in next quarter's GNP--this is
Mr. Partee talking! I don't know whether he wants the flash or the
preliminary or the final revised figure 10 years from now.
MR. PARTEE.

I want an average for the next four quarters.

MR. BLACK. That's what Mike Keran says our target is, now
that he is out of the Federal Reserve System.
MR. PARTEE.
I really thought he was right until this morning
when the Chairman denied it.
MS. SEGER.
If we are forced by Humphrey-Hawkins to talk in
terms of GNP growth and unemployment and inflation, it seems to me,
though, that sometime it has to be tied into what we do, whether we
are targeting it precisely or not.
MR. PARTEE.
I used to think that way when the bill was
written [unintelligible].
I even thought the Congress might ask: Why
don't you get a better outcome?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the difficulty with that
approach is that it rather promises more than we can deliver.
MR. PARTEE.

That seems to be true of everything.

It is
That's precisely it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.
true of most things.
If it were as simple as that, we'd never have a
recession or inflation. Well, maybe we're prepared to vote. Are we
prepared to vote?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Yes.

MR. BALLES. Can you repeat the specifications so we will all
be singing from the same hymn book.
MR. BLACK.

You do that and we may not get unanimity!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the numbers are all clear in the
directive and the language. They are all 6 percents with a "would"
and a "might" worked in there. It's 6 to 10 percent, I presume, on
the federal funds rate. And we are talking $350 to $550 million, with
$450 million the center of gravity and with some flexibility of going
up or down depending upon the aggregates and all this other evidence,
including the exchange market.
MR. MARTIN.
accommodation.

And a slight bias toward a little more

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which is expressed to some degree in
changing the range itself and in the "would" and "might" language.

11/4-5/85

-36-

MS. SEGER. But the monetary growth numbers are cut back from
what we talked about at the last meeting.
MR. PARTEE.

Because we have had that low October.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They are at the bottom end of the range.

MR. BLACK. They don't matter when they are over; they
shouldn't matter when they are under either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to discuss this other paragraph
too, but if we know enough to vote on this one, let us vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
President Balles
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Seger

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now we have this other paragraph. Some
people's consciences suggest that something like this is appropriate.
MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, since the market seems to be
largely disregarding large swings in M1, I think to add this paragraph
that is on page 12 of the Bluebook would call attention to something
in an inappropriate way. We had some language in this direction six
weeks ago; I think the same logic applies today.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are right; we had some language in the
discussion six weeks ago; we could sharpen that and say something like
this in the general discussion as an alternative, if that's desirable.
Now, the question that was raised was whether we have to make an
announcement of this.
I don't mind saying this: Since everybody
anticipates it anyway, it looks a little odd to go out of one's way to
find the special occasion to say it.
I might be testifying later this
week.
If I do, I could just plant a question; that's easy. But if I
don't, I need some natural occasion to-MR. MARTIN. If we say it this way, isn't there a slight
implication that we're leading up to putting M1 in the future into a
monitoring range or something of that sort?
If we go out of our way
to say this, aren't we saying: "Next week, folks, we are going to put
M1 on a monitoring--."
MR. MORRIS.
MR. BLACK.
whole view.
MR. MARTIN.
this?

I would hope so.
If you are right, Pres, you have just changed my

I'm asking.

Is that the implication of stating

-37-

11/4-5/85

It seems to me the word is "acceptable" instead
MR. PARTEE.
If you use the word "acceptable," it doesn't imply
of "appropriate."
anything as to the future. I wonder what a reading of the
Congressional history of the Humphrey-Hawkins [legislation] would
suggest. There used to be the idea that if the targets were changed,
the Congress would be notified that the targets were changed. We have
never utilized that, but I recall that as being characteristic of the
Humphrey-Hawkins-If we
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any doubt.
were making a change in targets and that implied some change in the
way we're approaching things, the implication is that we'd announce
Now, this has kind of crept up on us--well, [not] crept up; it
it.
But the point of
started out with a burst when we did it.
interpretation is that we haven't said we had to announce it when we
thought we were going to miss a target. We have missed lots of them.
That's the
Is this missing a target or is this a change in target?
question.
To me, it's changing the targets because we
MR. MORRIS.
clearly are not attempting to hit the targets.
MR. AXILROD. On Friday, when the directive of the previous
meeting comes out, it will be clear, as everyone knows, that the
Committee was not aiming at hitting this target, given the SeptemberI believe we could put it in the policy record
to-December [figure].
as you suggested, Mr. Chairman, and just say that the Committee, in
its discussion, recognized that given the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that takes care of it in
substance, but that's not announced for a month; that's the only real
problem. Are we forced to make an announcement here? We probably are
dancing on the head of a pin, but I don't know whether you can find
some previous time where we missed a target--I suspect that you could
--whereby this late in the year it was evident that we were not going
to hit it and we weren't aiming at it.
MR. GUFFEY. If we were missing M3 or debt, we wouldn't be
considering this, it seems to me; and I don't think we should for M1.
I wouldn't raise the question: "Why is M1 more important than M2 or M3
in the context of policy?"
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

People think it is.

MR. GUFFEY. I understand that, but to the extent we could
diminish that perception, I think it's important. Therefore, I
wouldn't do it.
I recall in October 1982 we specifically stated
MR. MORRIS.
that we were setting aside the M1 targets for the year, and that was
in the minutes.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
that in this business of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Was it in the minutes or did we do

Oh, I think that was announced.

substantive difference is that then we weren't so far off.

The

We were

off, but not so far off, and it was meaningful to say we were not

11/4-5/85

-38-

[aiming to hit it].
I think.

This time people know we're not going to hit it,

MR. MORRIS. Well, as I recall, it would have taken a zero
growth rate in the last quarter to hit the target in '82.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

This time it would take a minus.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, do you think there are any
expectations or fears in the markets that we might actually take
actions to get back close to that 3 to 8 percent range?
If there are,
I think it would be well if we eliminated those fears or expectations,
and putting this paragraph in would be a way to do it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there is that expectation,
but the question may be there. It's a question of how hard we're
trying to come closer; I think that is the practical question. If
they did their arithmetic, I don't think anybody really would think we
are going to hit it or even are trying, because we would have to say
we are aiming for a minus figure in the fourth quarter like we
achieved in October.
MR. BOEHNE. If you look at what we say here about the M1
range, we say that there are a lot of uncertainties surrounding it
including velocity, etc. When you testified back in July, you wrapped
it in a lot of uncertainties. I would think we'd be smarter to treat
this as simply a miss of a target and say: "We pointed out last July
when we set it that this was a very fuzzy target, given all the
uncertainties, and we missed it."
My sense is that's the way people
on the outside read it now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
announcement on this.
MR. BOEHNE.

I feel under no pressure to make such an

And I wouldn't want to put the spotlight on

this picture.
CHAIRMAN
an occasion arose
little trouble is
I don't know what

VOLCKER. Well, I have no trouble with doing it if
to do it in the next few days very simply. My
what do we do--put out a press release or something?
the heck people would--

MR. BOEHNE.

I wouldn't do that.

MR. PARTEE.

Well, your speech in Toronto was interpreted by

some--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry now in retrospect that I just
didn't say that. I wasn't thinking about it, but I could have easily
said that we're not going to meet the target a little more directly.
I'm sorry I didn't because that would have taken care of it.
MR. STERN. I think we should say something like this myself,
in part because we're not under any pressure to do so, and yet coming
forth with some additional information or clarification under those
circumstances strikes me as a plus.

11/4-5/85

-39-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The issue, it seems to me, is do we put it
in here?
What would you do as a practical matter apart from what we
put in here?
Go out and make an announcement tomorrow?
MR. BOEHNE.
I wouldn't make an announcement.
I would wait
for a very natural occasion and simply say that the uncertainties
surrounding M1 continue and the range is-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I do have a speech on the 19th or some

time.
MR. BALLES.

Yes you do,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

in Los Angeles.

Yes, but that's two weeks off.

MS. HORN. It doesn't seem to me that time is of the essence
here. Two weeks from now is fine; it wasn't as if we decided
something at this meeting relative to M1.
MR. BOEHNE.

I think if we put out an announcement--

MS. HORN. If it's two weeks from now, it's fine just to say
it a little more clearly than you did in Toronto.
If we put out an announcement along these lines
MR. BOEHNE.
now, I think it will be interpreted as the Fed is about to ease.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

point.

Yes, I agree with that.

MR. BOEHNE.
I don't think we want to convey that at this
We may want to ease but I don't think we want to convey that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that's the way you feel about it,
I'll couch it in appropriate words in Los Angeles if I don't find a
suitable occasion when I'm in public to say it before then.
MR. FORRESTAL.

And leave it out of the directive?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what do you want to do?
I would
leave it out of the directive but say it pretty clearly in the
discussion.
MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. BOEHNE.

Yes, I think that's a good way to do it.

I do too.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, given the record that will be published on
Friday this week, it will be no surprise that we're not going to make
the 3 to 8 percent target. And I don't see any reason to make any
announcement at all, unless you're asked the question.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can put it into a speech easily
enough.
I could just put in some sentence saying of course we're not
going to meet this--that given what has happened, we don't have any
expectation that we're going to be within the range. That's not
difficult.

11/4-5/85

-40-

MR. PARTEE. We have had commentary from both the House and
the Senate on the summer Humphrey-Hawkins [report], haven't we? And
the House specifically recommended that we not. But the Senate I
think--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven't answered those yet, have
I? That's another thing we can do. They send a letter and say: What
comments do you have? I could just put it in the answer. That's what
I could do: put an answer in that letter.
MR. PARTEE.
procedure.

That, it seems to me, would follow the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

I think those are on my desk, aren't they?

This letter?

MR. PARTEE. These are on the two reports.
I'm sure all Board members have.
MR. FORRESTAL.

It's the Fauntroy report.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

I have copies;

I think I have those letters on my desk.

Yes.

MR. ROBERTS. You have the Fauntroy letter; I don't know
about the Garn letter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't make any difference--one or the

other.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE.

Yes, that's a good idea--just to have it in that

letter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. We'll word it in the answer to:
I can say that we take your report
"What do you think of our report?"
so seriously that we are not going to meet the M1 target. I think
that's quite a natural way to handle it, if I can get it out in the
next couple of days, although one can argue about the timing and so
forth. Okay, that's the way we'll do that. Do we have anything else
to do?
MR. BERNARD.

No.

We're scheduled to be in Dining Room E at

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The Open Market Committee meeting is over

1:00 p.m.
then.
MR. PARTEE.

How about that!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

And we agree that the next meeting is--

December 17.
END OF MEETING

