Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 21, 1985

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 21, 1985, at 9:30 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Balles
Black
Forrestal
Gramley
Keehn
Martin
Partee
Rice
Seger
Wallich

Messrs. Boykin, Guffey, Mrs. Horn, and Mr. Morris, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,
Scheld, Siegman, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Entered the meeting after action to ratify transactions in domestic
operations.

-2-

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors

Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Garbarini, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang, and Syron,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
and Boston, respectively
Messrs. Pearce and Rolnick, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. McCurdy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Meeting of
May 21, 1985
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MARTIN.

We have to approve the minutes.

Move approval.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. I have an
extraordinary item this morning. We have had a request from the
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers to receive the weekly
report of the Manager for Foreign Operations and the weekly report of
the Manager for Domestic Operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Little does he know!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will say it is sent to the Treasury; it
has always been sent to them, historically. The question is whether
we can change this rule and send it to the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers under our rules of confidentiality. Does anyone
have a strong opinion on this? Do we have to take a formal action?
Does this have to appear in the record so we have to have a vote?
MR. BERNARD.

No, I don't think so.

MR. PARTEE. There used to be projections in the New York
report on domestic operations. I don't know; maybe they've been taken
out. It was a source of leaks earlier. Peter, do you have any
projections anymore in your report?
MR. STERNLIGHT. No, in the Manager's weekly report we do not
include the projections in what has been going to the Treasury. I
would think if you approve this, we'd send the same [to the Chairman
of the Council].
MR. PARTEE.

I remember we had problems with that some years

ago.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know that we ever had a problem;

I

know we worried about it.
MR. PARTEE. Well, you know, it was distributed widely in the
Treasury to something like 150 people some years ago.
MR. BLACK.

150?

MR. PARTEE.

It was a big number!

MR. MARTIN.

Mr. Sprinkel has not lobbied for this.

MR. PARTEE.

I don't think they have 150 people anymore!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

Not hearing any objection--

I have a question, though: Would this continue to

be sent to the Chairman ex officio or is it specific to the present

Chairman?

5/21/85

The
I think once you begin this--.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
be
will
Chairman
subsequent
any
whether
know
I
don't
problem is:
interested.
MR. GRAMLEY. I would be inclined to sunset the decision at
of
the present Chairman's term of office and, in effect, await
the end
The individual who first requests information like
a new request.
this may well understand the confidentiality with which to protect it.
The next guy may not.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It's worth reviewing.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if we do send it, I think
probably we should add those few words to our present memorandum [on
rules regarding confidentiality] because at the time of that GAO
investigation, it was crucial whether the procedures we were following
were consistent with the written documentation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Steve?

I assume we are going to add it.

Then there's the question of sunsetting it.

MR. BLACK. Can you take it out at the time you sunset it,
That would be the only graceful way to do it.
MR. AXILROD.

I guess we could.

In the old days, the guy at the New
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
York Fed who wrote the report could never read it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BALLES.
know" test?

We can add "upon request".

Mr. Chairman, is there some sort of "need to

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not supposed to go to anyone else
But--how many people here read this
other than those who receive it.
report?
[Secretary's note:
Mr. Wallich spoke.]
MR. WALLICH.

Well, not every report.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Cross.
MR. CROSS.

Among those whose hands were raised, only

I think I have the sense of the meeting.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Comments?

Questions?

MR. WALLICH. Sam, this kind of information, I think, is
substantially ignored by the people who are working on the exercise of
the G-10 Deputies--the reform of the monetary system. The discussion
of intervention there continues exactly along the old lines of what
was said at the time of the study--we can do a little but not much and
so forth. But there was no sense from any of the central bankers or

5/21/85

Treasury people there of a cumulative deterioration of markets, which
I take it to be the implication of what you say.
MR. CROSS. Well, certainly the complaints about market
conditions have been much, much worse. And there's no doubt that the
day-to-day volatility in the past two or three months has been far
greater than in earlier periods. We've been hearing for a long time
from the banks regarding their concern about the market's condition
and we're beginning to hear more complaints from some of the corporate
representatives at this point. That's a new element in this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are the banks not making any money these

days?
MR. CROSS. Generally speaking, most are making money on the
exchange market, if you look at their quarterly reports. With some
notable exceptions, they continue to make money.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
compared to last year.

Though less so in the first quarter

MR. CROSS. Less so. It does vary; it moves up and down.
But at least at the banks in New York that we keep an eye on, the
number of quarters in which they had large losses was very few and
that was only at a very few institutions.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To me it's astonishing, given what
has been going on in this market, that somebody hasn't taken one great
big loss in foreign exchange operations. It's a miracle.
MR. GRAMLEY. Is it a miracle or have they hedged their
positions sufficiently so that they get by?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The logic of that can only take you
so far. Somebody somewhere is absorbing the price risk associated
with this volatility.
MR. CROSS. I think the banks are withdrawing more and more
from the market, so they are protecting themselves by being much more
unwilling to be market-makers except in limited conditions than they
were before.
MR. MARTIN.
accounting?
MR. CROSS.
MR. MARTIN.

Are they hedging or are they using some creative
No, they're just not doing business.
No, I'm talking about the traders not the banks.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
clear enough.

Everybody can't be hedged; that's

MR. CROSS. It is a matter of considerable concern. The
volatility did increase considerably, of course, after the operations
in late February. Now, that does not mean necessarily that people
should be unhappy about the heavy intervention in late February. But
there is a question of whether there should be some follow up to that
kind of arrangement to provide for a little more structure in the

5/21/85

market and a little more effort to try and deal with this kind of very
short-term variability.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's short-term variability, hourly
variability, daily variability, and intra-daily variability.
MR. CROSS. What I've been talking about here was intra-day-the amount during one 24-hour day--which, as I say, now averages about
2 percent whereas in earlier periods it was much less.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in the absence of a constructive
suggestion we'll turn to Mr. Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
transactions. Motion?

[Statement--see Appendix.]
Discussion?

SPEAKER(?).

So move.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PRELL.

If not, we'll ratify the

Without objection.

Mr. Prell.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I listen to you, I wonder how you get
all those projected GNP increases. Well, what comments are there?
Mr. Black.
MR. BLACK. Mike, do you have the figures for gross domestic
purchases and domestic final purchases for the first quarter as a
percentage increase?
MR. PRELL. Yes, for brevity, I eliminated a sentence in
which I was going to refer to gross domestic purchases.
MR. BLACK.

Well, you alluded to it.

MR. PRELL. For the first quarter, it was 4 percent; and
final sales to domestic purchasers was 3-1/2 percent.
MR. PARTEE.

In both cases, it was down by 1/2 percentage

point.
MR. PRELL.

Yes, I believe so.

MR. BLACK.

Down by 0.4 on the first one and 0.8 on the

[second].
MR. PRELL. Ted tells me the 3-1/2 percent final sales to
domestic purchasers is unchanged.
MR. GRAMLEY. But the reduction of 4 [tenths] is primarily, I
think, a consequence of governmental purchases rather than private
final purchases. That is, the private final purchases were actually
revised up somewhat from what they had been. That part does not
signify anything.

5/21/85

MR. BLACK.

What were those figures, Lyle?

Do you have them?

MR. GRAMLEY. The domestic final demand was revised down from
1673.2 to 1672.9 but the private component thereof was increased from
1362.6 to 1363.8.
I don't have the growth rate, but it is a tiny
little adjustment.
MR. PARTEE. Mike, I thought I heard you suggest that there
would be less strength in state and local purchases looking ahead.
That sort of surprises me; I had the impression that revenues were
coming in very well and I assumed that expenditures in the state and
local sector would rise with more prosperous times.
MR. PRELL. Well, it is certainly the case that their
operating capital account budget surplus position has improved over
the past year, and we think it will stay reasonably positive. Last
year there was some spurt in construction outlays, but on the whole
there was not a tremendous growth of state and local expenditures.
The first quarter of this year doesn't look particularly strong. And
while there is a lot of talk about a backlog of repair and renovation
work that needs to be done, we just don't see the evidence of it.
I
think there is a great deal of caution on the part of many state and
local government units about forging ahead with spending programs
partly because, given taxpayer attitudes, they don't think they are
going to be able to keep all those tax revenues that they got from
increasing taxes in earlier years.
Then there is the question of what
will happen both with tax reform and federal spending. Both the House
and Senate proposals spell the end of grants to state and local
government revenue sharing by 1987.
So, I think there is a good deal
of caution being exercised.
MR. BOEHNE.
question period?

Are we ready for comments or are we still in the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We're in the comment period.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I have been out travelling around the
District more than usual this spring and talking to lots of people in
different kinds of businesses.
It is a little hard to summarize the
situation because there is such great variability among industries.
In general, what I find is that people are saying: "Well, things
aren't great, but they aren't terrible either."
In my District there
seems to be a changing economic mix more toward some of the faster
growing sectors and away from the traditional manufacturing area. So,
in general, I think the tone is probably a little better in my
District than it might be in some others.
One thing that did strike me, as I was talking to lots of
people, is that the expectations about the economic outlook seem to me
in a rather precarious zone right now. Earlier, around the start of a
recovery when expectations are generally for expansion, if you get a
bearish statistic, it is greeted as an aberration and it doesn't
really have very much effect on expectations. When you get into a
recession it is just the other way around: Everyone thinks things are
going downhill and if you get a bullish statistic, that is viewed as
an aberration. With this kind of bombardment of mixed signals that we
are getting, I think we are in a period where expectations could
change rather rapidly.
Right now I think the predominant view is

5/21/85

still that the economy is going to continue to expand; but there are
just enough [negative] reports coming in, that people can shift over.
It is almost like a teeter totter and the weight of opinion could
shift more toward the down side. A story that somebody told me
A person who runs a medium size capital goods firm,
illustrates this.
a family business, told me that while they still expect a good second
half, what makes her nervous is that the salesmen, instead of buying
cars and boats, are now buying CDs in insured institutions. And that
So, I think
gives her a great deal of pause about what might happen.
we are in a gray area where these expectations could change rather
rapidly.
On the inflation front, I just don't sense any great concern
about inflation. Most people that I spoke to are talking about fairly
moderate wage increases.
They find it difficult to pass on price
increases and they find that the prices from their suppliers are
holding fairly steady. So, whatever the statistics coming in, I just
don't find much out there on the inflation side. The influence of the
international sector continues to strike me in a dramatic way. In the
smallest of businesses and the smallest of towns one keeps hearing
I have heard even more
more about world markets and world trade.
concern this spring about Korean imports than Japanese imports; that
seems to be the new kind of enemy, if you want to look at it that way.
More and more business people are expressing concern about competition
from the Koreans.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. I would like to add some rail cars to the
locomotive of expectations already alluded to.
I am struck by the
cumulative nature of the vulnerabilities of markets and of the
financial side of the economy. Notice that in our first two reports
this morning there were some comments on the variability in foreign
exchange markets. Think of the junk bond phenomenon, which continues
into this year. The SEC indicated that they are not disposed to
intervene in the merger and acquisition surge. You are talking about
$80 or $90 billion at an annual rate of equity retirement replaced by
debt.
In the commodity markets and the COMEX in New York, the three
largest traders failed to meet a margin call one day, though it was
only a temporary phenomenon. As for the LDC debt deterioration, we
get reports out of Argentina on a series of private bank failures; the
government steps in and this passes.
Capital flight has resumed from
the LDCs and various measures we're all familiar with are being
implemented there.
It is not all one-sided, of course. We have what
sounds like favorable news out of Venezuela and the Philippines, but
still there is the onus of this capital flight situation. Newspapers
in the last few days have had the Coldwell Bankers survey, which talks
about $25 billion plus of nonresidential construction coming on
stream--80 percent above 1980.
I think there is a kind of frenzy of
office building and other kinds of activity.
Sooner or later that is
going to put pressure on major money funds around the country because
tens of billions of dollars are coming in there, resulting in
overbuilding. Multiple unit dwellings are hung on the revenue M
bonds, industrial revenue bonds--techniques that are a tax phenomenon
in part.
Vacancies are accumulating there. As for government bond
dealers, obviously, we know the work that has been done in that area
by the New York Fed. But I wonder if we weren't so concerned with the
cost and we weren't so concerned with the smooth running of this

5/21/85

enormous market, if maybe we might have come up with something a
little less voluntary and more like the rulemaking being extended in
the municipal securities market.
But we have the vulnerabilities to
contend with and who wants to take that chance?
Ed Gray has talked
about $100 billion in savings and loan assets in savings and loans
that are essentially defunct. Well, that's $100 billion out of an
industry that is 10 times that large that he has found; and I wonder
what else is out there that could come around to haunt us.
The President is about to go on the road to present the socalled tax reform and simplification program. There is going to be a
great deal of attention to top bracket rates and a capital gains
treatment a little more favorable than the Treasury proposal.
Is that
going to add to a speculative bubble that seems to be occurring in
market after market after market? Where can we find a financial
market that doesn't have this feeling of a kind of froth in it right
now?
And how many of these things need to go down in one day, one
week, or one month before we talk about expectations and attitudes?
Government securities and mortgage-backed securities markets are
enormous markets trading hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars
now. And one day, Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac may decide
they are not going to settle. Well, all that [happened in the past]
and there were negotiations and so forth and every one of these
potential crises worked out fine.
Everybody saluted and got in [line]
and did what they had to do and it worked. But what are the dangers
that we are facing here?
I am not so concerned about the tiny bit of evidence of price
increase; I certainly am concerned about unemployment and the lack of
employment growth and the 0.7 percent real growth figure that that
implies. Think of the cumulative nature of financial vulnerabilities
of the country right now. I think I voted for--maybe I even made the
motion, I can't remember--the [recent] discount rate cut.
I think we
should have done that. But my goodness, let us be aware of what we do
next in terms of this tremendous pervasive, ubiquitous, financial
vulnerability that we have here. That is my cheerful message.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know whether
should tighten up or ease up.

[that means]

we

MR. GRAMLEY. The remedy for that is good old-fashioned
monetary discipline--make credit tight enough.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I do think we are in a period when the
signals are decidedly mixed at best and are very conflicting. The
good businesses are continuing to do pretty well and are continuing at
a pretty good level; the automobile business is good even though it
has leveled off a bit. Those in the industry do say that the dip in
the early part of May should not be taken as a change in the trend.
They view it rather as a comparative issue, given a very strong period
the year before.
Retail sales in our District, if you put March and
April together and adjust for Easter, are really very strong;
commercial building is particularly strong--indeed I think perhaps too
strong; steel output is rising a bit; and the service sector is
strong. But on the negative side, I think the news is very serious.
The capital goods people are experiencing a slowdown this year as

5/21/85

compared to last year, and last year certainly was not very strong.
One CEO I talked to who has a very heavy commitment to the capital
goods sector said that his company had a really dreadful month in
April and if they had another month or two like that, he would be
very, very worried about the outlook.
The agricultural situation is deteriorating further. Land
values are down. We had a good planting season this year and are
considerably ahead of last year; some 83 percent of the farm planting
is done. Therefore, over the long time between now and harvest the
outlook is for higher levels of production, which will have a
Anybody who has anything to do
depressing effect on commodity prices.
with the agricultural sector is having a very tough time. The
implement people are operating their plants at about 30 percent of
capacity and there is a significant number of plants that have just
I commented last time that railroad shipping and
simply shut down.
car-loadings were down; we have had another period here in which the
railroad shippings are down. There's an interesting import
implication here that one man told me about. Whereas before they were
shipping [unintelligible], now the parts are coming in in a finished
state and are by and large being shipped by truck.
I agree
On the inflation front, I think the news is mixed.
with Mike that many of the positive factors may be behind us and that
there are some very significant increases taking place in the services
side, in pretty steep amounts. But more positively, I am impressed
with the number of people I have talked to who are still renegotiating
contracts for three years in the 3 to 4 percent area. And they are
finding their union negotiators to be very, very flexible with regard
They are getting very significant productivity
to work rules.
And the pricing out there is
increases as a consequence of this.
terribly competitive; the people I have talked to just simply can't
If there are any trends
get price increases through in a full sense.
that are persistent in all this, I think one is that expectations are
being revised downward.
I haven't talked with anybody who is revising
his expectations upward.
No one that I talked with suggests that we
are on the edge of a recession; nonetheless, they do think that the
outlook for the rest of the year and next year is more modest.
I think that the most significant trend is this export-import
problem and the dollar value.
I have a couple of anecdotes.
First,
cement--and I have always had the feeling that cement was a commodity
that was very, very transportation sensitive in that beyond 200 miles
[shipments] fell off the edge of the table. Fifteen percent of the
cement consumption this year is going to be from imports, which I find
rather staggering. Also, we had our first meeting of our small
business advisory council, a group that I would have thought would be
absolutely insulated from this dollar problem. We had a
representative from
Indiana, and one from
Iowa
and both of them said that without a single doubt the most difficult
problem they are having is the export-import problem--the value of the
dollar. Their industries and businesses are being very hard hit by
imports. As I look at it, I think this high value of the dollar is
the most pervasive problem that we are dealing with. The economic
news is pretty mixed and the inflation news is pretty mixed, and I
think that we are probably in a period where it is awfully difficult
to tell how the future is going to unfold.

5/21/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.
Well, Mr. Chairman, the conditions in our
part of the country pretty much mirror what is going on in the rest of
the country in terms of mixed signals.
The service industry
throughout the District seems to be doing pretty well.
We have fairly
good news with respect to construction, real estate, tourism and so
on; but the bad news is related to the manufacturing sector and those
sectors that are dependent on a lower dollar--particularly textiles,
apparel, and agriculture to some extent.
Energy is also a negative in
the economy.
With respect to the apparel industry, you might be
interested in knowing that the protectionist sentiment is growing by
leaps and bounds.
Their latest slogan is "Take off your foreign
clothes."
I am also concerned about the overbuilding, particularly in
offices and multifamily structures, that seems to be going on in many
cities in the Southeast.
I think that is creating vacancy rates that
are going to be unsustainable in the long run.
So, as we look at
what's going on in our District and around the country, I think we
would now revise our forecast down somewhat.
That seems to be the
general sentiment of people that I talked to.
Expectations are being
cautiously revised downward.
Like Si, I don't hear anybody talking
about a recession; but on the other hand, I think there's a great deal
of concern about where the economy may be going.
On balance, we don't
differ significantly from the projections in the Greenbook.
If
anything, our expectations in the near term may be a little lower than
Going out a little further, I think the
suggested in the Greenbook.
reduction in the discount rate and other short-term interest rates
might give a little push to the economy, but with a lag--later on in
the year.
So as I look out over the horizon, I think the risk is on
the down side for the economy, and I think growth for the rest of the
year is going to be just barely acceptable.
I would say one other thing about sentiments in the District,
and that is that there is a great deal of concern now about the
If you put together all of
financial stability of the banking system.
the various episodes that we have had, people are asking: Is this just
the tip of the iceberg or is there more?
With these government
securities dealers, firms like E.F. Hutton and so on, the list goes on
and on.
While there may not be any direct relationships among all of
these, the psychological atmosphere that is being created is one of
mounting distrust in the financial system or concern about whether the
People are asking
stability of the system is what it should be.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, my view
questions very strongly about that.
now--and I haven't had this view before--is that the economy is
tottering a little and that our policy prescription needs to take that
into account.
MR. GUFFEY.

How do you respond to that

MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. GUFFEY.

question?

Which question?

About the financial stability.

MR. FORRESTAL.
Well, my stock answer, which I think is the
correct one, is that the banking system is in good shape and that
these are isolated incidents.
I say that with my fingers crossed.

5/21/85

-10-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES.
Mr. Chairman, reverting for a moment to the
similarities and dissimilarities of the Board staff's forecast to our
staff's forecast: We have similar views on the outlook going through
the fourth quarter of this year in a number of major areas including
consumption, capital spending, government spending, and inventories.
Where we differ, and where our staff turns out to be somewhat less
optimistic than the Board's staff, is with respect to our expectation
that imports will be up somewhat more because of the recent behavior
of the dollar and that housing will be up somewhat less than the Board
staff's projection because of the weakness in disposable income.
So,
even though our two forecasts tend to converge, ours is up a little
from last month and the Board staff's outlook for real GNP has been
revised downward this time from last month. We are still
significantly lower for the year as a whole, showing a 2 percent real
GNP gain, fourth quarter to fourth quarter, versus the Board staff's
view of 2-1/2 percent.
Whether it is 2 or 2-1/2 percent, it is still
going to be a pretty weak year.
I share the view that we are
experiencing already--and are likely to see more of it as the year
goes on--a pretty sluggish economy operating below its potential, in
large part because of an enormous distortion and imbalance that has
already been touched on, particularly relating to the impact of the
huge federal deficit and the high dollar and the import surge that has
resulted from all of that.
Like Si, we recently had our meeting of our council on small
business and agriculture in response to your suggestion. We got a
whole earful of bad news and I, too, was surprised by some of the
anecdotes that we heard.
For example, one of the small business firms
represented was
a very small manufacturer up in
Oregon, which is outside the Portland metropolitan area.
It turns out
that they export a good deal of
equipment all around the world;
more than half of their business in fact is foreign. We really got
some graphic illustrations of what the high dollar has done to this
small little business.
We found similar illustrations from other
representatives of small concerns that were there.
Contrary to
conditions in your District, Si, or yours, Roger, where the family
farm still predominates, as you know in the West it is the large scale
farm that predominates.
And even representatives of those agribusinesses were singing the blues and gave some pretty graphic
illustrations of how bad business was, not just because of the high
interest rates but also the strong dollar.
Cotton is one of the major
products of our agriculture in California and traditionally about 80
percent of it has been exported.
You can imagine what the high dollar
has done to cotton exports; that particular business is in big
trouble.
Based on the latest information we have, nearly all of the
nine states in our District experienced an increase in unemployment
fractionally; and in the latest month for which we have data for total
employment, it actually dropped a bit.
Electronics, which had been
one of our stronger growth industries for some years is now flat;
manufacturing has been rather weak except for defense spending; and
lumber is still a disaster.
Aerospace is the one industry still going
fairly strong.
On balance, adding up all these strong and weak areas,
it is clear that the weaknesses predominate and that we are seeing in
the West what we are seeing in the national statistics: a pretty

5/21/85

-11-

sluggish performance. Therefore, when we get around to the policy
discussion, that would be the reason I would like to err, if we are
going to err at all, on the side of ease.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have long since abandoned any
hope that anybody can do very well in projecting the economic outlook
over any extended period of time. I am particularly uncomfortable in
trying to do that today because the signals are so mixed. But having
said that, my guess would be that if the staff forecast is wrong, it
may be a tad bit on the low side. As we see it, domestic demand is
still pretty strong and the sharp growth in M1 back in the winter is
likely to keep it fairly strong. The real question is: What's going
to happen to imports? And I don't think we know the answer to that.
I agree with the staff's assessment that the dollar probably has
peaked and will continue on down. When that will be felt by some
slowing in the rate of increase of imports, I don't know; it may be in
1986 as Mike suggested. We were thinking we probably would see some
effects before then. In any event, we think that by the last half of
this year GNP might be somewhere around the 3.3 percent growth that
the staff is projecting for the last half of this year.
On the implicit assumption on velocity that the staff has
made, if we had the kind of growth in M1 that they seem to be talking
about--say, 6-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of last year to the
fourth quarter of this year--that implies a slight decline in M1
velocity. If we get a more rapid rate of growth in Ml, that would of
course mean more than that, and that would be very unusual for this
stage of a business expansion. I certainly wouldn't say it can't
happen, but I don't think it is very likely. So in short, I don't
believe the general economic outlook provides any very compelling
reasons at this point for any significant move toward ease. It is
tempting to think in terms of ease, as we see all these worries that
Pres has outlined. But to me at this point that really would
exacerbate most of these problems. It was excessively easy policy,
coupled with some other things, that I think created most of these in
the past. To me it is time, even though the statistics seem to be
flashing danger signals, to keep our eye on our long-run objective. I
would try to keep the aggregates under control; specifically, I had in
mind trying to get M1 back somewhere within these target bands that we
set for ourselves.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. I want to applaud the Board for reducing the
discount rate, although the timing I found a little surprising. But-MR. GRAMLEY.

You can't win!

MR. MORRIS. I think [unintelligible] that the economy has
performed in a much weaker fashion than I expected or than I think
most of us expected a few months ago. I am finding in the comments of
businessmen--right across the board regardless of the industry, again
with the exception of the defense industry--that they all tell me that
orders are coming in at lower rates than they had contemplated. And
there is a very sobering mood developing. Another phenomenon--I don't
know whether it is confined to the New England area and I would like

-12-

5/21/85

to hear some other comments on this--is that a lot of businessmen are
telling me that they have been waiting for the dollar to go down so
that they can begin competing in world markets again. They have about
given up on that, so they are planning in a great many industries to
expand their production facilities abroad. That is the only way that
they can compete in world markets; they can't do it from a U.S. base.
In the past few years, the decline in U.S. direct investment abroad
has been an element of strength in the dollar. But if we see a pretty
widespread movement to build new production capacity abroad, that
could very well put downward pressure on the dollar at some point if
the movement got very far. Has anybody else run into this phenomenon?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I hear the threat all the time.

Everybody

I talk to--

MR. MORRIS. But they are beginning to plan to do it now.
That's the difference.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the major concern is
whether the economy is going to rebound moderately in the second half
as projected in the staff forecast or whether it is going to continue
along the present sluggish path. Now, if one is convinced that the
economy is going to perform along the lines of the forecast in the
second half, I don't think we need to worry too much; the worry then
would be about next year. While I think the staff forecast probably
captures the most likely outcome, the factors supporting that outlook
do not seem to me to be very strong. While we probably can expect
continued strength from residential construction, the rate of growth
in business fixed investment and consumption expenditures will be
declining. Yet, the 3 to 3-1/2 percent growth that we look to depends
on some moderate strength in both these categories. So, it is very
hard to be confident that there is this basic strength in spending
that's going to produce this outcome. With resource utilization
significantly below capacity, with capacity utilization most recently
falling--and even if it stabilizes from this point on, it will still
be at a relatively low level--and with the outlook for unemployment
not very reassuring in that it is not declining significantly, it
seems to me that the economy is vulnerable on the down side. There
seems to be very little risk of excessive growth in these
circumstances. So, I would say that what we can reasonably expect is
an economy that is, as Governor Martin put it, very vulnerable. It
could go either way; I see no strong momentum in either direction.
I think the inflation outlook is moderate. Most of the
recent influences on the inflation rate are probably temporary; I am
not convinced that the recent spike in wage costs is more than
temporary. I would say, therefore, that with the inflation outlook
moderate we should not be satisfied with anything less than a 3 to
3-1/2 percent rate of growth in the second half. And I think we
should make our policy judgments with that particular bias in mind.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, looking at the economy
first and taking a little longer perspective on it, I think the

5/21/85

-13-

numbers would suggest that domestic final demand really has been
performing more or less as expected for the third year of the recovery
and maybe even a little better than expected. But the wild card, as
has been amply reflected so far in the discussion, insofar as the GNP
and production, etc., is the external side. Against that backdrop, I
still lean to the view that for the balance of the year real GNP is
likely to be growing in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range. And I think
that this recent rather pronounced decline in interest rates provides
a little further measure of insurance in that direction. At the same
time, that kind of forecast is one that assumes a much smaller drag
coming from the external sector over the balance of the year. While
economists seem pretty comfortable as a group with that, I will be
darned if I can find a businessman--whether in small or large
business--who agrees with that. I think that remains, therefore, the
wild card.
I agree with those who say that the nonresidential sector-the construction sector in particular--looks very vulnerable at this
point. On this question of financial shocks and disturbances, the
point has to be made--whatever else one might want to say about them-that to the extent that they are being managed and contained, they are
being managed and contained with a very high degree of government
involvement. Whether it is front page news or not, that has been the
case. Indeed, what I see almost daily is the situation where "free
markets will take care of things" is a slogan only until people think
they are on the hook. And then that slogan goes out the window in one
heck of a hurry. I would like to say that I can see some reemergence
of discipline growing out of this cumulation of problems, but I don't
see it. The leaders in banking and investment banking institutions,
foreign and domestic, have reached the point where I think they want
discipline. But in a setting in which all of the institutional sand
has been taken out of the wheels, they don't seem to know how to get
it.
I think that those vulnerabilities in that setting are something
to be concerned about.
On the inflation side, I keep coming out on the side of being
uneasy. I look at the numbers and I listen to what everybody says and
I am tempted to reach the same conclusion that Governor Rice just
stated: that these are all temporary things. But I can't quite get
myself comfortable with that. Even if these things are temporary, the
rate of inflation that we are seeing right now, against the backdrop
of the exchange rate that we are seeing right now, still strikes me as
high. I am concerned that if the inflation rate were to start to
creep up from where it is now, even by a percentage point or so, and
produce the situation in which we felt at some point we had to move
against that, it would be a very, very difficult thing to engineer, to
put it mildly. But more importantly, I think some of this financial
market situation that we are seeing still reflects a kind of residual
point of view that says somewhere down the road inflation is going to
bail this situation out. So, I can't bring myself to be sanguine
about the inflationary situation, even though I certainly don't think
it is something that has to be the number one priority for policy.
But I think it has to be watched very, very closely.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. First, in terms of our District economy, I would
characterize that as simply more of the same. The split that we have

5/21/85

had, which may be most easily described as urban versus rural,
persists. The economy in the urban areas--from the city of Rochester
to Sioux Falls to Rapid City--continues to do reasonably well on
balance; the economy in the rural areas is very difficult at best.
And that has been the situation for quite some time.
On the national level, without wanting to belabor the
obvious, the key word in my mind is uncertainty. As I look at the
Greenbook forecast, my own view of the situation is that the economy
is going to have to hustle just to get that 2.3 percent real growth in
the second quarter, given the monthly trajectory in the first quarter.
But having said that, I expect that the economy may do a little better
than the Greenbook suggests in the second half of the year, largely
because I think the interest sensitive sectors of the economy may do
I do
somewhat better. But I would re-emphasize the term uncertainty.
not have a great deal of confidence in that particular scenario,
although it is the one that, under the circumstances, I am inclined to
go with.
We too have had our first meeting of our advisory council on
small business and agriculture, and we included labor as well. Most
of the news would have to be described as grim, particularly from the
people associated with the agricultural sector. The focus of concern
The
seems to have shifted a bit, however, in the last several months.
focus used to be on the producer--the farmer. I think now the focus
is shifting to his or her lender, be it the Farm Credit System or the
There seems to be rather vague but mounting
agricultural banks.
concern about the status of some of those lenders.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. The war between the forces of the budget and
the trade balance seems to have moved increasingly in the direction of
the trade balance prevailing, which pulls the economy down, over the
To some extent this will
stimulus that comes from the budget deficit.
continue, as net exports are scheduled in our forecast to become
increasingly negative for several more quarters. But my impression is
that it is slowing down. On the other side, of course, if we succeed
in bringing the budget deficit down, that expansionary force
diminishes as it ought to.
It seems to me that there is a sort of
stand-off in the economy between these two forces.
And they have very
drastic repercussions on various sectors: farmers, some parts of heavy
So this is not a static
industry, and the import-competing sectors.
situation; it is a situation full of great tension.
Given that there is a [pause], as it were, this may be the
opportunity to do something that in the long run is very important: to
try to reduce the structure of interest rates--not in the sense of
stimulating the economy in trying to accomplish a short-run objective,
but to bring interest rates down over time, as with inflation. If I
thought that a reduction in interest rates now would have the effect
simply of a brief stimulus, I would think that could be a great
mistake.
Let me look for a moment at the mistakes that we might fall
into.
We have always leaned toward fine tuning. When the economy is
going down, immediately one sees what one could do by monetary policy
if one doesn't think too much about the long lags.
Long lags have

5/21/85

-15-

been mentioned and I think they are important. What we do now in May
may have effects early next year, at which time the problems we face
may look quite different. There has been a proclivity at the Federal
Reserve to push harder late in the cycle, perhaps because the cycle
tends to peter out, the natural forces of expansion diminish. It's
the nature of a business cycle. And one tries hard to postpone the
evil day and push back the moment when the economy flattens out so
that we do not have to go into recession. One stacks up problems,
financial problems and economic problems, for the future; and instead
of a mild growth recession, one may get a real recession a little
later. So, I would not press very hard to keep the expansion alive if
what it wants to do is to slow down. But that does not seem to me a
very clear description of the present situation. It may be more of a
lull before the current account ceases to drag it down while budget
improvement and lower interest rates give a certain stimulation.
Finally, as for the alternative of inflation and unemployment, I keep
looking at that myself and I arrive at a somewhat different
conclusion. I think that inflation is still much above where it ought
to be. And I don't see it coming down other than in a recession,
which we want to avoid. So we do have to do something to bring it
down during a period of good activity. A 7.3 percent unemployment is
not good and 2-1/2 percent growth also isn't very good. I would still
pay a price to bring the inflation down. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What is that price?

MR. WALLICH. Well, 2-1/2 percent growth for a year and
acceptance of 7.3 percent unemployment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you indicated earlier that that
wasn't going to bring it down, but I-MR. WALLICH. Well, the inflation should come down; the
unemployment and the growth rate will be less satisfactory under that
[scenario].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't really have anything
positive to bring to the table today. The situation in the Eleventh
District pretty well mirrors what has been going on [in other
Districts].
We obviously had a slowing in the first quarter of 1985.
In the fourth quarter of 1984 we were pretty well paralleling the
nation in terms of economic growth but our rate of increase has
slipped below the pace of the nation in the first quarter, in part
because of absolutely declining activity in energy, electronics, and
construction. Reference already has been made to office building
construction and that sort of thing. Of course, we have had an awful
lot of construction in our area as I've reported in the past. The
problems in Houston are very well known; they are not unforeseen
problems; they have been trying to live with their problems for a
couple of years. We are getting reports that now there is concern in
Austin, which has been a very strong boom area; that seems to be
slowing very significantly. As an example, based on a recent survey,
we had about 18 million square feet of office space sitting empty in
Dallas in March--a vacancy rate of a little over 21 percent. But on
top of that in March we had another 25 million square feet of office
space under construction. The conclusion of the survey was that we

-16-

5/21/85

I think I can
are now approaching the end of a real estate cycle.
accept that statement. Agriculture remains weak. Our preliminary
indication on our latest survey of agricultural land prices actually

showed a little increase in 1984 but the first quarter now is
beginning to show a little decline. So, it looks as though those who
said we are about a year to a year and a half behind the Midwest might
be right.
Having said all that, I would also share the view expressed
by a few others regarding a little concern about overreacting on the
side of ease, despite all the gloomy reports. The uncertainty is
very, very great and I still think it remains to be seen which way the
economy is going to turn.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I have been very impressed with the size of the
downward revision in the official staff forecast since our HumphreyHawkins FOMC meeting in February. That shows a far more significant
change than just the change from the March meeting to this meeting. I
must say that I concur with those downward revisions because of the
problems with the manufacturing sector of this country and the import
competition. The fact that imports are hurting not just the auto
industry and not just textiles but a broad spectrum of companies in
many, many different industries really depresses me. Also, I see the
kinds of people who are aware of this: individuals I would expect to
be unsophisticated and not even know what exchange rates are. But
they are tuned in to the super dollar; they also are tuned into why
it's super; and they know that it is hitting them very directly. I
think that we have not seen the full extent of this yet.
Also, I continue to be very concerned about the fragilities
of the financial system. I got on this jag early; unfortunately, it
has been going on since '81 and '82 and I don't see it getting better.
I see it getting a lot worse because it is not just a couple of states
that have had specific problems, namely local depressions; it is now a
lot broader. Unlike Jerry, I don't think this is because free markets
don't work. I think the problems with the financial system go back to
poor public policy in the '70s: namely, a very inflationary policy
that sent bad signals to financial institutions and participants in
financial markets. Then when the gears were shifted and we went into
a more moderate approach to public policy, i.e., fighting inflation
and producing deflation in certain sectors of the economy, it was a
real adjustment for those people to make. Also, I think we have to be
candid and say we probably have not regulated them as well as we could
have. Supervision has left a lot to be desired. That is the message
that I think comes through from Ohio and Maryland. It isn't that free
markets don't work but that the supervisor did a crummy job. I think
further that if you really started to dig into the asset portfolios of
many institutions that have not been looked at, you're going to find a
lot of water in there to squeeze out. We haven't seen it all yet.
And when that squeezing takes place, I think we are going to see many,
many more insolvencies. I am not just talking about thrifts; I am
talking about banks. This is, of course, a problem for those
institutions themselves but I am more and more worried about how that
will impact on consumer confidence in general and on business
confidence--and particularly how it will impact on these little towns
in rural areas. If you want to have some fun, go back and read about

5/21/85

-17-

the 1920s and the problems in the agricultural community in that
decade and what that did not just to agriculture but to whole sections
of the country when the problems with farms brought down farm banks
and the result was tremendous local recessions or depressions.
I
think this is one thing we have to take very, very seriously.
Finally, I just want to mention that I talked to three of the
highest level economists in the auto industry and I'll just relay to
you a couple comments from them because I think they are rather
interesting. In general, their sales forecasts are below what we are
talking about.
One is using 10.5 million units or possibly slightly
above that as total new car deliveries for calendar year 1985.
Some
of the sales that used to be in the form of autos are now going to be
for small trucks, so there might be a little more in there; they think
truck sales will be about 4.5 million. The big point this fellow made
In other
was that it takes a lot more marketing money to move cars.
words, consumers are not coming in and beating the doors down to buy;
they are having to be dragged in to purchase.
Interest rate
incentives are being used very heavily. The customers are interest
rate sensitive, and the special promotional rates of 8.5 to 8.8
percent for slow moving cars have worked to move those specific cars.
Auto makers are putting those incentives on some other cars--small
cars--because they want to help their "cafe" ratings with the U.S.
government.
The penalties are going to be severe if they don't
average out okay for this year, so they want to move more of these
fuel economy cars to help that. Another chief economist is talking
about 10.6 million deliveries for the year and truck deliveries of 4.4
million. But again, he mentioned this interest rate incentive to move
new cars.
It is substantial. He said that the going regular rate for
new car loans would be about 14.5 percent and they are using 8.8
percent on selected lines. The third fellow says that the market at
the moment is the strongest in this recovery if you just look at sales
volume, year-to-date. According to his numbers they are coming out
with 10.9 million [currently] but for the whole year he still thinks
deliveries will be down somewhere around 10.6 to 10.7 million. And
they're having to buy the business.
He said the incentives provided
He also mentioned the
on some of the big car purchases are $2,000.
competition from imports, such as Mercedes Benz, on the big car lines,
and he brought up the matter of the strong dollar.
In his view, we
have not seen the full impact of the rise in the dollar in lower auto
prices and, therefore, they have a lot of room to cut prices if they
want to go after sales because this has just been going into their
If they really wanted to go after
pockets in the form of profits.
sales more aggressively, he thinks they could. Anyway, [these
economists] are not complacent about the economy as a whole and they
see a slowdown being something that would cool off their numbers still
more.
MR. GARBARINI. Since my District is contiguous in small part
to Mr. Boykin's, I'm glad that they have found they are at the end of
the building cycle. We have had space for lease in three of our
offices for some time and have found that the overbuilding in those
areas was recognized, at least by us, somewhat earlier.
Our
discussions with business folks in our District reinforce some of the
comments Jerry made about their lack of optimism and what Frank said
about firms giving some serious consideration to moving manufacturing
facilities.
However, I would say that in such discussions in the past

5/21/85

-18-

generally those folks were the most pessimistic right before things
got a little better.
The lack of any what might be called "meaningful" growth in
the first half wasn't too much of a surprise to us and was fairly
consistent with the projections that we had made. As I recall, at the
February meeting--and you testified about the central tendency [of
forecasts] expressed around this table--we were somewhat of an outlier
both on real output and inflation. On real output we were 1/2 to 3/4
of a point [lower] and on the inflation side about 3/4 to 1 percentage
point higher. For the second half, even though there is that lack of
optimism in the business community in our District, and in spite of
the mitigating factors such as the strength in the dollar, I believe
that the stimulation that we gave to the economy in the last half of
1984 and the first half of this year and the impetus of current rates
and promise of a reduction in the budget deficit could give us
stronger growth, perhaps even above that 3 percent plus level. I
would echo Bob Black's and Governor Wallich's comments that at this
point in time surely we are looking at uncertainty but not a disaster,
and that keeping our eyes on our long-term goals is certainly
appropriate.
MR. GUFFEY. Let me focus just briefly on the Tenth District
economy. The major sectors in that economy are agriculture, energy-which includes both petroleum and mining [unintelligible]--aircraft,
auto, and high-tech, including semiconductors. In that array, only
one is doing very well and that's the automobile industry. The
remainder are all in a depressed state. In agriculture the situation
is basically the same that has been well publicized and that we've
talked about around the table. I would note that, based on the
results of a quarterly survey just completed, the land values in the
Tenth District--that would be dry land, irrigated, and pasture land-are down another 6 percent from the end of 1984. In the aggregate for
the District as a whole, land values are down 38 percent from the high
of 1981. Now, that means that in some of those states it's down 30
percent, depending upon the kind of agricultural land, and in some
states it's down 40 to 45 percent; on average, it is down 38 percent.
But the important fact, I think, is that land continues to drop in
value, showing a 6 percent decline from the end of 1984.
Energy, both the petroleum and mining, is just rocking along
with no great hope of any resurgence in the period ahead. Aircraft
manufacturers just can't sell commercial or private aircraft overseas
as a result of the dollar. And with high interest rates and the
uncertainty about what the future state of the tax law will be,
corporations are just laying back in the woods and not committing
themselves to aircraft. As a result the industry is struggling. The
auto industry in the District, which is a very big employer and a big
component of the economy, is going full out and that's the real
positive aspect. In the high-tech area, which is in Kansas City,
essentially, and in New Mexico and the eastern range of the Rockies,
we find that the competition from overseas together with the [strength
of the] dollar [has put] the semiconductor part of that industry at
great risk. As a matter of fact, we had the second closing of a hightech firm in Colorado this past week. They just are not able to
compete with the overseas markets.

5/21/85

-19-

Having said all that, I would like to turn momentarily to the
national economy. I take some encouragement from the comments that
have come from around the table. There is very little concern about a
recession. That is to say, the staff's forecast of 2 to 3 percent
growth for the year as a whole suggests that we will be in the
positive figures and perhaps not working against the high unemployment
rate. Nonetheless, there is no concern about recession, and I find
that true in talking to people in the Tenth District; recession is not
on their minds. Our staff, looking at the outlook for the period
ahead, would forecast just a bit more expansion in the second and
third quarters than the Board staff's forecast, but on balance we
would come out for the year as a whole about where the Board staff
comes out, with slightly more growth in the latter part of the year
because of the interest rate action that was taken most recently.
There are two parts to that expectation of a bit more expansion than
in the Board staff's forecast: one would be inventories in the second
quarter and the other would be domestic consumption remaining very
strong through the second and third quarters. My own view, however,
would be a bit more optimistic than the Board's staff or even my own
staff. Given the money growth in late 1984 and the early part of this
year, I think the chances are that we will see some real strength
beginning to emerge in the third quarter and maybe on through the
remainder of 1985.
Having said all that, I also have met with the small business
and agricultural group as well as people around the District and,
clearly, the focus in their minds is the strength of the U.S. dollar.
That touches each of the areas that I mentioned that the Tenth
District is involved in. It is becoming very [apparent] that they tie
in the federal budget deficit with the dollar and they see that as
their enemy at the moment. The most recent decrease in the interest
rates is looked upon very favorably, and I should think the reduction
of the discount rate will fall in that category. I would just note,
if I heard the Vice Chairman right that he could not [identify] any
financial markets that didn't have froth in them, that I can tell you
that the agricultural financial markets don't have froth in them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No new froth.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we are hearing a lot of gloomy reports
today and that's understandable. There is a lot to be gloomy about.
When that sort of thing happens I think it's worthwhile at least to
remind ourselves that there are some positive signs developing.
Housing has been moving up for four or five months now. I agree with
Jerry that we have had enough reduction in interest rates, given the
lag in the way they affect spending and credit sensitive sectors of
the economy, that we should expect to see some results from that as
time goes on. I would regard auto sales as a positive; they may go
down but they certainly have been quite strong recently. Consumers
remain quite confident. And I take some comfort in the fact that,
although investment spending intentions for 1985 are a lot more
subdued than they were at this time last year, we don't seem to have
seen any further deterioration from the fall to the spring. That
rather surprises me, but maybe it will turn out that that won't hold
up. We should remind ourselves also, I think, that periods of
slowdown during an economic expansion are the rule, not the exception.
If I remember my business cycle history correctly, Wesley Mitchell and
Arthur Burns used to talk about a mid-cycle retardation, which

5/21/85

-20-

occurred about 3/4ths of the time.
The problem is that we don't know
whether we are in the 3/4ths now or in the 1/4th.
I am not a wild
I agree with the staff's forecast that we will
optimist by any means.
I have a hard time assessing
have some pickup in economic activity.
whether the risks are a little on the minus or the plus side, but I
think I would assign a probability of .001 to an outcome of more
growth over the next year than I would be comfortable living with.
I
Now, I would like to put that in a longer-run context.
think we ought to take into account the fact that what we are looking

at now is an economy that is being severely depressed by competition
from the international side. It's a consequence of a horrendous
increase in the value of the dollar and the dollar is eventually going
to decline. When? I don't know whether it is going to be next week
or next month or next year; but when the dollar goes back down, we
could find the economy as severely stimulated as it is now being

depressed. And if that occurs in the context of a federal structural
budget deficit that is still rising, we are in big trouble. That may
not happen, but I think one has to remember that the problem we may be
worried about on average over the next three years is not too little
growth but too much, and not too little demand, but too much. We need
to keep that in mind as we think about the course of monetary policy
under present circumstances.
MR. PARTEE. Well, Lyle said a good deal of what I was going
to say. This has been such a gloomy go-around today that I thought
maybe I couldn't even survive it! I didn't get any sense as I was
listening to everybody that in the first four months of the year
nonfarm payrolls rose by more than 1 million workers. That's a
tremendous rate of addition to our employment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
means productivity grew.

Want to be gloomy?

Look at how lousy that

MR. PARTEE. Well, we don't even measure productivity in
services or trade and, of course, that is where the employment gains
were. They weren't in manufacturing. I think that we tend to be
bemused by manufacturing, because historically it was the cyclically
volatile sector and historically where we thought we got our oomph.
And, of course, we are not getting any now with the import
competition. I agree with Lyle that that is a temporary phenomenon,
although temporary in terms of years, perhaps, rather than months.
But we really have had a very buoyant domestic economy in my view,
with the strength being sapped by the import competition. And I think
we ought to keep that in context.
Now, I'm as concerned as anyone here--even Pres--about the
condition of the financial markets. I think that they are in terrible
shape. In fact, I can't even bring myself anymore, Bob, to say what
you say about the banking [system].
I don't know that it is sound or
that banks are in good condition. I am very much taken by the fact
that we are 2-1/2 years into the recovery and that we are still
talking about all of these problems. We have a thousand problem
banks, [the ones rated] fours and fives. We have failures moving
along and we are 2-1/2 years into the recovery. What happens come a
recession--which will come?
I don't know. There may be no way out of
this box. But I do believe that the worst conceivable thing that
could happen--the thing I have nightmares about--is a situation that

5/21/85

-21-

brings about the necessity of a substantial increase in interest
rates.
By substantial I don't mean a point; I mean a substantial
increase in interest rates because of, let's say, a very sharp drop in
the dollar or a sudden strengthening in the economy because of less
import competition or an inflation rate that accelerates.
I remind
all of you that all the research shows that inflation starts with
prices, not wages. And then when prices move up, wages follow. They
will do it this time too--that is, if we have another rise in prices.
But an increase of 3 or 4 percentage points in interest rates would
absolutely sink most of our financial institutions--certainly most of
our thrifts and a good many of our other financial institutions.
So,
I think the big thing to guard against is getting ourselves into a
situation where perforce we have to tolerate or accept, and maybe even
encourage, a substantial increase in interest rates six months from
now, a year from now, or a year and a half from now, as the case may
be.
So, I find myself a little timid on this business of
stimulating the economy at this point through monetary expansion.
Some fluctuation in rates is all right, certainly. One has to
recognize that we are not anywhere close to our potential, that we
very easily could accommodate in the near term more growth than is
forecast, and that we may not have as much growth as is being
forecast, because quarter after quarter we have had shortfalls in our
projections. But I wouldn't want to do that in any kind of gung ho
way because I think that would raise the odds that a subsequent
sizable fall in the dollar and a subsequent increase in observed
prices would bring higher rates that would give us really serious
financial troubles in our system. So, I come out on the side of
caution and moderation in what we do today.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
invocation.
MR. AXILROD.

Mr. Axilrod, why don't you pronounce an

[Statement--see Appendix.]
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of very brief
comments.
In terms of the business situation and outlook, I myself
would be quite surprised if we have seen the end of the import
I think that
penetration at anything like the current exchange rate.
process is maybe not in midstream--it's beyond the midstream--but we
are not to the other shore by a long shot in my own appraisal. Mr.
Morris expressed a bit of surprise at the timing of the discount rate
change.
I am not quite sure what you had in mind. You may have had
in mind the timing relative to this meeting.
MR. MORRIS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a factor that we considered and
we thought on balance that it was better to get it out of the way
before the meeting--kind of as a benchmark--rather than leaving some
question as to how it would fit in connection with open market
operations.
I would simply say that I did not have in mind that we
would be reversing direction of that action by tightening up on open
market operations.
With that much preliminary, who would like to
comment?

5/21/85

-22-

MR. MORRIS. We have observed in Boston that the only thing
in the economy that is very strong is M1.
I have distributed to all
of you a chart that I thought was rather interesting entitled "Super
NOW Account Yields."
In the last six months more than a third of the
growth of M1 has been in Super NOW accounts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In Super NOWs as opposed to NOW accounts?

MR. MORRIS. Ten billion dollars out of the $26 billion
growth in M1 has been in Super NOW accounts. In the prior 6 months,
instead of growing at a $10 billion rate, they grew at less than $2
billion. I think the answer to why M1 exhibited slow growth in the
middle of the year and very rapid growth in recent months is shown on
this chart. The interest rates on Super NOWs as administered by the
banks tend to be rather sluggish relative to market rates. When rates
went up sharply in the spring and summer, the opportunity cost of
holding Super NOWs relative to money market mutual funds rose
substantially, so we had a very slow rate of growth in Super NOWs. As
the opportunity cost dropped--there's now only a one percent
differential and I suspect in the weeks ahead it may drop below the
one percent level--you would expect people to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before you say that, let me just ask: A
one percent differential between what and what? That's not what it
looks like.
MR. MORRIS. The difference between the [yields on] money
market mutual funds and the Super NOW accounts is about 1 percentage
point. In the original that bottom chart was colored; the
differential was about 1 percentage point as of April. I suspect now
it is probably down lower than that. As the opportunity cost changes
I think you would expect that the public's willingness to hold Super
NOWs relative to money market funds would change; and it changes in
precisely the direction that you would expect. So, I think this
explains a part of the acceleration in M1 growth--not all of it, but a
part of it. It also raises again the question that I have been
raising for several years: If a large, and the fastest growing,
component of M1 is paying a rate very close to the money market mutual
funds rate, should you expect the aggregate that contains that rapidly
growing component to behave the same way as it has in the past? Quite
clearly, it seems to me, the new M1 is going to be more interest
sensitive than the old M1 as long as the stickiness of the Super NOW
account rate persists; and the relationship between the new M1 and the
nominal GNP is going to be as unpredictable as it has been during the
past few years.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It all sounds very plausible to me. I
asked a similar question to the staff recently and they told me there
was nothing to it, so I will let them respond. I may have
misinterpreted their answer.
MR. AXILROD. I think what you're observing is the interest
sensitivity of M1.
This is why the models have been predicting large
growth in M1. This was somewhat of a phenomenon in earlier periods.
Part of the growth of the Super NOWs, of course, is related to the
switching out of NOWs when the minimum went down from $2500 to $1000
at the beginning of this year. But if you go back for six months,
there has been a $10 or $11 billion increase in regular NOW accounts,

5/21/85

-23-

including Super NOWs, so that they have been--as they have been in the
past--a large part of the increase in M1.
That is the reason we have
been contending that M1 cannot have the same degree of weight it had
in 1979-1982.
There are a lot of reasons for that, but one is that
one cannot be certain how M1 velocity is going to behave under
different circumstances.
I think President Morris rightly points out
that the interest sensitivity has increased with the Super NOWs and
NOWs in M1 and the sluggish behavior of their rates was indeed quite a
phenomenon in 1982 and early 1983.
But after a while we are not sure
If the
what is going to happen to that interest sensitivity.
institutions begin moving their rates with the market rates, then to a
degree that interest sensitivity will diminish. Our own uncertainty
in that respect is one of the reasons that we are a little reluctant
to advocate M1 strongly at this point.
We just haven't had experience
in varying kinds of circumstances as we go through all of these
transitions.
MR. MORRIS.
But it does suggest to me that with rates coming
down and the differential narrowing, if anything, we could very well
see sustained strong growth in M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I asked you, [Mr. Axilrod],
explicitly the other day was: Does it look different if you look at
the old M1 and M1A? You told me no, but this would seem to imply that
it should look different.
MR. AXILROD. Well, on other figures they don't behave
differently--the velocity behavior and the growth rates behave very
similarly. Give me a second and I can round those figures up here.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
give you a sample of one.

While Mr. Axilrod is looking, I will

MR. AXILROD.
In the first quarter, growth in M1 was 10-1/2
percent and growth in the old M1A was 6.8 percent.
In the second
quarter, growth in M1--this is with certain assumptions--would be
If you look back
around 6.7 percent and M1A would be 5.3 percent.
since 1981--omit the year 1981--in 1982, 1983, and 1984 growth in M1A
was running anywhere from 1-1/2 to 5 percentage points below growth in
M1.
So the relationships that have emerged in the first and second
quarters are not that different.
The velocity of M1A declined 0.3 of
a percent in the first quarter when velocity of M1 declined about 0.4;
in the second quarter the velocity of old M1A was about unchanged, or
down a little now given our revisions, and it was down 0.2 percent on
old M1.
So they are behaving roughly the same.
But the greater
growth in M1 relative to M1A is a function of the greater growth in
the NOW account component. But the structural relationship-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What were the fourth-quarter figures?

MR. AXILROD. Fourth quarter of 1984?
M1 grew 3.2 percent
and M1A 1.4 percent; the velocity [growth rate] was around 3-3/4
percent for M1 and 5-1/2 percent for M1A. M1A has had a steadily
higher velocity [growth] for several years now. The reason is that
NOW accounts have low velocity [growth].
MR. GRAMLEY. There is another way you can get basically the
same conclusion. One of my favorite ways--nobody else likes it but

5/21/85

-24-

me, I guess--is to look at those old money demand functions and ask:
What would money have done if the relationship between GNP and
interest rates and the growth of money had been what it used to be?
If you do that, you find that over the past year the predicted growth
of M1 on those old money demand models was 6.9 percent compared with
an actual of 6.2 percent; for the past two quarters predicted growth
was 7.0 percent compared with an actual of 6.8 percent. I think the
really big question is not so much whether money is behaving in a
peculiar way relative to what might have happened in the past if old
money demand models prevailed, but rather whether money growth has the
same kind of meaning when you have an exchange rate that is way, way
out of line. We used to think that money was related to aggregate
demand not to output. That in itself makes a difference. But maybe
even the relationship between money growth and aggregate demand is not
the same in a world of wildly volatile and fluctuating exchange rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's another thing you can look at--that
this money growth may not look all that odd compared to demand.
[Unintelligible] 4 percent in the first quarter.
MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I did ask some people to run
some--Mr. Garbarini will excuse the words "simple-type"--simple-type
St. Louis model predictions from M1. That had been something we
tested back in 1982-1983 to see if there indeed had been some sort of
demand shift. In that period. M1 had been predicting a lot higher
nominal GNP than actually developed. We were in a discussion with
monetarists [unintelligible] would be needing, and indeed the nominal
GNP came in lower than the monetarist-type models would predict. M1A
in those days was not predicting so badly for 1983. Now, simple
predictions on M1 underpredicted in the first half of 1984 and
overpredicted in the second half. Looking into 1985, they would
predict in the first quarter a 9-1/2 percent nominal GNP, which is
almost 3 points or so higher than we got; and they are predicting
double-digit nominal GNP, of course, in the second and third quarters.
The old M1A is also predicting nominal GNP higher than our staff is
predicting, although not as high as the M1. So, if the nominal GNP
comes out about as our staff predicts, it looks as if we are going to
see a pattern somewhat similar to what happened in 1983 in terms of
these predictions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I conclude from all this
discussion is that we better have a little more orderly analysis of
this before the next meeting when we have to look at those [long-run]
targets.
MR. AXILROD.

We will provide some.

MR. MORRIS. It does suggest that if M1 keeps rising very
rapidly between now and July that we might have to rebase it for 1985.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can face that issue then.
Meanwhile, who would like to make a suggestion?
In the absence of any
other suggestions, I will make a suggestion: Keep the reserve
pressures about where they are.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As long as we know where they are.
I will make a suggestion which really does involve keeping reserve
pressures about where they are. In terms of the monetary aggregate

5/21/85

-25-

specifications, I can easily live with those specified in alternative
B.
I personally would shade the borrowings level a bit higher than
the staff's suggestion of $300 to $350 million. This is really

splitting [hairs], but I would rather see it $350 to $375 million
because I think that is compatible with existing money market
conditions, as I understand them.
MR. PARTEE. Now, what are you doing with the thrift
[borrowings]?
Is that-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The thrifts are out as described by
Mr. Axilrod in his [briefing] a few minutes ago.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. PARTEE.
extended credit?

Totally out, Steve?
Well, that's what I was assuming.
You regard them as a functional equivalent of

MR. AXILROD. The Ohio thrifts are on extended credit and the
bulk of those in the Richmond District are on extended credit at the
moment. Some additional ones may be put on.
MR. PARTEE.

Oh, is that right?

MR. BLACK. We would be glad to put them all in there, if you
will take it out of that figure, because it is like extended credit on
those that [unintelligible] for a short time; [the institutions are]
not feeling the adjustment pressure that is ordinarily felt in
adjustment credit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think you could [unintelligible]
out of extended credit as you do out of adjustment credit.
MR. BLACK.

The rate is higher.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Those institutions are under some

pressure.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Again, I would take alternative B
with borrowings of $350 to $375 million. We have this awkward problem
of having set monetary growth paths for the quarter in March that,
especially in the case of M2 and M3, just are now so far out of line
with what we were talking about then that I think we have to consider
--although no one likes it--finessing the language of the directive to
acknowledge that situation at least as it pertains to M2 and M3. I
think M1 we can finesse without any great problems. That's about
where I am.
MR. PARTEE.
numbers, though?

You are prepared to accept those low M2 and M3

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARTEE.
content in them?

Yes.

You don't think that there is any information

5/21/85

-26-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I do not.

MR. MARTIN. Picking up on Governor Rice's comments with
regard to the economy growing under its potential, I would certainly

subscribe to that comment. I don't know whether it's 3 or 3-1/2
percent or more, but certainly [2.7] percent and a range of 2 to 2-1/2
percent are under potential. It seems to me, though, that that
question is properly addressed in the July review rather than in this
short-run situation we face. Secondly, I would like to address the
suggestion that M1 be brought down to the band--I think it was the
band, not the cone. I won't get too methodical with you here. It
seems to me that the growth in GNP right now is too low, and that
there is a downside risk. The 7.3 percent potential growth rate [for
M1] that Steve mentioned earlier--if that is the case for the year--I
don't find all that disturbing, considering the discussions that we
It seems to me that in the usual model it
have had with regard to V1.
would take a federal funds rate--what would it be: 8-1/2 or 9 cent?-to bring M1 down within that band. And it seems to me that that is
not called for under these circumstances.
As far as alternatives are concerned, the point I was trying
to make by reviewing the horror stories that unfortunately are real
and not in the movies anymore is that I think we made the correct move
in reducing the discount rate but that there is enough speculative
fever out there that if we were observed doing anything further in the
direction of ease, we would run a risk that I don't believe is
necessary of aiding and abetting that fever. So it seems to me that
this is a wonderful time for the Chairman--as only the Chairman can
do--to make that representation that we are central bankers and we are
concerned with orderly markets and inflation and we are going to hold
the line, as it were. That gets me certainly to voting for
alternative B as the closest thing to the status quo I can read out of
today's confusing events and the description thereof. If the market
expects a nudge further in the direction of ease, our failure to
satisfy that expectation might be the best thing we could do right
now, when I feel there is so much potential panic out there. As far
as the borrowing is concerned, I go along with Jerry's suggestion of
$350-$375 million, partly because I cannot understand how the thrifts'
borrowing [fits], and secondly because I don't know how much borrowing
will occur as unfortunate events unfold and how that will affect the
borrowing level. It seems to me that results in a federal funds rate,
perhaps as was indicated, between 7-1/2 and 8 percent; and I think
that is appropriate in terms of market pressures and the discount rate
reduction.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my wife tells me I'm hard to please
and if she were here today she would say that my actions would prove
that because I don't like any of the alternatives. I am mindful of
the risks involved in this, but all of these alternatives would put us
above the upper band and also above the upper cone for M1. And I just
don't think anything would be gained by pushing M1 above the long-run
target range; on the contrary, I think we have a lot to lose. The
financial market participants are well aware of these parallel bands
and if they see us running short-run targets above those bands, I
think they are going to question our anti-inflationary resolve.
Therefore, I couldn't accept anything above 5-1/2 percent, which would
put us about at the top of the band. Actually I prefer 5 percent,
which would give us a little breathing room. I don't know what kind

5/21/85

-27-

of federal funds rate it would take to do that--it might take a little
bit of an uptick from where we are now--maybe where we were right
before the discount rate was cut. But if that had to be, I would
rather see that than encounter the kind of scenario that Chuck
outlined earlier, where later we find that we were wrong and have to
push it up still more. And if an increase is necessary, I think that
might be some indication that the economy is really stronger than the
Greenbook suggests.
On this matter of not changing policy: If the Committee does
adopt alternative B, as I suppose it will, I think most people would
regard that as a clear easing of the short-run policy stance that we
adopted at the March meeting. Now, there is nothing in the directive
language to indicate that any easing has occurred but we have taken a
small step in that way. And in particular the term "maintain" in the
first sentence of alternative B would be somewhat confusing. I
recognize the system we use and that the term "degree of reserve
pressures" refers to the level of borrowing. But I don't think that
the outside world looks at it quite that narrowly, so they might not
understand it.
So, I think that's at least a question we ought to
address if we go with "B" as I would guess the Committee probably is
going to do.
MR. RICE. I would just like to respond very briefly to some
of the observations that have been made. First, if I thought we were
facing an inflation rate of 5 percent, I certainly would be much more
concerned and that would be reflected in my view of appropriate policy
in that I'd probably want to be more restrictive. I don't think we
are. Secondly, if I thought we could get the inflation rate down
under 2 percent by keeping the economy growing at 2 percent and the
unemployment rate at 7.3 percent, I would be willing to do that too.
I would be willing to pay that price, but I don't think we can get
inflation down below 2 percent by holding the economy down at such a
low rate of growth. I don't see any beneficial effects to be achieved
from such a slow stagnating rate of growth and that is why I said that
we ought not to be satisfied with anything less than 3 to 3-1/2
percent. Having said that, I would favor alternative B with a tilt
toward "A."
By that I mean that I would be willing to relax borrowing
a little below Jerry's recommendation and more in accord with the
borrowing that we would expect to be compatible with alternative B--in
the $300 to $350 million range.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I do think we are probably at a time where
maintaining the existing degree of reserve pressure is appropriate. I
am a little unclear as to whether that is "B" or "C" at this point. I
am a bit uncertain about the thrift aspect of the borrowing level, so
I think I would favor alternative B. If I were going to vary from
that, I would have a slight tendency toward "C," which maybe suggests
raising the borrowing level a bit from the earlier recommendations to
the area of $400 million. That seems to me probably about where we
are, adjusting for the thrift borrowing.
MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I earlier indicated that I think we have
to be thinking about where we are going over the longer run in
deciding on policy today. By that I mean that I don't think we ought
to dump in reserves in buckets. We shouldn't act panicky. We
shouldn't let rates drop a ton. We should be ready to take back
whatever additional stimulus we put in now, if it turns out that the

5/21/85

-28-

economy gets a bit more robust as the year goes along than we now are
forecasting. I do think that what we need to worry about most with
respect to M1 is not so much how fast it is presently growing, but
whether or not there is going to be an impression out there that the
Fed is throwing in the towel on inflation. If that impression were
I don't sense that now and I
widespread, I would be deeply concerned.
do want to make sure that we don't give that impression. But I am
perfectly happy to go along with the specifications of "B" and the
borrowing range specified by Jerry of $350 to $375 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Just a word on this matter of M1 showing growth
above the band: I think we're all aware of the fact that there has
been a change in the pattern of velocity here, probably stemming from
deregulation and what that has done to the interest elasticity of the
In any event, our staff felt at the time of our
demand for money.
February meeting, and still feels now, that we're likely to see a
decline in V1 of approximately 1 percentage point for 1985 as a whole.
So that influences my view of what the appropriate growth rate of M1
is.
Because of that decline in velocity that seems to be going on,
I'm not concerned that we are courting inflation or a reigniting of
inflation in the near term.
With respect to the specifications, I would be in favor of
the federal funds rate associated with alternative B of about 7-3/4
percent and borrowing in the neighborhood of $300 to $350 million.
The San Francisco money model, given those and other inputs, would
expect the growth rate of M1 to be more like that shown in alternative
If it were 7 percent or a bit higher, that would be all right with
A.
me in view of the losses in the economy and the view I expressed
earlier today about tilting in the direction of ease until we get some
So, as I mentioned, I would favor
better balance back in the economy.
alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Given the sluggishness of the economy and the
fact that inflation is at a moderate rate and the dollar--in spite of
its recent declines--is still at high levels, I think the Committee
should appropriately confirm or ratify the accommodative stance that
has been taken over the last couple of weeks.
I'm not particularly
disturbed about M1 being over its band at the present time, given the
relative weakness of the broader aggregates and what I sense is going
to be a continued weakness in the second quarter.
So I would think,
Mr. Chairman, that we ought to maintain the current reserve pressures,
if "pressures" if the right word to use at this point.
I would opt
for alternative B with the borrowing specification given in the
Bluebook which would translate in my mind to a federal funds rate of
about 7-3/4 or 7-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I generally would support
alternative B.
I must admit to being a little concerned about
selecting a target that leaves M1 above its channel. But it seems to
me that at this point in time that is a relatively low-cost insurance
policy, if you will, that may at the margin help economic performance.

5/21/85

That seems appropriate to me under the circumstances and, therefore, I
don't have any problems with the general specifications of B.
I don't
have a conviction on the borrowing level, in part because of some of
the noise that's affecting those numbers. But it seems to me that
maybe a borrowing target centering on $350 million would be
appropriate under the circumstances.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think last week was an
historic week in the evolution of the thinking of the Federal Reserve.
On Thursday we announced a $2-1/2 billion rise in M1 and on Friday we
announced a discount rate cut, which shows that we're really learning
from experience.
MR. PARTEE.

Or that we didn't know what the money supply

was.
MR. MORRIS.
As I read the numbers, it's clear to me that the
U.S. economy--and I think the world economy--needs a lower level of
interest rates in the United States to the extent that that can be
produced without jeopardizing our determination to control inflation.
It seems to me, therefore, that it's appropriate for us to probe a
little on interest rates.
I'm not completely persuaded that what has
happened already will be enough. But I think we ought to sit back and
assess things before we move any further.
So, I would support "B"
with Jerry Corrigan's $350-$375 million on borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I favor alternative B, but I think we ought to
recognize that alternative B in the context of a 7-1/2 percent
discount rate is an easier policy than in the context of an 8 percent
discount rate.
I think it's technically correct to say that we're
maintaining the same policy. But for the world at large that's only
going to be a technicality.
I would think we would be better off in
the wording to use the words "maintain the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions" but that we might add the phrase "in the context
of the recent decline in the discount rate."
Otherwise, I think we're
going to let something that is technically correct in a very narrow
sense lead us into a communication problem. The other point is that
the M1 specification of 6-3/4 percent strikes me as being overly
precise; perhaps we ought to round that to something that looks a
little more even, like 7 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I have some sympathy with Bob Black's
position.
It makes me uneasy to be running above track on M1.
There's no magic in it, of course. But we specified it and it is a
relatively high number historically. We're at the time in the cycle
when it's conceivable that we're seeing weaknesses here and there that
could do the kind of thing that would lead people to say, as they do
about the '70s, that we acted in an inflationary manner. It is a
sensitive time to overrun the objectives that we have set before. I
am impressed, however, by the fact that the M1 target ranges were set
in the context of a higher interest rate structure than we now have.
And interest rates, as Frank has pointed out, do now very much affect

5/21/85

-30-

So, that may be somewhat of a temporary
the behavior of M1.
explanation at least. I think we need to review this all quite
thoroughly for the next meeting, including what NOW accounts are
doing, particularly Super NOWs. You remember when the minimums were
reduced on all of them in January that we said we were going to watch
carefully to see what happened. I'm not sure that we have watched
that carefully since then, having decided that nothing was going to
happen. So that all ought to be reviewed. I'm also impressed by the
extreme weakness in M2 and M3.
I've asked about that several times
and I'm always told that it's a technical thing that will soon reverse
itself. But, in fact, if you look at the family of aggregates--and
you remember that the Committee has a family of aggregates so that it
won't be misled by some exotic movement in one of them--we're in
pretty good shape. M2 and M3 have declined down not only within the
parallel lines but are now within the cones. And seeing that gives me
a little more comfort. So, I would accept alternative B. And if I
were going to err, I'd err on the side of tightness rather than ease.
MR. MORRIS. I just wonder whether the weakness in M2 and M3
is--and we saw this at the same time last year--an IRA account
phenomenon.
MR. PARTEE. Well, it could be that. It could be the
Treasury refund situation and the big Treasury balance. I think we
just have to look at it.
MR. MORRIS. Well, as I recall, didn't we have a similar kind
of weakness last spring, Steve?
MR. AXILROD. Not that dramatic. If you put in all of the
IRA increase seasonally unadjusted, that would add 4 percentage points
to the growth rate. And assuming that our seasonal on the
nontransactions component-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

4 percentage points for one month?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, at an annual rate, for one month. If you
assume that our seasonal on the nontransactions component caught at
least half of that--which strikes me as a reasonable assumption--you'd
add a couple of points, which would leave growth still very weak.
You'd need other explanations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These M2 and M3 numbers are quite low
however you look at them. If they were really that low for the
quarter, I'd worry a bit. It allows much room for increases. Mrs.
Horn.
MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to show some progress in
moving the monetary aggregates--M1 in particular--toward where we want
to be at year-end. Because of the uncertainties in the economy and
the uncertainties with respect to velocity, where I personally would
like to come out at year-end is in the top part of the ranges,
particularly for M1. I'm not in favor of bringing it back too fast
for a number of reasons, including the uncertainties. But I'm also
not sure it's the appropriate time to be active on the other side
either. So, I would favor alternative C, but I would favor changing
the borrowing number upward slowly as things develop.

5/21/85

-31-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

MR. GUFFEY.

Mr. Guffey.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

aggregates specifications of alternative B.

I would favor the

It doesn't bother me

greatly that we are at, or near, or above the top of the parallel line
[for M1],
response,
appear to
borrowing

given the weakness we've had. I think it's an appropriate
with the velocity [growth] being negative for what would
be two quarters. But what I am bothered about is the
level suggested in the Bluebook: the $300 to $350 million

range, which will achieve a 7-3/4 percent federal funds rate.

If I'm

correct in my thinking about that, if we maintain the same pressures
on reserves that we've had in the past and have dropped the discount

rate 1/2 percentage point, then that would suggest that in order to
get a funds rate of 7-3/4 percent we would need to have the same
borrowing level that we had before we dropped the discount rate. And
if I understand the numbers right, that level is closer to $400
I think borrowing
million than it is to $300 to $350 million.

averaged $380 million over the intermeeting period. The point that
I'd like to make is that $300 to $350 million seems a little low and I
would be a little more cautious so as to get to the 7-3/4 percent over
time. As a result, I would opt for a borrowing level of $375 to $425
million with a target, obviously, of $400 million starting out. And I
should think that if we're looking ultimately to move to 7-3/4 percent
that we can do it gradually.
The other point that I would make, and I've made it before,
is that seasonal borrowings are now running about $170 million, which
is half of the $300 to $350 million, and they will continue to build
over the upcoming intermeeting period. Therefore, with a $300-$350
million borrowing objective, we're really getting very close to
turning loose and actually pegging the federal funds rate, which I
would oppose. Therefore, I would accept "B" and recommend a borrowing
range of $375 to $425 million, centering on $400 million for the start
of the intermeeting period.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms. Seger.

MS. SEGER. As I reviewed the table here and the charts on
the various monetary aggregates, it seemed to me that what I saw for
M2 and M3 was, as Chuck said, that as of April we were already not
only within the parallel lines but within the cones. Also, as I look
at where the various alternatives A, B, and C are plotted for the end
of the quarter, they are not really that far apart. They are within
the cones at that point. For M1 I see that as of April we're a touch
above but with each alternative--A, B, or C--we are going to be above
the parallel line. So if we're concerned about how the financial
market participants would view this, I don't see that it makes more
than about a nickel's worth of difference. I don't think that they
just look at M1 to begin with; and secondly, I don't think that they
would be that sensitive to these short-range positions we are taking.
So I guess I could practically roll the dice here and say that if
everyone is going with alternative B, I certainly can. But I hope if
there is a way to lean that we would lean toward alternative A rather
than toward tightening, particularly because I think we have to be
very careful about what our actions do to the fed funds rate and what
message that sends to market participants about what we did today. In
terms of the borrowing target, frankly, I'm so confused about how the
thrift numbers come in here that I really don't know exactly what

-32-

5/21/85

number to pick up. But I think I would rather have it lower than
higher, which is a very vague way to put it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Garbarini.

MR. GARBARINI. Mr. Chairman, I strongly endorse your
recommendation that monetary policy be consistent with what we've been
doing recently. I'm concerned that, while monetary policy might work
with lags, monetary messages work somewhat quicker. And it seems to
me that anything other than "C" gives a message of a move toward ease.
If we had to go with "B," I'd agree with Roger that at least we should
increase the borrowing level.
MR. PARTEE.
I wonder, Paul, whether the staff has any view
on this seasonal borrowing point that Roger made.
I had sort of
forgotten about the fact that it would be moving up--I presume
significantly--in weeks to come.
It looks like it would tend to
MR. AXILROD. Well, it may.
rise a little in May naturally, although in 1984 the spread between
the funds rate and the discount rate was about the same as in April-It looks to me at least that if the spread
maybe a tad higher.
between the funds rate and the discount rate is unchanged, that it
probably would be running, say, $30 or $40 million or so or maybe a
little more above what is "normal" for seasonal borrowing given this
spread and this time of year. So, implicitly, the $350 million was
allowing for that. And that probably would give you a funds rate of
7-3/4 percent shaded on the down side I would guess rather than shaded
I don't know if Mr. Sternlight agrees or disagrees with that.
above.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

No, I'd agree with that--shaded to the down

side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

In my
MR. BOYKIN. I would find alternative B acceptable.
view the borrowing assumption as a minimum should be $350 to $375
million. I would not go below that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich hasn't been heard from.

MR. WALLICH. Well, as I said before, the chief monetary
objective that I envisage is to overcome the stickiness of the longterm rate and to bring about more reasonable real long-term rates.
This can be done by steepening the yield curve--that is pulling the
short-term rate down--provided that it doesn't lead to an excessive
Fortunately, that seems
acceleration of M1 or the other aggregates.
to be what is happening now, so our range of maneuver is very limited.
We have already reduced the funds rate, the short-term end of the
yield spectrum. And I think we've probably done as much as we dare
If the market
right now. One has to observe what the market does.
accepts it and brings down the long-term end so that the yield curve
doesn't steepen, well, then one has made a step forward and one
In
shouldn't take any risks of the market rejecting the maneuver.
practical terms I'm concerned also by how quickly one moves from the
cone to the band. The main virtue of the band that I see is that it
seems to give us in writing a lot of leeway; it doesn't matter whether
the money supply overshoots quite sharply in the short run; we don't

5/21/85

-33-

have to bring it back immediately. But other than that, the band is
not a good guide.
It's the cone that is the right guide.
So given
the constraints, I can go with "B" and I can go with $350-$375 million
on the borrowing and a funds rate to match, which would be 7-3/4

percent or a little more perhaps.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd just make one quick technical
comment on M2. In March and especially in April there has been a very
substantial runoff of RPs, which we think is associated with the
anomaly of the Treasury balance and the refund problem. That itself
is a major factor in terms of abnormally slow growth of M2 in this
period.
MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. But I'm hearing also
that April was the lowest M2 growth since 1970. That goes back a long
way. It may be strictly technical, but it gives me pause so long as I
see it there.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Peter, was how much in April?

I agree.

But the runoff of RPs,

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that was the main factor in the
weakness in M2 but I don't know how many percentage points.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

It was big dollars.

MR. PARTEE. One of the things is that thrifts are getting to
be a part of these numbers and we know that FCA is still in trouble.
And as a matter of fact the whole savings and loan industry seems to
be much less aggressive in terms of expansion--I guess because of the
Home Loan Bank Board rule on incremental net capital. So I'm
wondering whether there might be something more there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may well be. It's probably unduly
optimistic to think that they decided not to make so many bad loans.
MR. PARTEE. No, they're going to make as many bad loans but
they're going to make fewer good ones!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, there seems to be some
misunderstanding as to what the level of borrowing is that we set
forth with respect to the different alternatives, especially with "B."
I would ask Steve--and I think the rest of you might be interested in
the answer--whether, as I understood it, the level of borrowing he was
talking about in the Bluebook assumed that all the so-called special
situation borrowing with respect to thrifts would be treated as other
extended credit. So, that is not as fluky a number or as
unpredictable a number as it might otherwise be. That is the
understanding, is it not?
MR. AXILROD. Well, that's how we wrote the Bluebook. I
think what's unpredictable, essentially, is the relationship [of
borrowing] to the funds rate. There has been a lot of looseness in
that relationship. And I don't think any of us can guarantee any
particular funds rate for any particular level of borrowing. We can
guarantee sort of an area, but not any particular level.

-34-

5/21/85

MR. GUFFEY. As a follow-up on that: Your $380 million
borrowing level that you averaged out over the period excluded
everything, right?
MR. AXILROD.
I excluded it.
the special situation borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
seems to me.
MR. PARTEE.

That's right;

I took out all of

Which is clearly wrong at the extreme, it

Yes.

MR. AXILROD.
In the same sense that it was wrong to take out
all the borrowing by Continental last summer. Some fraction probably
should have been left in there; I assume that some of it was not
extended credit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Small or large.
Well, there's no great
desire to change things aggressively. That is a point with which I
agree, but let me just make a couple of supplementary comments.
I
don't know where we are on the economy; it's not looking very good.
I
do know the exchange rate is awfully high and I surely wouldn't want
to push it higher.
I would rather do the reverse.
I don't know what
is going on with M1 or M2 or M3.
I know they are giving out different
signals, but I don't feel very religious about M1 at this point.
If
the economy shows further signs of softening and the dollar is going
higher and financial strains in a number of directions continue or get
aggravated, as they well might, I think we're running some financial
[risks] in the financial system, clearly. There are financial strains
across a large part of the structure of the American manufacturing
industry at least. One is partly related to the other. And I think
we have to maintain some flexibility on the easier side, although I
wouldn't [move in that direction] right now.
I think that's a much
more likely hypothesis than the opposite, although I don't mind
maintaining flexibility on the opposite side either. This alternative
B/alternative C business never appears in anything [we publish]; maybe
we ought to look at the [draft] directive language, which I don't like
much in the sense that it doesn't change anything from last time.
There have been a number of comments that we ought to mention the
discount rate someplace. I think that would be wise. Let's put
something in the first sentence there.
I'm not quite sure why we
would say "uncertainties in the business outlook."
It seems to me
what we ought to be saying is "relatively slow growth."
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can't really say "taking account
of progress against inflation" anymore either.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's long term. Another thing on the
inflation front, as we said in our announcement [about the discount
rate], is that the commodity prices are just continuing to fall.
The
averages for the most part, except for the very low level at the
bottom of the recession, are as low as they have been in two years and
the level is about where it was in '79 or '80.
MR. MARTIN.

Yes.

-35-

5/21/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That is a real reduction in commodity

prices of 30 or 40 percent, I suppose.

And it's just about across the

board: in agricultural prices, industrial, mining-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's another reason why it's

disturbing that the general price level is rising as much as it is.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, it's rising and it's mainly in the

But there has been a little bulge in gasoline
prices of services.
prices recently, which we may have for another month in the

statistics, but that seems to be over in the commodities prices.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
report]?

Car prices went down last month.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I haven't seen that.
MR. MARTIN.

Car prices.

In the latest consumer [price

The Japanese premium ought to start coming in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just read it. Used car prices
were down slightly and the new car prices were unchanged. It's a rare
thing for used car prices to come down.
MR. PARTEE.
of new sales.

It's all those trade-ins, with this high level

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the easy thing to do, and maybe it's
sufficient, is just to mention in the first sentence that the discount
rate went down.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, there are three items mentioned--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest something radical: take out
all this business about progress against inflation, uncertainties, and
the exchange value of the dollar.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, they really are all very difficult.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Say: "In the implementation of policy for
the immediate future, against the background of the recent decline in
the discount rate."
We mentioned all these things [in our
Put a footnote on it that
announcement of the discount rate action.]
says "See the statement on the--"
MR. PARTEE. Well, these are mentioned elsewhere too I think.
This is just somewhat--okay.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I think that's a good idea.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future and against the background of the recent reduction in
the discount rate"--is it worth mentioning market rates in there?
SPEAKER(?).

You don't need it.

-36-

5/21/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we say "The Committee seeks to
Does it sound a little more accurate to say
maintain the existing--."
"The Committee seeks to maintain the range--"?
MR. BALLES.

How about "the recent"?

Borrowing is going to be
"The recent"?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
How about "in the period"?
very high this week isn't it?
MR. AXILROD.
situation.

Well, yes, with this particular week's

[Mr. Axilrod,] you had a rather selective
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
recitation, I think, of the average borrowing.
MR. AXILROD.

No, no.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

It's going to be high with the--

Just yesterday there were--

They are
It was high with all the thrifts in.
MR. AXILROD.
So we're running high with them in.
not all in extended credit yet.
MR. STERNLIGHT. That would only take out about $200 million
I would say that what we'll publish this week
in the period average.
will be high because most of them are in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
thrifts, isn't it?
MR. AXILROD.

It's going to be high without all the

Well, I calculated that average--

MR. STERNLIGHT. My feeling is that without thrifts this
period's average will be at something like $600 million.
SPEAKER(?).

We could still get some borrowing in New York

today.
MR. AXILROD.

For the period, but the week will be a little

high.
MR. PARTEE.
MS. SEGER.

Did you say $600 million without the thrifts?
Yes, that's high.

I guess "recent" is better than "existing"
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
in that connection. When I say it, it doesn't sound very good; but I
guess "recent" is better than "existing."
MR. AXILROD.
weeks" or something.

Maybe you could say "prevailed over recent

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

"In most recent weeks."

MR. PARTEE.

"Selected recent weeks"!

MR. BOEHNE.

"As interpreted in recent weeks"?

5/21/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know. The more we try to explain
it the more difficulty we get in.
"The Committee seeks to maintain
about the same degree of pressure on bank reserve positions."
Let's
go on to the next sentence, having resolved that one.
I think this
bracketed suggestion may be better; what do you think? M2 and M3 are
awfully low looking.
MR. MARTIN.

4 percent and 5-1/4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just put it in there baldly. Look at the
alternative: "This action is expected to be consistent with growth in
M1 at an annual rate of around--."
We can say "6 percent or a little
higher."
MR. MARTIN.

It's likely to be 6-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't mean to sound-MR. PARTEE.

Well, but those differences are so fine.

That's a two-month rate for the two of them?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
three-month rate.

No.

The way this is written the M1 is a

MR. MARTIN.

March to June.

MR. PARTEE.

Yes, but the other two are two-month rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes, that's right.

Well, I guess that's 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent.

MR. BOEHNE. We could put M1 on a 6 to 7 percent basis and
It's a little
keep the timeframe the same for all the aggregates.
peculiar, isn't it, to have one aggregate over one time period and the
If we said 6 to 7 percent, it's
other two over different periods?
much-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, everything is a little peculiar
because they are not ordinarily that far off.
MR. BOEHNE.
use April to June--

6 to 7 percent kind of gets them all.

But if we

MR. KEEHN. But is 6 to 7 percent consistent with "maintain
the existing"?
It seems to me that that doesn't line up.
MR. MARTIN.

It does April to June.

MR. GUFFEY.

April to June it does.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to put two-month growth rates in
there, but we could do that--roughly 6 to 7 percent--for all of them
for April to June.
MR. MARTIN.

It gives us a little more flexibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

M3 is actually higher than that I think.

5/21/85

-38-

MR. AXILROD. Another alternative, Mr. Chairman, would be to
use the three months for M2 and M3 and maybe lower the number a little
from the 7 to 8 percent or lower it a lot and indicate the possibility
that it might be more because of the shortfall in the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we could just say something more
vague such as "expected to be consistent with growth of M1 at an
annual rate of around 6 percent or a little higher, while M2 and M3
would be expected to increase at a slower rate of speed than implied
earlier, due to the sluggish growth in the--"
MR. AXILROD.
of the last--

That would do it.

That would be in the spirit

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think the neatest thing to do is
to say April to June rates of 6 to 7 percent for all of them and just
wink at that 7-1/2 percent on M3.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes, I think that--

MR. BALLES. Even better might be to say 6 to 7 percent for
M1 and M2 April to June and 7 to 8 percent for M3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My only trouble with that is that I don't
like two-month growth rates and if M2 and M3 turned out to have a
little bulge on the other side--well within what we thought earlier-it wouldn't bother me. But I don't know that it makes a lot of
difference.
MR. AXILROD. You could say "M2 and M3 may grow slower than
the 7 to 8 percent rates expected earlier because of..." to allow for
that possibility.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't mind that. Let me try something
like that. The alternative, I guess, is giving a two-month growth
rate but say "expected to be consistent with growth of M1 at an annual
rate of around 6 percent or a little higher, while M2 and M3 are
expected to grow more slowly over the quarter than anticipated earlier
in the light of the--."
One of them was actually minus wasn't it?
MR. AXILROD.

Yes, "in light of that--"

SPEAKER(?).

"April performance."

SPEAKER(?).

"In light of April."

MR. PARTEE.

"The sluggish April performance."

MR. AXILROD.

"The sluggish April."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"their weakness" maybe.

"Their sluggish April performance" or

MR. GRAMLEY. If we separate M1 and M2 and M3, does that
perhaps convey the notion that only M1 is the target now and that for
M2 and M3 we have expectations but not targets?

5/21/85

-39-

MR. PARTEE.
didn't you, Paul?

You used the word "expected" in both cases

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way this would read is: "This action
is expected to be consistent with growth in M1 at an annual rate of
around 6 percent or a little higher while M2 and M3 are expected to
grow more slowly over the quarter than anticipated earlier in the
light of their weakness in April".
The advantage of this is that it
has M1 a tad higher than what we said we envisaged before and it's
immediately balanced by saying M2 and M3 are considerably lower. The

alternative is just using the two-month growth rates.
what we have here.
this.

Which do you prefer?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Or we can do

I guess I slightly prefer

It's fine with me.

MR. PARTEE.

Me too.

MR. MARTIN.

I prefer your recent language.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's assume that for the moment.
[The next sentence is]: "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint--"
MR. MARTIN.

"Would be acceptable."

I'm perfectly happy to have it "would" in
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the first part and "might" in the second part.
MR. PARTEE.

That's a shift.

MR. MARTIN.

[Unintelligible].

MR. WALLICH.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. WALLICH.

[Unintelligible.]
That's noticeable.
Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARTEE.

Under a magnifying glass!

Well, that's where [markets]

put the directive

language.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
months from now.

This isn't going to come out until two

I think they have to be "woulds" in both cases
MR. PARTEE.
or "mights" in both cases; I don't care which it is.
SPEAKER(?)
Well, in both cases it ought to be "might" so
that we don't get trapped.
MR. PARTEE.

I can go with "might."

MR. MARTIN.

I'd prefer "would/might."

MR. PARTEE.

[Unintelligible] you'd prefer "woulds."

5/21/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I prefer too, but what do you
all want to do?
It doesn't make that much difference.
MR. PARTEE.

"Might" and "would."

MR. BLACK. No, I prefer "would/would;" I always prefer that
so that we don't make a mistake.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many members of the Committee prefer
"might/would"? The alternative is going to be "might/might."
MR. MARTIN.

What happened to "would/might"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's right:

"would/might."

Did I say it

wrong?
MR. MARTIN.

Yes sir.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I thought that's what I gave first.
prefers "would/might"? Wait a minute; let me see.
How many
"might/mights" do we have?
Five. Somebody didn't vote.
SPEAKER(?).

Probably you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.
MR. BLACK.
MR. PARTEE.

I picked the "would/might."

He counted himself.
"Would/mights."

That sounds infectious!

You wouldn't mind some company.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
at this point.
MR. BOEHNE.

Who

I count one vote

[more]

for "would/might"

We can have a softball game: the Mights and the

Woulds!
MR. BLACK.

That's what it sounds like!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this federal funds rate range?
We
have it at 6 to 10 percent and that still seems to be ample to cover
all contingencies.
MR. MARTIN.

rate?

figure.

In "B" it's 5-1/2 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, where do you want the federal funds
I don't think it's worth changing to get it to 5-1/2-MS. SEGER.

Zero to 12 percent.

MR. BLACK.

6 to 10-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're left with this borrowing
The center point seems to be $350 million.
MR. MARTIN.

And all the thrift borrowing out.

5/21/85

-41-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

Well, all the emergency thrift borrowing.

Only emergency thrift borrowing.

MR. AXILROD. The bulk of it is now extended credit and
perhaps more of it will be.
But I would say that Mr. Sternlight has
made a mental adjustment even for some of it that might not yet be
classified as extended credit, at least recently.
MR. STERNLIGHT. It would still be around $100 million now
[unintelligible] extended credit when we make some allowance-MR. MARTIN.

[Unintelligible]

MR. PARTEE.

Now we're talking!

adjustments.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't like to get in a position of
splitting hairs about this borrowing. But it seems to me that $350
million taken by itself is kind of a threshold because if it goes down
and stays down at $350 million or falls below that, there is a real
danger: I think we'd find ourselves again in a situation where it
would start pushing on the current level of the discount rate. And at
this juncture, I at least would not want us to fall into a situation
where the behavior of the federal funds rate starts to give rise to
market expectations of a further discount rate reduction. I had
mentioned $350 to $375 million, but I think the $350 million number at
this point is more than symbolically significant because I think it
does get you into that range where I would start to get very
uncomfortable.
MR. PARTEE. Why don't we make it $350 to $400 million and
allow some discretion to be exercised here?
I think we all expressed
the view that we didn't want it to threaten the discount rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether the discount rate is threatened or
not will depend upon what goes on in the economy or the exchange rate,
I suspect.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But that would take place in the
normal course [of events], and I wouldn't want to kind of fall into
that independent of the economy.
MR. BALLES.
I'd be concerned, Mr. Chairman, about moving up
to $400 million.
I'm afraid that might push the funds rate up.
I
would not like to see that happen.
MR. PARTEE.

Well, that's why it is discretionary.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Leaving a little margin here is fine,
obviously. We can leave a little margin by saying $325 to $375
million.
MR. RICE.

I would support that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think nobody is talking about trying to
force the federal funds rate down at this point below where it would
naturally lie, which is a little above the discount rate.

-42-

5/21/85

MR. GRAMLEY.
I would feel much more comfortable if we stayed
above $350 million.
I like Jerry's formulation of $350 to $375
million. It just seems to me that if the funds rate gets down below
the 7-3/4 percent range, then it raises questions again about whether
or not we're going to have another cut in the discount rate. We've

sent some very strong signals to the markets with this cut in the
discount rate.
like that.

And I really wouldn't want to send any more messages

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we sent a very strong
message; they were anticipating it for two weeks before it happened.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, given what's happened to market interest
rates and stock prices, it seems to me that the markets weren't
expecting it all that confidently.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bond market was down 1/2 of a point
this morning; I don't know where it is now.
MR. PARTEE.

20 points in the stock market yesterday.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, it sent a signal to the market that they
think that at this meeting we are really going to go toward ease.
That's one of the things I think it conveyed to the markets.
MR. AXILROD.

As a technical point, Mr. Chairman--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What did the stock market do this morning?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the first half-hour it was down 2 points,
I might mention a technical point: If,
[so] it may be down [now].
because of a wire failure, a large bank borrows $1-1/2 billion or
something like that on a Friday--which often happens to us--the level
of borrowing can easily be $600 to $700 million with money market
conditions very little different from a borrowing level of $300 to
$350 million. So there has to be--I hope--some sense from the
Committee that there can be wide swings here in borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
experience.
MR. MARTIN.

I think we've learned that from

$325 to $375 million.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, the target that I think you're
looking at is $350 to $375 million. If I understand, that would
result in the federal funds rate quite likely moving to the 7-3/4
percent area immediately. Is that a correct interpretation?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you ask this question every time,
Roger, and I'm not a prophet.
MR. GUFFEY.

I understand that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would assume it's somewhere in that
neighborhood, give or take 50 basis points.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, if there's 50 basis points down to 7-1/4
percent then I would oppose it, obviously. I understand you're not a

-43-

5/21/85

prophet; but I think the staff's projection suggests that it will be
moving immediately to 7-3/4 percent as a result of the discount rate
cut with a $350 million borrowing level.
MR. AXILROD. Yes.
There may be slight differences in
judgment among the staff here.
I had $300 to $350 million; there are
other people, and I think Mr. Sternlight is one, who would say $350
million or maybe a shade above for that.
I don't know how one could
possibly be certain on this.
MR. PARTEE.
That certainly does seem to suggest $325 to $375
million then, doesn't it?
It encompasses both views.
MR. GRAMLEY. But it really suggests that we ought to have an
agreed upon target for the federal funds rate.
I would think that's-MR. MARTIN.

Oh, shame on you, Governor Gramley!

MR. GRAMLEY. Not a written one.
whatever borrowing level is appropriate.
MR. AXILROD.

Let Steve translate that to

The stock market, Mr. Chairman, is unchanged at

1:00 p.m.
MR. PARTEE.

And that means it kept all its gain.

SPEAKER(?).

So it is pretty good.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we need to linger
over this point forever.
I assume we will start--and probably miss it
by $100 million plus or minus--somewhere around $350 million or
slightly above with a bit of flexibility on either side.
MR. GRAMLEY.

What was that again?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We start at $350 or a little above and
have some flexibility either way as we move along.
MR. RICE.

I don't see how anybody could have a problem with

that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How do you want to express that noble

thought?
MR. RICE.

Just the way you did it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just say $350 for the moment with an
understanding that there's a little flexibility. All right.
MR. BERNARD.

Did you settle the

[language]

for this earlier

part?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think so. We more or less settled it
but various people are unhappy. It reads: "In the implementation of
policy for the immediate future, and against the background of the
recent reduction in the discount rate, the Committee seeks to maintain
about the same degree of pressure on bank reserve positions. This
action is expected to be consistent with growth in M1 at an annual

5/21/85

-44-

rate of around 6 percent or a little higher during the period from
March to June, while M2 and M3 are expected to grow more slowly over
the quarter than anticipated earlier in the light of their weakness in
April. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
event of substantially slower growth of the monetary aggregates while
somewhat greater restraint might be acceptable in the event of
substantially higher growth."
All the rest of it is the same with 6
to 10 percent [for the funds rate range].
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
on the second page?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
person not voting.

We ended up with "would" and "might"

By one vote as I understood it, with one

MR. PARTEE. Where you said that there would be less growth
than earlier anticipated for M2 and M3, don't you think we ought to
put in the percentages earlier anticipated?
There's no base there
unless somebody goes back and looks at-SPEAKER(?).

Yes, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

What were they?

7 to 8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Whatever they were.

For both?

It was 7 percent for M2 and 8 percent for M3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Add "the 7 to 8 percent range anticipated
earlier."
Would you want to say "grow significantly more slowly"?
It
was 7 to 8 percent for both?

M3.

MR. AXILROD. No;
And more slowly--

it was 7 percent for M2 and 8 percent for

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it should say the "7 and 8 percent
anticipated, respectively."
MR. AXILROD.
MR. BERNARD.
respectively."

"Anticipated for M2 and M3, respectively."
"Anticipated earlier for M2 and M3,

MR. PARTEE.
I would just say "less rapidly" instead of
"substantially less rapidly" because, as you say, if we should happen
to get a snap-back, it would be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Well, if that's all right and
nobody wants to raise any further points, [we can vote].
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
President Balles
President Black
President Forrestal

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

-45-

5/21/85

Governor Gramley
President Keehn
Governor Martin

Yes
Yes
Yes

Partee
Rice
Seger
Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Governor
Governor
Governor
Governor

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Okay.
END OF MEETING

