Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 1, 1985

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1985, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Balles
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Martin
Partee
Rice
Seger
Wallich

Mr. Guffey, Mrs. Horn, Messrs. Melzer and Morris, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, 1/ Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Broaddus,1/ R. Davis,1/ Kohn,1/ Lindsey,1/ Prell,1/
Scheld,1/ and Ms. Tschinkel,1/ Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel,1/ Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low,1/ Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors

Messrs. T. Davis,1/ Lang,1/

Ms. Munnell,1/ and Mr. Rolnick,1/

Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, Philadelphia, Boston, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Messrs. Burger,1/ Pearce,1/ and Scadding,1/ Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, and
San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Sniderman,1/ Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Ms. Meulendyke,1/ Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/

Entered meeting after action to ratify foreign currency transactions.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 1, 1985
[Secretary's Note: This meeting began with an executive
session that was not recorded. Also not recorded were the Committee's
approval of the minutes of the previous meeting and the foreign
currency transactions undertaken over the intermeeting interval. The
report by Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, was presented
during the executive session and is included in the Appendix.]
[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They all got unwound in an orderly way?
Those extra loans were unwound, yes sir.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
ratify the transactions.

Any comments or questions?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

We need to

So moved.

Without objection.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where is the dollar today, roughly,
compared with the second-quarter average?
MR. TRUMAN.

Down about 12 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any other questions or comments?

I just wanted to make sure of what I heard, Jim.
MR. BALLES.
For the projection of the dollar, you assumed down 20 percent by the
end of 1986 from where?
MR. KICHLINE.

The Q2-1985 average.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

From which you've already had a 12 percent

decline?
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. PARTEE.
previously.
MR. TRUMAN.

Correct.
So it's about the same rate of decline as
From now on out.

I think that really is an

accident.
MS. SEGER. What did you think of the NABE forecast of a
recession late next year or early 1987, since they're having their
annual convention right now?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I guess it's somewhat fortunate that we
don't have to forecast into 1987 at the moment. It's rather cloudy, I
think, in terms of trying to look into late '86 and '87. There are
questions about lots of things. What do you assume about policy and
the dollar? One of the things that is happening--and I can lay this

10/1/85

on Ted in the sense the dollar forecast is giving us some help--is
that as we go on into '86, if the dollar follows the path that we've
assumed, we ought to be getting some benefits from that domestically
in terms of increased production.
So, at this moment I wouldn't
necessarily come up with a bearish forecast and assume that the
economy comes to a grinding halt in late '86 and early '87.
Certainly, our forecast as we have it now would not give one the sense
that we begin Q1 1987 and fall off a cliff; we have a sense of the
economy growing in the 2-1/2 to 3 percent area pretty much throughout
the period, but being helped by the foreign trade sector later on in
1986.
MR. BALLES. May I follow up on this dollar outlook question
because that's a very key one?
If I understand your numbers
correctly, your expectation is that the dollar will be down another 8
percent between now and the end of '86.
It's already down 12 percent
from the second quarter of '85.
MR. TRUMAN. Another way of looking at it, as Jim said, is
that this forecast is built on the assumption that in the 4th quarter
of 1986 the dollar will be 5 percent lower than in the last forecast.
And most of that downward adjustment occurred between the time of the
August meeting and today.
MR. KICHLINE. Previously, the assumption had been a very
gradual decline throughout the period; this assumption is essentially
front-loaded in September so that we would anticipate a bigger impact
on the economy in terms of exports, imports, and prices than we had
earlier because it doesn't occur very gradually throughout the whole
period.
MR. BALLES.

Thank you, Jim.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No more questions or comments on the
business situation?
If not, we'll turn to Mr. Axilrod.
MR. PARTEE.
situation?

There aren't any comments on the business

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I assume that they're going to come

later.
MR. AXILROD.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, who would like to comment?
out of staff; it's up to the Committee.

We've run

MR. BALLES.
I would like to ask for a little further
clarification in Steve's view of these so-called portfolio shifts as a
possible partial explanation of the surge in M1.
Looking back to May,
as we all know, we have seen absolute declines in some of these term
deposits like large-time deposits, term RPs, term Eurodollars, etc.
You and your staff study this, Steve.
To what extent is that a
significant factor in this surge in Ml?
MR. AXILROD. Well, we think it's largely behind the strength
of the NOW accounts over the past several months--that is, the
strength above what "normally" occurs.
At the same time, of course,

10/1/85

we have had large increases in old M1A, the currency and demand
deposits component.
It's conceivable that some of that money could be
flowing into demand deposits, but I don't think much. Or it could be
flowing in for a very few days as people make up their minds what to
So I'd say it has been a strong element, but I can't put
do with it.
I'd say it's not 80 or 90 percent dominant, but
a percentage on it.
maybe a little less than that. From June to September, for example,
old M1A moved [up] around 8 percent while the present M1 grew 13.7
percent.
It's not as if it's all in the NOW accounts; a substantial
part is in currency and demand deposits.
MR. BALLES. Well, that's what I recall.
In the May-toAugust period, which is what I was looking at, the increase in demand
deposits was just about as big as the sum of the increase in NOWs and
So, I'm a little confused as to whether the portfolio
Super NOWs.
shift out of these term deposits was in fact directly connected with
the rise in old M1A.
MR. AXILROD. Oh, I doubt that it's very much in there. I
could conceive of some going into demand deposits for a while but not
for very long.
MR. BALLES.

Yes, that's about my view.

MR. PARTEE. Why would you take money out of an interestbearing deposit and put it in a demand deposit?
That's-MR. AXILROD. Yes.
I would say that it's only conceivable
for a transitional period while one is making up one's mind what to do
with it.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.
very short while.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. AXILROD.
MR. PARTEE.

Very short.
That's why it could affect the average for a
And currency has gone up quite a bit too.
Well, it has.

It has its ups and downs.

I know.

MR. AXILROD. But starting in May, we had growth rates in
three months that were 10 percent or more and in two months that were
6-1/2 percent.
It's on average a little faster, but I don't think
it's extremely noticeable.
MR. BOEHNE.
Well, one could make a case that we're seeing
some backsliding in the demand for money. If you think about the
increases in velocity over the last 30 years and the various reasons
for that--higher rates, inflation, increased use of credit cards for
cash--now we're finding less inflation and more of M1 bears interest.
There could be some backsliding in a number of local markets.
Credit
cards aren't what they used to be; service charges are being applied
from the date of purchase rather than giving that grace period of a
month. It's nothing we can measure very precisely, but it seems to me
that in the '80s there has been some backtracking in the very same

10/1/85

kinds of forces that led to an economizing of money in the '60s and
'70s. And there just could be some backsliding.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the credit card
explanation but I have a couple of charts in front of me depicting
just a very simple part of velocity, M1 velocity, with various lines.
And it just stands out in these charts that--well, just how it looks
depends upon the lag--there has been a flatness or a downward tilt for
four years now. This chart shows a break in trend, not just this
year, or not just in '83.
It has been flat for four years.
MR. PARTEE. The same period that we've had a very rapid
increase in credit relative to GNP.
MR. AXILROD.

The same period--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this began before that I think, but
I don't know what the connection is.
MR. PARTEE.

Did it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In 1982?

I don't [know] either.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to make two comments.
One is that we have been seeing, really since the beginning of the
year, a divergence between the growth rate of M1 and the growth rates
of all of the broader aggregates. If you look at total liquid assets,
debt, M3, and even M2, you'll see a deceleration in growth rates since
early in the year. M1 is the only one on the chart that we show
accelerating. I wonder if you would look back in earlier history,
Steve, and find the periods where we had this kind of divergence in
the past. I don't think there were very many, actually. But given
that divergence, what weight should we apply to the M1?
MR. AXILROD. That's the exercise we engaged in, actually.
This was a three-quarter period of an acceleration--these are
accelerations not levels of growth rates--in M1 that has occurred
through the third quarter of this year; it's an acceleration of 9
percentage points, essentially, at an annual rate. At the same time
the nontransactions component of M2 has decelerated by 3 points. And
M2 itself measured over the same period [decelerated] by about two
tenths; it certainly has not accelerated. Now, when we looked back,
the other period of exception in some sense was back in the first
quarter of 1966. Then the nontransactions component dropped 1 percent
and M2 went up 1 percent--small increases relative to M1, which had
gone up 4-1/2 percent. There were some other periods where there were
similar drops in the nontransactions component and small increases in
M2. In a couple of them money and nominal GNP went up together. But
by and large where M1 has been strong and nominal GNP has been
correspondingly strong, M2 also has been relatively strong. And the
only thing I can make out of that is that we were getting shifts into
M1 and out of the nontransactions component of M2, which doesn't
affect M2 as a whole but does affect M1. And in that case, M2 might
be given some weight because of the conflict of the two; and it was
tending to say that nominal GNP isn't going to move quite as much.
The simplistic formula would be that if M1 is strong and M2 is strong,
the odds are better that nominal GNP is going to go up than if there
are conflicts between the two [aggregates].
And I think that's--

10/1/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You didn't look beyond M2?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I have a whole list of variables here,
like the rate of change in commodity prices, the dollar. None of them
worked-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You didn't look at M3 and liquidity and

debt?
MR. AXILROD.
I have, yes.
I have the nontransactions
component of M3, but not M3 itself. And that doesn't do very much for
And that isn't consistent enough;
you. I have debt as a whole here.
it has scattered minuses and pluses.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

I'd like to
I have another point, Mr. Chairman.
MR. MORRIS.
propose that a presentation be made by the staff at some future
meeting on this whole issue that Steve raised in his presentation of
what we're going to do if we're faced with a precipitous decline in
the dollar. To what extent do we let the pressure be borne by the
exchange rate and to what extent do we let it be borne by interest
rates?
It seems to me it would be helpful, if we get to that point,
to have had a thorough thrashing out of what all of the consequences
would be.
I could tell you that my own bias at the moment would be to
have a policy geared to letting the exchange rate take the pressure.
But I'd like to be better educated on that subject.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

We may need some.

We have some work in process.

MR. PARTEE. Well, is it the exchange rate versus interest
rates or is it interest rates versus prices?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't you just review this
little frightening exercise you did yesterday, Mr. Truman.
I have a paper here to look at. With much
MR. TRUMAN.
hesitation, we have run estimates--with the help of models, rules of
thumbs, judgments--and looked at what would happen if we had a 40
percent decline in the dollar over a very short period--18 months,
roughly.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That was 40 percent you said, Ted?

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, 40.
[The specific number] doesn't matter;
basically, it's a very large decline over a short period of time. And
then we looked at where the economy would be three years later-another 18 months after this decline had happened. We looked at two
extreme assumptions: one was that you don't change money growth, or at
least what the models tell you money growth is; and the other was that
you don't let interest rates change.
In the first case the models
tend to tell you that the nominal GNP won't change at all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
go up but--

The first case meaning let interest rates

10/1/85

MR. TRUMAN.

Let interest rates go up; take it on interest

rates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's your extreme assumption?

MR. TRUMAN.

That's an extreme.

MR. PARTEE.

Very extreme.

MR. TRUMAN. The level of real GNP, while it may go up
initially, comes back down as the interest rates-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't go up beyond what it otherwise

would.
MR. TRUMAN. Right.
But the composition changes because
gross domestic purchases go down by about 5 percent. That is about
enough to change--well, it gives you $140 billion on the current
So,
account and essentially wipes out the current account deficit.
gross GNP is unchanged, gross domestic purchases go down by about 5
percent, making-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

From what they would otherwise have been.

MR. TRUMAN.

From what they would otherwise have been, yes

MR. PARTEE.

And prices?

MR. TRUMAN.

And the price level goes up by 7 percent.

SPEAKER(?).

Seven?

MR. PARTEE.

Above what it would otherwise go up.

sir.

MR. TRUMAN. Above what it would have gone up. At the other
extreme, real GNP goes up by around 10 percent compared to what it
otherwise would be.
Gross domestic purchases, since you have a
sympathetic effect from the addition to net exports, go up above what
they otherwise would be.
Capacity utilization you might not believe:
The unemployment rate drops by a
that goes up by 6 percentage points.
somewhat unbelievable 3 percentage points. The consumer price level
goes up a total of 12 percentage points. Governor Partee commented
that he didn't believe that number would be so small; I think I agree
with him. And because you have these sympathetic--or unsympathetic-income effects, you get half as much mileage on the current account
deficit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get involved with the
particular numbers, but what these exercises illustrate is that if you
take extreme--I hope extreme--assumptions and you're going to correct
that $150 billion current account deficit, you have a helluva
relocation from domestic consumption to the external sector. You
would have what's going on in Latin America where they have had no
increase in domestic consumption while they are putting all [their
expanding production] in exports. And unless events force some of it
out of domestic consumption, you have a helluva inflationary impact

10/1/85

and capacity problems and employment goes up and unemployment goes way
down.
MR. AXILROD. From another perspective, Mr. Chairman--and
this supplements Mr. Truman's data--we've been working on this also,
partly using the quarterly model and partly using some judgment. And
with the same assumption that we get the current account balanced, the
question is whether interest rates go up and whether it reduces fixed
investment and all that. But the model ended up with a very high
personal saving rate in that process, which we judgmentally reduced
over a four-year period. By the time it was all done we were ending
up with a personal saving rate of very close to 8 percent which, as
you know, is very high historically. That sort of cast into doubt the
practicality of all this short of other measures, such as a weakening
economy, which themselves would bring the current account in balance.
And that same exercise, to verify it in the sense of capacity, did
require capacity utilization rates in manufacturing rising--depending
on [an assumption of potential] capacity growth on the order of 2-1/2
If you thought
to 3 percent--to the area of 85 to 87 percent.
[potential growth] was 3-1/2 percent, it'd be a little lower than
that.
But it certainly is on the order of 5 percentage points added-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
In your little exercise where you kept the
GNP where it otherwise would have been, Mr. Truman, what kind of
interest rates did you get?
MR. TRUMAN. They go up initially, as Steve was commenting
earlier, but then they come back down as they begin to bite or
constrain the economy.
I think at the peak these exercises generated
[rate increases of] something like 500 or 600 basis points.

points.

MR. PARTEE. You have to cut the domestic demand 5 percentage
That's a lot.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I think--

But on the other hand, why would you want to cut
MR. BOEHNE.
Where we have a lot of excess capacity is in
demand all that much?
the manufacturing sector and that's just exactly where you would have
So it would seem that while we'd have
the substitution with imports.
to rearrange domestic consumption, reallocate it somewhat, we still do
have a lot of excess capacity concentrated just where we need it
because it's largely manufactured goods that we are importing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you see more of that excess
capacity, I think, than I do.
It's arbitrary.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I could take you on a trip through parts
of Pennsylvania where they claim they have a heck of a lot of excess
capacity.
If they had the demand for some of these manufactured goods
that they say are now [being imported] from abroad rather than being
produced here-MR. PARTEE. Ed, if you give those people income they're not
just going to spend it on products, they're going to spend it on
services too.

MR. BOEHNE.

I understand that.

10/1/85

MR. PARTEE.

And there is a macro effect.

MR. BOEHNE. I understand that. My only point is that we
don't have to be anywhere near the extreme of this; we can be
somewhere in the middle. And we might be able to be on the side of
the middle that gives us a little more growth largely because of where
this [capacity] is. We have areas in Pennsylvania where unemployment
is 10 to 12 percent. These are largely people who have been displaced
by the imports.
MR. KEEHN. I raise the same question on the capacity. For
example, the automobile industry domestically is operating about flat
out currently. They are trying to speed up their lines and they are
adding shifts. But fundamentally, the people I've talked to are
saying that never again will they add another dollar's worth of
capacity on the domestic side. If there is any shift, they will begin
to bring in more products from Mexico and Korea. They are not going
to add to their capacity. So, I think there are an awful lot of
industries that have quietly--and some not so quietly--taken capacity
off the line. So, if we get a resurgence of demand for domestic
output, the capacity would really-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would note that our trade deficit,
largely in manufactured goods, is the equivalent of something like 16
to 17 percent of manufacturing output.
MR. MORRIS. So I guess the only thing we can do is pray for
a gradual adjustment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.

That's probably right.

Either that or we're in trouble either way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're in trouble politically the way
things are now and I think it's unsustainable. That's a pretty good
definition of trouble in terms of the overall performance of the
economy, employment--

MR. STERN. That was based on a radical assumption about the
dollar. I would like a little elaboration from Steve or from Ted as
to how market participants have viewed the G-5 announcement so far.
MR. AXILROD. Well, I could add that one example we were
working out would imply the dollar would go down, but I don't know by
how much. But suppose you said you're going to move to current
account balance over a four-year period--and this is relevant to what
Mr. Boehne was mentioning in a lot of ways. Just say you're going to
do that, but if you do it you've got to press. So, apart from what
happens to the dollar, you have to have over that period gross
domestic purchases--consumption plus investment plus government
expenditures--growing less than GNP. And there has not been a fouryear period [like that] in the postwar period. There have been some
periods where it has grown less but not [for so long].
On one
estimate we've worked out, if you went to current account balance and
GNP was growing 3 percent in real terms--yes, your potential may be a
little more because you had a little slack in unemployment--you would
have had to had gross domestic purchases growing 2 percent over that
four-year period. So, it's 1 percentage point less year after year.

10/1/85

The public has to be willing to sacrifice output, in effect, to
abroad.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Not sacrifice output.

I mean to sacrifice their consumption relative

to output.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which could most logically come by cutting
the federal budget deficit.
MR. AXILROD. Yes. To make it difficult, we were assuming
that didn't happen. That's not the experience of the postwar period.
It has been less than that, but not for so long. I don't think--and
Mr. Cross and Mr. Truman [may think differently]--that the market has
yet moved to the point where they think the dollar is going to drop 40
percent. But that's the danger, I think.
MR. CROSS. I imagine it would be falling a lot sharper if
the market thought that.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

MR. BLACK. Could you supply us with a written statement of
these simulations you ran so that we could take a look at them at a
more leisurely pace?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we have a little presentation at
the next meeting?
I hope that's not too late. But I think these
issues are clearly at the heart of our problem.
MR. PARTEE.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a disequilibrium in the economy.
How do we correct it? Frankly, how to correct it--to produce a nice
smooth correction--is not all within our power, I'm afraid. There are
certain extraneous forces that are going to foul us up. Well, I think
we better have a doughnut after this.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think our discussion [about the exchange
value of the dollar] needs further elaboration, because the problem is
evident in what was said. The success of countries in the past of
pushing their own currencies down without creating problems is
extremely limited. In fact, I don't know of any case where any
country has done this and been happy about the end result. Just to
sharpen the dilemmas a bit, the funds rate has been up the last couple
of days over the course of the [quarter-end] statement date.
Ordinarily, we would think that [rise] would have a strengthening
effect on the dollar; the dollar is weakening quite a lot today. The
latest money supply figures are down rather significantly, so the
possibility of a minus in October is not remote, given the [September]
average that we start with. These are very fragmentary data; I hate
to even mention them on this unfortunate day, Tuesday, when we get
this fragmentary information.
[The weakness] may loom larger tomorrow
and remain. We do not have a weekly figure but a fragmentary

10/1/85

-10-

indication of a weekly figure. But September looks lower than was
projected and October may be starting lower.
MR. PARTEE. That's surprising. With September growth I
presume at least 10 percent, I would think that the end of September
would be higher than the average for September.
MR. AXILROD. We had projected about equal, given the ups and
downs in the month. The latest figure would suggest that the monthend is quite a lot lower; but that figure revises.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

September started higher.

It started quite high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there hasn't been much discussion of
the straightforward business scene or the inflationary scene or
anything else while we, I think usefully, were preoccupied with the
basic [dollar] adjustment problem. I think we can proceed and go
around the table. Mr. Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I held up my hand right before we
got into the discussion of these foreign exchange simulations and we
were trying to grapple with the idea of what accounts for the strength
of M1. Everybody has been searching for that, even those of us in
Richmond who don't always take that [aggregate] completely at face
I guess we reached the conclusion
value, as you may assume we do.
that this had to spell trouble for us unless one of two things has
happened. One would be that there has been a downward shift in the
long-term trend of velocity--and I think there probably has been
something of that as a result of financial innovation. But it seems
to me unlikely that this decline in velocity will be of such a
magnitude that we can stand growth of anything like the 10 to 12
percent we have had over the bulk of this year without running into
problems. The second way in which it would not be inflationary would
be if these sharp drops in nominal rates have been accompanied by a
corresponding decline in either inflationary expectations or the real
interest rate as a result of some autonomous weakening in some part of
aggregate demand. Actually, what little information we have on
inflationary expectations suggests that there really hasn't been much
of this. One can't rule out these two possibilities at all, but on
balance it seems to me that these two explanations--if indeed they are
the only two, as we think they are--are insufficient to justify [M1]
expansion of anything like what we have had. So, we need to do
something to get back to more normal growth rates. It may be, as you
said, that we are going to do that without any effort on our part.
But I do think that it is imperative that we slow this down to some
extent because we just cannot explain away that much growth, in our
judgment. When we get to specific policy points, I would be glad to
make some later; but I sense that it's probably not the best time to
do it now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
be more specific, you can.

Well, time is passing, so if you want to

MR. BLACK. Well, I would think that it is important that we
go ahead and move the borrowed reserve target up some. This may prove
to be totally unnecessary, but I would think something like $650 to

10/1/85

-11-

$750 million would be appropriate. That might, of course, cause some
increase in the federal funds rate--to 8-1/2 percent or so.
If
If
[money] is still growing fast, I would be prepared to accept that.
it isn't, then I would want to back off from it.
But I don't think
that we ought to be so over-zealous in our efforts to get the money
supply back on target that we aim even at the top of the range that we
revised at midyear. I think that clearly would be overkill in view of
the rapid expansion we have had thus far.
But something like this 8
percent quarterly rate that is projected for the third quarter would
seem to me to be reasonable in light of the kind of growth we had
before the second quarter.
MR. PARTEE. The third quarter is pretty well determined.
Are you talking about alternative C--5-1/2 percent for September to
December?
MR. BLACK.
MR. PARTEE.
the 4th quarter.

Well, I am talking about the quarterly rate.
On the quarterly, it's that high from the 3rd to

MR. BLACK. The third quarter--if I don't have my figures
wrong--would be about 8 percent.
It's 8 point something or other-8.3 percent.
I am just talking about the quarterly rate there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These new numbers, if they stand up, will
reduce September by about 2 percentage points or more.
MR. BLACK. Of course with our procedures, we always have a
risk that we are not going to get what we think because there's a
pretty loose connection between the rate of growth in any of the
aggregates and the borrowed reserve target.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think we can stipulate that.

MR. BLACK. But I think we maybe ought to err a little on the
side of tightness to make sure that we get some progress toward
decelerating M1.
But I would not push it so terribly hard that we get
into-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, looking at the general business
situation, I have changed my forecast very little from the last
meeting.
I think we are beginning to see the kind of numbers we hoped
for and that we wanted to see.
I feel more confident about the
economic situation than I did a month ago, and I find that that
impression is shared pretty much around my District by the business
people I talked with. There seems to be much less uncertainty about
the course of events.
The people I talked to are seeing some forward
momentum in the economy that they think is going to carry over into
the fourth quarter and, indeed, into the first half of 1986.
Now,
that view of the economy may be influenced a little by conditions in
the Southeast, which are relatively better I guess than in some other
parts of the country. While we have some weaknesses, particularly in
export-related areas such as textiles and so on, those weaknesses are
being offset by strengths otherwise.

-12-

10/1/85

On the aggregate picture, I would agree pretty much with the
forecast of the Greenbook, although on the composition of that
forecast I would differ marginally.
I would think that perhaps we are
going to have a little less strength in housing than in the Greenbook,
I think consumer spending is
but otherwise I am generally in accord.
a real question mark here. My staff is telling me that they expect
I am not sure
consumer spending to increase, especially in durables.
that that's a correct assessment, given the high debt level and the

personal income situation that we have.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

And a very low saving rate.

MR. FORRESTAL. A very low saving rate as well. The
inflation picture looks pretty good. Everyone I have talked to
There are certainly no wage
doesn't see any price pressures at all.

pressures in my area. Altogether, I think that the situation, while
not dramatically great, is certainly better than it has been. And I
think the outlook is reasonably favorable for the economy to grow at
about the trend rate of 2 to 3 percent for the year as a whole.
As far as monetary policy is concerned, we have all of these
imbalances that we talked about considerably this morning and I don't
think that there is very much we can do about those imbalances. So my
feeling, Mr. Chairman, is that we should stay pretty much where we are
in terms of policy. The dollar, of course, is something that we
obviously will want to watch very carefully. If there were extreme
changes in the value of the dollar one way or the other, I think that
we ought to move aggressively. But as I see the picture at the
moment--given the economic growth, the declining dollar, and the
I guess
absence of inflation [pressures]--I would stay where we are.
that means alternative B, although that perhaps suggests a slight
uptick in market conditions. M1 is a lingering concern; I am nervous
about that. On the other hand, I wouldn't take any positive action to
try to bring its growth down appreciably. I hope it will come down on
its own accord in October. But particularly in light of what has
happened in the G-5 meetings, I don't think we ought to be doing
In terms of the specifics, I would
anything to run interest rates up.
stay about where we are, maybe about $450 to $550 million in borrowing
and that probably means a federal funds rate of 7-7/8 or 8 percent. I
don't think it makes a lot of difference which of those we come out
with. Just to complete the specifics: On the question of the
variants, I would like to use variant I.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in terms of the discussion, I think
we should leave that until the last because, on the face of it, that's
not substantive. Mr. Corrigan.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a brief comment on the business
situation: My own view is similar to Mr. Forrestal's in that I do draw
more encouragement from the collection of latest statistics--not that
they lead to anything different than the staff forecast, but I think
that they raise the chances that that, or maybe a tad better, in fact
is what will happen. But I must say that in and around New York City
anyway, the people associated with the very large multinational
companies [unintelligible], notwithstanding the recent business
statistics, are still very distinctly on the bearish side of things.
I am not quite sure whether that's just a further manifestation of the
way in which those companies are being affected by the external side.

10/1/85

-13-

There may be some of that, but I detect in the time frame of the past
six weeks or so a higher level of concern in that community about the
underlying policy situation. There is even, as I said before, some
whispering to the effect that sooner or later that underlying policy
situation is going to lead to more inflation--not that anybody sees it
right now, but that there's a sense of inevitability about it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Some of them may even want it.

But again, I
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's true.
think the combination of things, including realization of a budget
resolution and all of the rest, has given rise to a renewed sense of
cynicism if not outright hopelessness in terms of the budget
situation. And in terms of monetary policy, there is a sense that the
constraints are growing--constraints in terms of financial fragility,
of the M1 problem that everybody wants to pretend isn't there but
can't quite get themselves to pretend that it's not there, and more
recently a net feeling that this G-5 [agreement] works in the
direction, at least in the short run, of more of a constraint on
policy. As I said, it's hard to judge that; but I think more
attention has been paid to the policy dilemma in that segment of the
business community in the recent past than I, at least, had detected
earlier. Now strangely enough, attitudes outside of that community of
the Fortune 500, including even places like Buffalo and Rochester, are
distinctly better.
I can't quite figure out why that's true, but we
have had a couple of meetings upstate recently and I was really struck
by the very sharp difference in perceptions about the business
situation, even in the Buffalo area. We have
an auto worker, and he's dancing in the aisles. He is
not buying this notion that all of this [improvement in the] auto
situation recently is just financing-related. He seems to think that
they are really getting back into a groove. That's strange, but true.
MR. PARTEE.

It certainly would be desirable for him.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You have the

vote protecting money?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I don't know if it has quite
progressed to that point.
It wasn't just
either.
I was
amazed at the attitude among a group of about 25 business people up
there two weeks ago.
It floored me.
I thought I was back in
Minneapolis, Gary. Anyway, extracting from the vagaries of the
business situation, however one judges it, my own view on policy is
that we should stay where we are, which means alternative B pretty
much as sketched out in the Bluebook. In the immediate here-and-now
situation, on top of all of vulnerabilities that have been there all
along, I must say that I personally think the major vulnerability is a
downside break in the dollar in the near term. I am not predicting
that, but I think the risks are there.
I am not sure what one does
about it, but I would be prepared to tilt the thrust of policy in the
context of alternative B in the direction of trying to mitigate
against that vulnerability in any little way that we can.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Martin.

MR. MARTIN. Mr. Chairman, I note that much of the positive
news recently has to do with housing sales and the leading indicators.
When you take autos out of consumer spending and analyze the [rise in

-14-

10/1/85

the] leading indicators, which has been in the financial [components]
up until the very last month, I am not sure that there has been such a
turn in the leading indicators as to point to much more strength in
the period we are going through.
I note and support the Fed staff
revising the growth downward in some of their projections at least.
It seems to me that when the labor force resumes its growth, we well
could have that two- or three-tenths improvement [in the unemployment
rate] disappear, as I think Jim hinted at. As the labor force resumes
growth and we remain on a 2 percent [real GNP] growth line rather than
2.7 or 3 percent or whatever, unemployment could well begin to creep
up again, given the continued layoff news.
It seems to me that
protectionist tendencies are obvious in the Congress. The price
situation already has been alluded to: wholesale prices, the CPI, and
the deflator are all looking reasonably good.
Commodity prices
generally are down. OPEC and the Saudis are having their [annual]
charade. When you look at the revised third-quarter data, you find
that CCC purchases are very important as are the purchases of autos by
consumers.
I don't get a very secure feeling about the fourth quarter
on that.
I note in the staff projection that while the inventory
buildup, the restocking, is not the whole [explanation] for another
quarter of 3 percent real growth, it is most of it.
We have been
disappointed, if that's the word, in the inventory buildup in recent
months; we previously were projecting inventory being a [plus] factor
for the third quarter.
I would make the same comment about the
I think that we may be a
[projection for] inventories for 1986.
I feel we are quite optimistic in our
little too positive in that.
analysis of the trade balance and how quickly that is going to help us
and how quickly import prices are going to change. We are talking
about changes by the second quarter of next year. So, we well could
have 2 percent real growth for the fourth quarter and for the first
Once
and second quarters or perhaps for the whole year next year.
again, that gets me to the problems of unemployment and protectionism.
In terms of monetary policy, I would go along with
alternative B, but given the way the markets have perceived our policy
until very recently, the funds rate has been trading down below what
might be expected. Add the borrowings and the excess reserve position
to the federal funds trading range and it looks as though the market
really hasn't detected the slight movement toward more borrowing and
Therefore, I
slightly higher rates from the last FOMC [meeting].
would like to see us go back to $425 million as the starting borrowing
level and to 7-1/2 to 7-3/4 percent on the federal funds rate, to give
ourselves a little action space in interest rates, in case we do have
the dollar giving us even more of a problem than we have already.
If
we have to kick the funds rate up 1/2 point, that keeps it closer to 8
percent than to 8-1/2 percent.
I'd give ourselves a little space
there. So, I am for alternative B, previous FOMC meeting fashion, of
$425 million and 7-1/2 to 7-3/4 percent on the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

In a broad context, certainly, our outlook for
MR. KEEHN.
the economy would be very consistent with the forecast that Jim gave
earlier in the meeting. But as has been the case, we have had in the
Midwest this terrible unevenness, and that certainly has continued.
Some of the areas are doing very well. We've already commented about
the auto sector, but I've just been staggered by how effective the
price incentive has been.
It is surely causing some imbalance in

10/1/85

-15-

sales. Nonetheless, looking ahead to next year, the people I talked
to expect--and I think our forecast suggests--a very, very good auto
year of, say, 10.4 to 10.6 million in sales or something like that.
So the high sales level this year isn't taking too much from that. In
retail sales, the people I talked with say that year-to-date sales are
running 6 to 7 percent ahead of last year. That outlook looks pretty
good. Looking ahead to Christmas, even though it's awfully early to
see that far ahead, I think they are looking for a 4 to 5 percent
increase, even though there is a shorter selling period. Commercial
construction, particularly in Chicago, continues to be very, very
strong. I am afraid a lot of it is tax-oriented, but buildings are
going up at a pretty rapid rate. On the bad side, there is
agriculture. There is nothing new I can shed on that particular
problem other than to say that, as these harvests are beginning to
come in, the news is very very bad; I think we are going to see a
continued deterioration in that whole sector.
On the inflation front, I really continue to be very
impressed by how good the news looks. The people I talked with, even
those who have businesses that are doing pretty well, are negotiating
contracts with annual increases as low as 2 percent, with 3 to 3-1/2
percent fairly typical for under-3-year contracts. They are getting
very good changes in work rules and, therefore, have high confidence
that productivity will enable them to overcome even those modest
increases. And materials costs continue to be very, very tight; 1 or
2 percent increases in materials costs are pretty typical; 3 to 4
percent would be very much on the high side. So everybody I talked to
is very optimistic, really, on the inflation front. All of that, of
course, is excluding our comments earlier this morning.
Moving to monetary policy, it does seem to me that we are in
a period when, because of the various circumstances, we have a
buildup--both in terms of number and magnitude--of problems that are
at the least very, very worrisome. Given that array of problems, I
think frankly that we have to be very rate sensitive; I don't think
that we can afford to change the status quo too much. M1 is going
through an erratic period and we ought to recognize that it is very
erratic. Therefore, I would be in favor of maintaining the status quo
in terms of the borrowing level and the fed funds rate and I think
alternative B addresses that objective. I would suggest a borrowing
level of, say, $500 million and a fed funds rate at the current level
without tolerating much of an increase.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, in the Fourth Federal Reserve
District business conditions remain sluggish. We have price weakness
across a wide range of activities; wheat, aluminum, coal, and steel
come to mind on that front. Conditions are not noticeably improving
and they are not really getting worse either. A bright note in our
District would come from the retail side; retailers are happy with the
pace of sales and they are happy with the mood of consumers. I will
be very interested in assessing the reactions to the G-5 announcement
in our District, since I think we are a hotbed of protectionist
sentiment. I think that the G-5 announcement will be successful in
blunting protectionist sentiment and that the efforts will bear fruit
in a reasonable period of time. But there is an interesting twist
there in that just from the very people who have the most to gain from

10/1/85

a falling dollar we hear the concern that if it's not accompanied by
either the spurring of growth abroad or the reigning in of our
deficits that, in fact, it won't do them the good that they so
desperately need from it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I hope you encourage that discussion.

MS. HORN. Yes, indeed. But I do think there is a real
understanding in the more sophisticated business public of the
dangerous game [the G-5] are playing; and we see that time and time
again in our District. Having said all that, I think that if we do
manage to play this dangerous game successfully and don't have a
precipitous drop in the exchange rate, there is room in the short run
for optimism. We have really good news on the inflation front.
I
don't see inflation starting from any other cause except an exchange
rate decline or a real spurt in economic growth, and we may be seeing
a little pickup in economic growth. So, in the short run I think
there is room for optimism. I add all of that together and say that
we should stay about where we are on monetary policy.
That would be
$500 million of borrowing and the federal funds rate where it is-- up
nudging the 8 percent level.
MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District, we are
probably a little more pessimistic, and certainly more pessimistic
than is traditional for us.
I just completed a swing around the
District and found the following: in Houston, no optimism given the
energy and real estate situation; in San Antonio and in Austin, a
little more optimism; and in Midland Texas, where our El Paso Branch
Board met--and that covers eastern New Mexico--all of the
uncertainties on energy prices have them quite worried. Si mentioned
agriculture.
I heard one report up in the Panhandle area of cows
coming out of the feed lot at a loss of $125 to $150 a head, so it's
going to take a lot of volume to make that up.
In Dallas, I guess
there is probably a little more optimism, although I worry about it.
I've talked about the commercial real estate situation to the point
where you all are tired of hearing about it.
But the Chamber of
Commerce did a report a couple of weeks ago which said that there is
more vacant office space in Dallas, Texas than there is office space
in Philadelphia. And that has to be a big problem down the road.
In a broader context, my own view is that there is
improvement in the economy.
I would pretty well agree with
forecast. On the policy side, I guess I have some sympathy
Bob Black was saying; I would probably be somewhere between
"C" myself.

a little
Jim's
for what
"B" and

MR. BALLES.
In terms of the business situation, both around
the country and around the West, it appears to us that it's a touch
better than the last time we met.
I would say that the risk of
recession--which I never judged to be very big in any event, but it
was a risk--if anything, has receded since the time of our last
meeting. Having said that, there is nothing that has changed
fundamentally in the fabric of the economy, certainly not in the West.
We have this big contrast between things that are going well, like
defense and aerospace and most services, and weakness in the fields we
all know about, such as agriculture, lumber, and many lines of
manufacturing.

10/1/85

-17-

Translating that into policy, we like many others are puzzled
by the behavior of M1.
The bottom line is that we, at least, can't
explain it satisfactorily by any different hypothesis--that it's an
increase in the demand for money and a shift in the demand function
for money upward, or simply money demand moving downward along a given
demand function as interest rates have come down. While you can
explain some of it possibly by portfolio shifts, that does not get the
whole answer either. That leaves me, net, a bit nervous about the
continuing strength of M1 that we have seen and I hope that we can
slow it down a little before it translates into some sort of
I don't know
resurgence of inflationary expectations in the market.
how long market participants and investors will go along, seeing
virtually an unprecedented surge in money, without beginning to wonder
what lies down the road in a couple of years in terms of the inflation
rate.
So it is really a matter of the feedback and the impact that is
having on investor expectations.
So far it has been quiescent, but I
wouldn't bet on that continuing too long. Were it not for the G-5
program, I would be between "B" and "C;" but given the G-5 program, I
suppose the better part of wisdom is to aim for something of an even
keel right now. Thus, I favor alternative B but tilting a little
toward the tighter end of the specifications--going up to the maximum
level of about $550 million on the borrowing range specified there and
wanting to keep that federal funds rate up to about 8 percent.
MR. WALLICH. In economic terms, very little seems to have
changed. Some non-economic factors have changed. As far as the
situation of the exchange market is concerned, I note your fears, Mr.
Chairman, but my impression is that some people in the market say that
this is just another of a series of interventions that isn't going to
If we
get anywhere. They are going to wait and see what happens.
don't follow it through, then they will just move the market back to
where it was before, and we will have a defeat instead of an element
of strength. That could be regarded as a reason why a softening of
rates would help to support the intervention. There are other
arguments on that side--the deteriorating LDC position, protectionism
--but these are all very short-run developments, and what the movement
of the dollar is likely to be doesn't seem to me to have much
immediate influence. On the other side there are two factors that are
more longer term and that do seem of concern. One is the seeming
misbehavior of M1.
I too make these calculations: Is it interest?
Is
it innovations?
What can it be?
Nothing seems to give an adequate
explanation except the explanation that the demand curve has shifted,
which it has done several times before so one shouldn't preclude it.
The second is an even longer-run development.
If now the dollar does
go down and over time we get an improvement in the current account and
we do not get an improvement in the budget, then we are building up
inflationary pressures, including ultimately higher interest rates,
which will be quite a negative [factor].
I think that is the most
likely course of events: that we will find ourselves from meeting to
meeting hoping that the current account is improving and that it will
begin to improve and, meanwhile, nothing else major in the economy
will have changed.
I think that would be a very dangerous
proposition. So unless we can get [relief] from that situation, I
don't think we should put additional stimulation into the economy.
But the end of all this is that I would go with alternative B because
I see rather strong forces on both sides, which I can't resolve.

10/1/85

-18

MR. MELZER. At the last meeting I was in favor of leaning
toward somewhat greater restraint, which has since been realized. And
the numbers we have gotten on the economy overall and what I am
hearing in the District would tend to make one feel moderately
[positive], anyway, about what is going on in the economy. On the
other hand, I did not come here today with any strong feelings that
One of the reasons why
greater restraint was necessarily called for.
I think that is the moderation we have seen in the rate of growth of
money, particularly that which is expected looking forward. One thing
that gave me concern immediately after the G-5 accord was the reaction
of the government yield curve, specifically the coupons, where we had
a steepening of the yield curve of about 10 basis points. At this
juncture I would say that is something I have taken note of but at the
current levels of those spreads it is not something that concerns me
terribly. But I think that market, and probably to some extent the
foreign exchange market as well, feels that the Fed is sitting here
with its hands tied and may not be able to respond to improving
numbers on the real side and rapid money growth. Because of the G-5
agreement and so forth, I don't think it would be particularly politic
to consider greater restraint at this juncture; however, if things
don't unfold as we expect them to with respect to lower rates of M1
growth and if we continue to get good numbers on the real side, I
would certainly be leaning toward greater restraint in the
intermeeting period.
I have one or two anecdotal comments. First of all, among
retailers in the District there seems to be a feeling that car sales
are definitely sapping the general strength of retail sales.
Secondly, corroborating what Si said about inflationary expectations,
I picked up the same [tenor] in a luncheon we had at the Bank: no
increased inflationary pressures on costs; no perceived ability to
raise prices substantially; and, to the extent that there were wage
pressures, strong feelings that those could be offset with
productivity gains.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make an observation on this
price situation. The recent figures look pretty good and promise that
we will have overestimated [the rate of inflation] for the fifth
consecutive year in our projections. But I don't think there is any
doubt that inflationary expectations in the longer-run sense in some
anemic way are increasing. The survey evidence--what we have--says
that. But I feel it in my bones too that fooling around with the
dollar and questions about the dollar may restrict Federal Reserve
It is not an
It tends to go in that direction.
freedom of action.
abrupt or major thing, but I think it is quite clear--just when you go
out and make speeches--that people are much more open about saying
that than they would have been six months ago.
MR. STERN. With regard to the business situation, I
certainly recognize that one or two months don't make a trend, but I
I think the
must say that I am impressed by the latest statistics.
economy is clearly doing better, picking up some momentum, as probably
was expected by a lot of us. My own view is that we may do somewhat
better than the Greenbook forecast, at least for the next several
quarters. That certainly would be welcomed, other things equal, in my
judgment. On the financial side, as several have mentioned, I can't
quite bring myself to dismiss M1 altogether. And in any event, it
seems to me that growth in the other aggregates certainly has been

-19-

10/1/85

So, I
adequate and that liquidity in the economy is certainly ample.
am not sure that we are getting terribly mixed signals from the
collection of statistics on that side. My major concern is that we
may have a monster on our hands in the foreign exchange markets--not
immediately, judging by the way things have been going, but I am
concerned about the potential weakness in the dollar and the
I certainly am struck, as I travel
inflationary implications of that.
around our District at least, by the fact that one of the origins of
the problems that are evident in the District is the rapid inflation
of the late '70s and early '80s; obviously, we still are suffering the
hangover effects of all of that. And that is one of my principal
concerns, both at the moment and looking ahead, in terms of economic
performance and the thrust of policy.
For the immediate period, as far as policy is concerned, I am
a little concerned that if the dollar weakens more than would seem to
be appropriate or desirable, or if money growth turns out to be more
rapid than we expect, we may not be in much of a position to respond
to it.
And what that implies to me is that, while I certainly can
accept the specifications of alternative B, I would like to make one
modification because of my concerns about both money growth and the
dollar. And that is, I would make the borrowing range $500 to $600
million, starting at $500 but leaving us a little more leeway on the
up side in case what I judge to be some of the risks here materialize.
I don't think a lot has changed in the economy;
MR. BOEHNE.
I think it is a touch better in my District. The feeling is generally
positive, but I'd say that positive feeling is expressed in
I am struck by the disparity just in something
unenthusiastic words.
There are a number of areas in my
like the unemployment rate.
District where you can find unemployment at 5 or 6 percent. You can
That kind of difference is
drive 50 or 75 miles and it is 10 percent.
striking. On the inflation side, I would agree with what has been
said: I don't think there is a real problem. Wage settlements
generally have been good; however, I would point out that wages are
rising, as they typically do, considerably faster in the service
sector than they are in the manufacturing sector. I have been
surprised at some of the increases that are planned in banking and
insurance for next year in our area and particularly by the
So, generally I agree; but
professional and managerial pay increases.
there are pockets in the service sector where we are seeing some large
I think the risk to the economy is largely from the
increases.
financial side--the whole litany of things that we have talked about
On monetary policy, I don't see that
many times before at this table.
we have very much room for maneuvering given the cross-currents of
events, and I would find alternative B generally to be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Partee.

I agree that the business outlook looks better
MR. PARTEE.
than it did a couple months ago.
I realize you can find difficulties
with all the statistics, but that is frequently true as you begin to
see some strengthening. You can say that there is an oddity here and
an oddity there, or it is concentrated in this or that. But in fact
it is coming out quite uniformly on the stronger side.
A comment was
Well, it seems to me that this endeavor is
made about new car sales.
not costing the auto companies all that much. The present value is
something under 10 percent. They have raised prices significantly, so

10/1/85

-20-

they can very easily afford to continue to do the same thing or
something similar with the '86 models.
Their problem will be that
they may run through a backlog of demand, not that they can't easily
afford the kinds of promotions that they have been giving in this
period. Also, I think technically the business situation looks better
because we have a quite moderate inventory level--in fact no inventory

accumulation--and good final demands.

I would expect that we will see

inventory accumulation and that will give us a stronger economy.

Even

so, the staff forecast is for 3 percent growth in the fourth quarter
and on the order of 2-1/2 to 3 percent in the first half of next year.
Say it runs stronger than that by a percentage point; it's still not
anything excessive. So I don't see that there is an upside risk of
excessive growth in the near term, and I happen to agree with NABE,
Martha: I think there will be a recession by this time next year. So
we are talking about a fairly short-run outlook and I don't see any
reason to say that the performance of the economy looks to be such
that we ought to be making financial conditions tighter than they now
are by any significant amount--unless the dollar breaks very strongly
or something like that, which will change the nature of things.
I note that not only has money been growing relative to GNP
so that its trend looks different, but that is also true of debt
relative to GNP, which is up very sharply in the last 4 years from 1.4
times GNP to 1.65 times GNP. It looks as if, for some reason that I
can't quite understand, it takes both more money and more credit to
keep the economy moving at all well. I think there are great pitfalls
in this in the long run on the credit side; I worry about servicing
the debt. That may get to be a very great problem at some point in
the future. And on the money side I worry about having pumped all
this liquidity in, which we won't be able to neutralize if something
should touch off the desire to use it actively. But these are not
questions for today; they will become perhaps very big problems later
on but not for today. I think we ought to leave policy just where it
is. I disagree with Pres. I don't think we ought to ease up any
because I think that is something the market is looking for and would
also associate with the G-5 accord and would be really more confining
on us than not to do it. But I don't think we ought to tighten at all
either. So I guess that's alternative B, with $500 million on
borrowings as the initial estimate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am confused about the things you are
worried about: an increase in money for four years and an increase in
investment for four years. When does it become timely to do something
about it?
MR. PARTEE. I don't think that you can do it, if the
evidence is that we have to have [such growth] in order to keep the
economy moving at all well. I think you just have to live with it
until the crash.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Mr. Morris.

Until the crash comes: a passive approach.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I too think that the evidence
suggests that the economy is picking up a bit but I certainly don't
sense in the numbers any strong forward thrust. I think it is
entirely compatible with the kind of modest growth that the staff is
projecting. In my area, I run into the same comments from business

-21-

10/1/85

people that Karen did: they don't see things getting stronger; they
don't see them getting weaker.
I think that reflects the fact that we
are a capital goods producer essentially and the weakest part of the
economy right now is the capital goods sector. New orders for capital
goods are no higher than they were a year ago.
But I think the uptick
in the economy does suggest a no-change policy.
I was concerned that
this might conflict with the G-5 program in the sense that I thought
there was a possibility, anyway, that we would need somewhat lower
interest rates to reinforce that declaration. But at least so far the
evidence is that we don't; we are getting a response at current rates
and I am hopeful that a nice and orderly response will continue. So I
would propose no change, alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would agree with
those around table who suggest that an uptick in the national economy
is probably in train--that the Greenbook forecast is very reasonable.
That, however, is only from a national view. From a regional view, in
the Tenth District things have not gotten better; they have gotten
worse. And the projections for the fall and winter, particularly in
the agricultural and energy areas, hold out no great hope. As a
matter of fact, the financial strain simply rolls back into the
financial institutions; the outlook for banks, savings and loans, and
others looks to be devastating. From strictly a national viewpoint; I
would agree with those who say no change in policy. From a regional
viewpoint, I guess I would have to urge perhaps some relaxation of
interest rate levels.
I will just note that on the inflation front,
much of the contribution to stable inflation in the short run is a
contribution by food and energy. And that impacts my District rather
dramatically.
There has been a good deal of talk about M1 and I would
agree, in view of what I have just said, that we shouldn't pay very
much attention to it in the very short run. Although I would hate to
give it up as a part of policy, over the next intermeeting period and
perhaps over the fourth quarter as a whole I don't see M1 as a major
player in policy decisions, unless other matters such as the dollar
come into play and we may want to use it.
On the other hand, the
dollar and the G-5 arrangement are a bit puzzling to me.
That is to
say that there's been a great deal of talk here and I think you, Mr.
Chairman, expressed the concern of a precipitous drop in the dollar.
I think that is a real risk, obviously. But if you look at it in
another way the fundamentals haven't changed, as far as I can see. As
a result, it seems to me that the dollar has come down relative to the
other currencies but I would expect that in the short run the traders
will test the United States, for example, and will try to push the
dollar back up to see how far the United States really will go to
participate in the G-5 agreement.
So with that in mind, and with the background of the economy,
particularly queuing off of my own region, I would prefer alternative
B.
But I am troubled a little by the language describing alternative
B and that is that the staff would project a funds rate of 8 percent
or a bit higher.
I would object at this point, if it were up to me,
to having a rate of 8 percent and pushing on up unless some of these
other exogenous forces, such as the dollar, come into play. As a
result, I would modify that and be someplace between "A" and "B" and

-22-

10/1/85

start out with a borrowing level, say, of between $400 and $500
million, centering on $450 million. I am hopeful that that would be
enough latitude and flexibility, if the dollar did start to drop, that
there wouldn't be a [conference] call and the policy prescription
changed as a result of that call.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms.

Seger.

MS. SEGER. Many of my points have already been made, but I
would just like to emphasize that I believe the risks are on the down
side.
The consumer spending numbers that look very robust and retail
sales that look good are being supported by very generous use of
credit cards and other kinds of credit.
I picked up some numbers from
the treasurer of one of the captive auto finance companies and the
terms of auto credit really did something to me: 45 percent of their
August contracts were for 60-month loans. Almost half of the
contracts were for five years, which means that they needed that
incentive plus a very low rate of 7.7 percent to get a monthly payment
that was low enough to drag these people in off the streets.
I don't
read that as a terribly, terribly strong demand situation. Also, Si
and I may talk to different people in the auto industry, but I haven't
found anybody out there who doesn't think that this temporary burst of
sales is going to be reversed, that in fact they are borrowing from
the future, and that later in October we will see a very big and
significant drop in sales as they pay the price for moving these '85
models out very rapidly. So I think we are going to see some
distortion in the numbers here for a while that will make it very
difficult to get a handle on what is really going on.
But I think
that there isn't as much strength basically as one might conclude.
Secondly, on the housing matter, as the standards of the mortgage
lenders and of the mortgage insurers are tightened, I think we are
going to see that show up eventually in [a drop in] new housing
starts.
I admit it hasn't happened yet, but I think it will and,
therefore, starts may come in a little below what the staff is now
estimating. On plant and equipment spending, here again I think more
and more companies are having profit problems, and that does feed back
into their capital spending decisions and doesn't make them very
positive about it.
So, I think there may be some downside risk there.
On the inflation front, like most of the others here, I think
the numbers look pretty good.
I also would like to emphasize that
there are sectors of the economy where there is actual deflation,
which doesn't seem to get mentioned much. Also, I certainly would
read the M1 numbers, but I would be much more concerned with what's
going on with M1 if M2 and M3 also were going off the top of the
chart, which they aren't--particularly M3.
Having just met with the
Decatur Chamber of Commerce yesterday and the National Association of
Manufacturers, you would need to give me a bullet-proof vest if I
suggested any policy change that would lead to higher interest rates
or a tightening, because both of those groups are very sensitive to
the financial side of the economy. They are tying that to their own
problems.
So I am torn between supporting "B" with a tilt toward "A"
or just going straight to "A."
I would be very, very concerned about
any uptick in interest rates at this point for the reasons I
mentioned--the impact on agriculture, the other areas that have big
debt problems, and furthermore the possibility that that would
undermine the recent G-5 agreement.
So I guess I am somewhere between

10/1/85

-23-

"A" and "B" with the borrowing down to the level we were talking about
at the last meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have no new observations to
make that have not already been made around the table.
I, too, see
the economy picking up.
I think that the staff forecast is right, and
I particularly agree with it for the short term--that is, for the
current quarter and the fourth quarter I think we'll get growth in the
area of 3 percent. Given this outlook and given the other noneconomic
developments that Governor Wallich referred to, I agree with those
around the table who say that we really don't have much policy scope,
or very much room for maneuver from a policy point of view. We
certainly would not, or at least I would not, want to do anything that
would reduce the chances of reaching a moderate 3 percent rate of
growth. And while I would have preferred to have seen in this period
after the last FOMC meeting a funds rate somewhat higher than it did
in fact average and certainly less money growth, I don't think that
there is anything we can do now either to tighten or to ease policy; I
think that we are in a very narrow range for policy decisions.
So, I
think this calls for maintaining the existing degree of reserve
pressure and that would be alternative B with borrowing around $500
million and the funds rate around 8 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what I can add to all
that discussion since every contingency and every threat has been
In the
mentioned by somebody. There are a lot of contingencies.
broadest sense, we are constrained by circumstances.
I wouldn't put
all that much emphasis on the G-5 matter; we're constrained by more
But I wouldn't interpret
fundamental contingencies on either side.
I don't know what is going to
that too strictly in the short run.
A lot of people talk about the
happen in a number of dimensions.
economy being a little stronger in tone.
I think that's probably
right, but against the background of the money supply figures in
particular--Governor Partee said he could imagine [real GNP growth]
going to 4 percent--I could imagine it going to a lot more than 4
percent under a certain set of circumstances.
All you need is a kick
in those inventories and a downward movement in the trade balance at
the same time and you could get quite a little kick. I'm not sure I
would predict that, but I don't think it's out of the bounds of
possibility. And that makes those money supply figures look more in
accordance with historical experience, and everybody has expressed
uneasiness about what that means.
I do think that everybody--well, not quite everybody--but
it's clear where the center of gravity lies.
I don't disagree with
that at all.
I think the most likely risk we face--or the one I worry
about the most, let me put it that way--is that the dollar may decline
too far too fast and create inflationary expectations and eventually
inflation. If it does pass some point of undermining confidence, it's
going to be very hard to manage and it's going to produce higher
interest rates.
That's the real threat of a sudden drop in the
dollar: decidedly higher interest rates as well as inflation.
Worrying about 1/8 or 1/4 point on interest rates now will pale in
significance compared to the kind of direction Mr. Truman was alluding
to if those kinds of conditions ever arose. That would really throw a
lot of things off course, beginning with the debt situation and

10/1/85

-24-

recession and possibly agriculture; you name it.
That's the one
threat that gives me nightmares as I look ahead. For that reason, I
think it's counterproductive to give any signals that we are easing at
the moment.
It would just create additional risks of that happening.
I'm not talking about a month from now or something. If the money
supply gets weaker and the economic news is weak--if we had a clear
basis for easing--we should ease.
I don't think we have that clear
basis right now. I would also say that if we had a clear basis for
tightening, we should tighten. If that arises it's going to arise, I
suspect, more from the dollar side. But if we continued to get big
increases in M1 combined with a real strengthening in the economy, I
don't think we would have much choice, whatever the G-5 says.
There
are no commitments made there. But for the moment, I think we are in
the area of what is loosely called "B."
I would also suggest that a certain amount of unusual
maneuvering room is needed in the short run, within a narrow range,
because I think a lot does depend on almost day-to-day psychology in
the exchange markets.
We can lean a little toward the easier side if
the dollar is strong and we're having a great test on the up side, and
we can lean on the other side if the dollar decline appears to be
building up momentum there. At the moment that's where the momentum
is, if it has any momentum. That could change any day, I well
recognize. But I would come out about where most people are in terms
of something like a $500 million borrowing level as a center of
gravity, but I'd be prepared to go moderately above that or
potentially moderately below that in day-to-day or week-to-week
tactics, depending particularly upon the dollar; but as the weeks go
by it also would depend upon the money supply and the economy. We are
now in a period where I think within a limit--I don't know whether I'd
call it $425 to $575 million or $400 to $600 million, or something in
that area--we could use a little maneuverability. And I think that is
consistent with a federal funds rate somewhere around 8 percent or a
bit higher or lower; I'm thinking about 8 percent or a shade below 8
percent.
MR. PARTEE.

The aggregates would play a relatively small

role?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, relatively small.
I don't know if
it's any smaller in some sense than they have been playing.
I am a
little influenced at the moment, inevitably, by the fact that the odds
on a slowing in the aggregates look a little better to me now than
they might have a week or two ago.
We had a big decline last week and
little change this week. There may be a sizable decline in the
following week: three weeks in a row of decline.
I think it's so high
that I wouldn't respond immediately by easing; I would be more
inclined-MR. PARTEE.
If you happen to get a negative month, say, that
wouldn't cause an easing?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It certainly would be a factor in saying
we would be less eager to tighten if other things are pointing in that
direction.
It's simple if everything is pointing in the same
direction.
If the dollar were rebounding, with M1 softer and the
economy looking rather weak, it's easy--ease. The problem arises when
these signals are not all in the same direction in a specific period.

10/1/85

-25-

On the contrary, if the dollar were softening, with M1 continuing high
and the business picture looking better, tighten. That's too easy
when all of them are moving that consistently.
I think that's what
the directive ought to say, whatever the particular form: that if all
these things--or the weight of them--are moving in one direction or
the other, we would ease or tighten.
It's perfectly reasonable.
MR. MARTIN. And you are implying a symmetrical view here,
essentially, or a little on the tightening side because-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I see it as symmetrical in an
analytic sense. My gut feeling is that it continues to--.
Well, the
one thing I really worry about is the dollar getting out of hand on
It's-the down side.
MR. RICE.
So you would be guided more by what happens in the
foreign exchange market?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am talking about very short-run
tactics. At this moment you get the impression that we're a "captive"
as some people put it, and we have to ease to get the dollar down.
The dollar has come down quite a lot.
I am very sensitive to the
psychology going the other way, based upon all we have experienced
here and abroad as to what happens sometimes when the market gets to
expecting ease. Maybe everybody is ready. We will have a great test
I would much rather have a test on the up side and do
on the up side.
a lot of intervening and maybe ease a bit, than I would a test on the
The upside test is much more manageable than the downside
down side.
There is no catastrophe if the dollar gets a little stronger
test.
than it has been and we have to do a lot of intervening and we even
I don't see any lasting damage from that
have to ease a little.
scenario, except that politically it undercuts the anti-protectionism
[position] but I don't know how much weight to put on that in terms of
sensitivity to day-to-day developments.
It's a question of what and
where. When I look at the broad strategy down the road--inflation,
and all the rest--I am more worried, though I don't know which is more
probable, about the risks we run from a deteriorating dollar if it got
out of hand than the others.
I'm not worried about the current level
but I don't know how much longer [unintelligible].
I would say with
all the hoopla this thing gets that there is a lot of sensitivity to
this point.
I see it was in the papers that there was some insistence
in the G-5 meeting that they redo the language of the statement to get
the word "orderly" or the wording "orderly decline or orderly rise" in
there. That was a Latin American inspiration; they among others were
sensitive to this point.
Nobody pays any attention to it, but it
reflects that concern that this could get out of hand.
I'm not saying
anything different here about the [borrowing] numbers than anybody
else was saying. But I am suggesting some tolerance of some day-today, week-to-week maneuvering, influenced by the dollar but against a
background of these other things.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARTEE.

That's fine with me.

I agree.

MR. GUFFEY. You have no problems with the funds rate
beginning to trade at 8 percent or a little higher in view of the most

-26-

10/1/85

recent background of something less than that--that is, coming out of
this meeting and seeing it trade at 8 to 8-1/4 percent?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not particularly during a period when the
dollar is weak.
I would if the dollar were surging up; I would not
under today's conditions in the market.
If we were having a great
test on the up side, we would not choose those days for making any
tightening move.
If anything, we would resolve our doubts in the
other direction, if that's the direction we think we are going.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, since funds haven't traded above 8 percent
in recent times, moving above 8 percent may provide a message of

sorts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not saying we aim above 8
percent.
I would accept something like, say, $500 million, which is
the figure most people picked one way or another as the center of
gravity. And that's where we would aim as a kind of starting point.
MR. PARTEE.

And that ought to be about 8 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It would be 8 percent or a little below, I
would guess. We don't know; we often get caught in just implementing
policy during the week that things do not turn out the way we expected
because of a bad projection or for some other reason. How frozen are
you to pushing toward $500 million if it is above $500 million and the
market is already easing or vice versa?
I don't think this is a
period when we want to give these day-to-day signals that may be
contrary to our basic intention, in an effort to get a lower or a
higher [borrowed] reserve figure because that is mechanically what we
are supposed to be hitting.
I guess what I am saying is that this is
an operating technique. The basic point remains.
We meet fairly
soon, of course, for our next meeting. But if everything or the great
weight of evidence was in one direction or another, these directives
always call for changing the center of gravity either in an easing or
a tightening direction.
I say an easing or a tightening direction,
but my own suspicion is that I wouldn't expect either, outside of that
Given how high the money supply already is,
range I talked about.
given that the dollar is moving lower, given a little better feeling
about the economy, I would be prepared to tighten if all those things
came down in that direction. Well, I don't think we'd do anything
drastic in the next 5 weeks but we could lean more consistently toward
the $600 million than less.
MR. PARTEE.

It is just five weeks before the next meeting?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BERNARD.
MR. PARTEE.

So I am told by the Secretary.

Yes, this is the shortest interval of the year.
Good.

Good timing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, we could always have a
consultation in between, and I would presume we would if we were going
to make a really big change.
It's hard for me to conceive of--I
shouldn't be so flat-footed.
I should say I would be surprised if we
wanted to go below $400 million or above $600 million as the center of
gravity, as opposed to in a particular week in the next five weeks.

10/1/85

There is going to be quite a bit of difference,
MR. BALLES.
Mr. Chairman, between the lower end and the upper end of that range in
terms of the tone of the markets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know.

We went from $400 to $500

million with no change in the tone of the markets.
MR. BALLES.

It's a pretty wide range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If Mr. Corrigan's banks have computer

problems, or at least alleged computer problems, they borrow more for
a week than we do with all our open market operations.

MS. SEGER.

Maybe we can sabotage computers!

That would be

worse.
MR. BOEHNE.
don't need to help!

They have enough potential on their own; we

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that connection, I'll make an ad hoc
comment--not about computer problems in particular. This happens
mostly with a handful of very large banks: They waltz in at 5:30 on a
Wednesday afternoon when the funds rate has been 7-1/2 or 7-3/4
percent all day and it gets to 9 percent at 5:30 on Wednesday
afternoon and they say very conveniently "Whoops, we're in overdraft
I think they ought to be told to go
and we want to borrow from you."
shove it.
MR. BLACK.

Certainly couldn't be more descriptive!

MS. SEGER.

They are just profit-maximizers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will modify that comment; I'd tell them
the next time they can go shove it. But, we have this question of the
directive. What we are talking about in terms of the numbers in the
directive is alternative B. I think we are saying "maintain." There
is this question we need to deal with about whether we say that we
expect M1 to exceed the range for the year. Obviously, that seems
highly probable although less certain this minute. I don't think it's
absolutely certain--highly probable but not absolutely certain--if we
get a big decline in October. I think some are in favor of changing
that if we are [positive]; maybe we should face up to that if we are.
It raises the question of whether we should say so publicly. I
haven't any very convenient occasion to do that right now; I would
If we
hate to go out and make a special announcement just on this.
do, it lends itself directly to the interpretation that we picked this
particular time to ease policy because of the exchange market
situation, which I think would be unfortunate. I don't think we want
to give that impression. So we're caught in a dilemma. We may face
this as a fact, but it's a bit awkward. We may have a probable
occurrence, but is it that much more apparent this month instead of
last month, let's say. that we are compelled to make an announcement?
It's almost bound to be misinterpreted, simply because it will be
interpreted in the light of this exchange market.
MR. PARTEE. I think we could hold this for five weeks, Paul,
by which time we will know whether October--

10/1/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly true, and that would
take care of this announcement.
MR. BALLES.
I for one would agree that this would be a bad
time to make an announcement.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's leave this out then.
But if
we are even more convinced 5 weeks from now, then we ought to decide
it.
Now, I'm not sure I looked at all these variants that closely,
but the main theme is what: not sticking M1 in the same sentence with
the others?
MR. MARTIN. I think variant II is a little more direct.
It's a considerably more direct expression of what we actually have
been doing, Paul, and I think it commends itself because it is direct.
And it starts off with the aggregates; it doesn't leave them out.
MR. BLACK. I think it's a more accurate description of what
we have been doing, but the old one gave the aggregates more primacy
and I'd hate to see that lost. But I sure agree with you that it's
more [descriptive of] what we've been doing.
MR. WALLICH. I like the first variant. Whether [or not]
it's what we have been doing, I think it points to what we should be
doing.
MR. PARTEE.
we ought to-MR. BOEHNE.

I think variant II is so much more honest that

Yes, we ought to take a chance and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me have a short recess for 15 seconds
to understand what the difference is between these variants.
The
first sentence is the same.

yes.

MR. AXILROD. The first sentence is meant to be the same,
There may be typos; that's different.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess there is no difference between
them, but shouldn't it say the degree of pressure on reserve positions
"sought in recent weeks"?
MR. AXILROD.

Well, I assumed--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Didn't we have this small change?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I assumed we hit the $500 million. In
the past we have used "sought" when we didn't get what we were aiming
for.
But whichever way, it doesn't matter.

are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just see where the changes
"This action is expected to be consistent with--"

MR. AXILROD.
The next two sentences may be expressed
differently, but they are meant to be the same in that there is an M2
and M3 sentence and an M1 sentence. The difference comes after that.

10/1/85

-29-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have no differences between them
in the first three sentences.
MR. AXILROD. That's right.
The difference is that the
"somewhat greater or somewhat lesser restraint," instead of being
confined only to the monetary aggregates and viewed in the context of
everything else, pertains to the monetary aggregates and everything
else all the same. And there is a little change in the last sentence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
said in three sentences.
MR. AXILROD.

We're combining in one sentence what we

Yes, that's right.

MR. BLACK. I think people would read that second variant as
saying that we are targeting nominal GNP, which is what I'm afraid
we're doing. I wouldn't want to be accused of dishonesty, since Chuck
said this is more honest, but-MR. PARTEE.

[Unintelligible]

MR. BOEHNE.

The aggregates are listed first in the sentence.

MR. BLACK.

the exchange rate too.

Yes, but they sure are downgraded from where they

were.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can exaggerate the
difference between these two variants. The fact is that the second
one is somewhat less cumbersome.
MR. BLACK.

That's what markets do when we change--

MR. AXILROD.
I took the words "monetary objectives and
related reserve paths" out of the last sentence and substituted
"reserve conditions" since that's what the Manager is operating on.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

It says you're going for them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it seems to me either of these
versions ought to say "sought in recent weeks" in sentence number one
since we did change it, however modestly, during the last period. And
we're talking about "maintain" I think. What are we putting in here
in either version?
What do we say-MR. PARTEE.

6-3/4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

6 to 7 percent?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Is that--

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Annual rates of "about 6 to 7 percent" or
"6 to 7 percent"?
With 6 to 7 percent, does anybody want an "about"
or "around" in there?
MR. MARTIN.

Use "about."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.,

in case we get lucky.

"About 6 to 7 percent" for both of them.

-30-

10/1/85

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"M1 growth is expected to slow--."
Heavens, I don't know whether it is going to slow.
MR. PARTEE.

No, it's expected to slow and then--

MR. MARTIN.

6-1/2 percent in "B."

MR. KEEHN.
growth is expected?
SPEAKER(?).

Do we really want to say a marked slowing of M1

Sure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOEHNE.

It leaves it plenty open there.

That's variant II.

MR. FORRESTAL.

That's variant II.

MR. PARTEE.

It's certainly "marked" compared to where it has

MR. MARTIN.

Down 11 or 12--

been.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

My version doesn't say anything about

marked.
SPEAKER(?).

I think it's in variant II.

SPEAKER(?).

I thought you wanted variant II.

MR. MARTIN.

In variant II,

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

it's the sixth line from the top.

He's on variant I.

Oh, I'm sorry.

Okay.

MR. KEEHN. Couldn't we say something like "It's entirely
possible that M1 growth might slow"?
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. BLACK.

But then again it may not.
On the one hand, we hope so but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
marked decline.

Okay, I guess we really are expecting a

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARTEE.
MR. BLACK.

Yes.

Even 11-Even I think it will be a marked decline.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we want to say here:
percent or something?
Everything is 6 to 7 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

6 to 7

It will be all right or all wrong.

-31-

10/1/85

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We took out this sentence. What do people
think about that?
"Slower growth would be appropriate--"
SPEAKER(?).

"Would be acceptable."

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARTEE(?).
MR. RICE.

"Acceptable."

It would be acceptable to me.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You want to put it back in?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It applies to Ml?

Yes, just M1.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I kind of like that, if the word
"acceptable" were put in place of "appropriate."
MR. AXILROD.

We meant that to apply to both variants; that

was the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It would have a semicolon or something.
Let me ask you the question: I wouldn't say "even"-MR. PARTEE.

I wouldn't either.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it's "slower growth over the next three
months would be acceptable"-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
--"in the context of satisfactory economic
Do you want that phrase "given the recent rapid growth"
performance."
in?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I like it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not hearing any dissents on that, so
that phrase goes in either version. Now, we have "somewhat greater or
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable" with a number of
alternatives here. Who prefers variant II?
MR. MARTIN.

Seger.

It's more direct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only two people, Governors Martin and
Add Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, "somewhat greater or lesser reserve
restraint" is in both of them.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just skipping from that to
simply who wants to combine three sentences into one sentence.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'm indifferent.

Mr. Keehn, did you have your hand up?

10/1/85

-32-

MR. KEEHN. No, I'm having a very difficult time determining
the differences between these two.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll rephrase it.
I would declare there
is no difference in substance, as near as I can see.
But the change
is considered by some, and I think it's probably true, more accurate
and a better [representation of] what we're actually doing.
MR. MARTIN.

It's certainly more economical.

MR. KEEHN. I think that might be fine. But I really do have
a bit of a problem with this phrase, "marked slowing of M1 growth" in
variant II.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, no.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's out.
It's in.

Oh, that's right.

Yes, that is in.

Why are you troubled with that?

MR. KEEHN. I suppose what you're saying is that even if it
goes from 20 percent to 15 percent, 5 percent is a significant amount.
But that, I think, has a kind of improper implication. I just think
it would be better if we were a bit vaguer on that, say, "It's
entirely possible that Ml"-MR. BALLES.
Mr. Chairman, one reason for taking variant I is
that the Fed watchers are going to be looking for the slightest clue
that we're somehow stuck or are precluded from tightening up or even
are on an easier money kick. For the very reason that you didn't want
to change the announced ranges for the second half of the year, I
would argue against moving away from that traditional language, even
though there may be a more accurate [description] of what we're doing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's a fair consideration.
I'm not sure they can read too much into this except less emphasis on
What do you have besides the [unintelligible] variant
the aggregates.
II?
I'm not hung up on this because we've gone too many months in
which there has been the proviso that [unintelligible] has been
operative since 1979.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But if we have that sentence that
says "a marked slowing in M1 growth to a 6 percent annual rate is
anticipated" with the clause that says "somewhat more of a slowdown
would be acceptable," technically that finesses not having to announce
abandoning the ranges here either because it leaves open that
possibility.
So I think that we need both the sentence and the
semicolon phrase or else we're really cheating on not saying anything
about the paragraph that we already agreed [not to consider] until
five weeks from now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I asked how many preferred variant
II.
Maybe a lot of people are neutral here. How many have a distinct
preference for variant I?
[Secretary's note:
Messrs. Balles and
Black.]
About as many votes as for variant II.
How many--

-33

10/1/85

MR. BLACK.

care?

How many people don't give a whit?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
That's a majority.
MR. BOEHNE.

That's another way.

How many people don't

The Chairman's choice.

MR. BLACK.
I think John Balles has a good point on the
market's reaction to any change. Partly I think it's a good point
because I tried to make that same point earlier and-MR. PARTEE.

You were the two who held up your hands.

MR. MARTIN.
I think it's better to say to the market what
they already know we're doing rather than hang on to what
[unintelligible] short-run picture.
I must say that at this point it doesn't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I guess I'm with all those who stuck up
make any difference to me.
their hands in the middle, but IMR. RICE.
MR. MARTIN.
not say what is?

Let's have a variant III.
Credibility is something of believability.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
interpretation of--

Why

This is subject to the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need one of those fancy electronic
gadgets that people can squeeze so they can measure the intensity of
feelings.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Long term, we've advanced from
pragmatic monetarism to full-blown eclecticism.
MR. BLACK. Maybe we can weight the votes by the intensity of
the feeling and come up with an algebraic average of it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I'm trying to do. Who
feels intensely about this?
[Turning to Mr. Black] You're going to
vote against this, anyway, so-MR. BLACK. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is an argument I don't
want to win, obviously, because if I'm right we have done the wrong
thing. My objective is to do the right thing. So I hope I'm wrong.
Usually I don't hope I'm wrong on arguments, but I do on this one.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, okay. Just let me get an expression
--I realize it's no big deal--[of preferences].
How many would have
[Secretary's note:
One, two, three, four.
some preference for I?
Messrs. Balles, Black, Forrestal and Rice.]
How many would have some
preference for II?
Four.
[Secretary's note: Messrs. Keehn, Martin,
Partee and Ms. Seger.]
MR. PARTEE.

You get to decide it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Maybe I should read it more carefully.

10/1/85

-34-

MR. PARTEE.
something!

He acts this way when the Board splits on

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
twice, Governor Partee.

I've observed it myself once or

MR. BLACK. Run it by Joe Coyne and let him tell you how the
news media would or could react, and I guess-MR. COYNE.

I don't think they'll see any difference.

MR. BLACK.

Well, hush!

That's the wrong answer!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But you have to understand that the
staff spent all day Thursday and Friday making these variants look
different!
MR. MARTIN.

Until we've made them look the same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
subject, Mr. Axilrod?

Do you have any comment about this

MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, a technical reading of the
first variant says that the Committee will tighten or ease depending
on what happens in the aggregates and they'll assess that in the
context of the other things.
The only slight substantive difference I
can see is that a technical reading of the second variant says you
could tighten or ease even if the aggregates were on track, depending
I think that's what the Committee
on what happens to other things.
pretty much has been doing recently and this was just a sentence that
attempted to say that.
You have to stretch your reading of the first
The
variant a bit to have that in, but of course it encompasses it.
only other difference was that in the last sentence it says "pursuit
of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period
before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a funds
rate..." and I short-circuited that to just "reserve conditions"
because the monetary objectives were cast in with other things--for
obvious reasons.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I just thought of adding three words
here that make them maybe exactly the same, but more condensed. Leave
it variant II, but after the first comma--after "depending on the
behavior of the aggregates" add "taking account of" before "appraisals
of the strength in business expansion, developments in foreign
exchange markets," etc.
MR. BALLES.

That would be better.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
improvement?

Does that strike anybody as an

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. RICE.

Sure.

Yes, I think it does.

Right; that takes care of it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right.
Let's just do it that way.
Add these words "taking account of."
Does that make it--

10/1/85

-35-

MR. PARTEE.

That does make it very much like the first

variant.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And then for the federal funds rate I
guess we're sticking with 6 to 10 percent, right?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But you have that phrase in there
that says that "slower growth of M1 is acceptable"?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. What we have is take out the word
"existing" and say "maintain the degree of pressure on reserve
positions sought in recent weeks."
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"This action is expected to be consistent
with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from September to December at
annual rates of 6 to 7 percent. A marked slowing in M1 growth to a 6
to 7 percent annual rate is also anticipated; slower growth over the
next three months would be acceptable"--not appropriate, but
acceptable--"in the context of satisfactory economic performance,
Somewhat greater or lesser
given recent very rapid growth in M1.
Do we
That's right, we didn't discuss that.
reserve restraint...."
just leave in the somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint
respectively?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, take out the parenthetic phrase and
continue: "Somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable depending on behavior of the aggregates, taking account of
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, developments in
foreign exchange markets" and so forth. Then "The Chairman may call
for consultation if it appears that reserve conditions...are likely to
be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range
of 6 to 10 percent."
Now, I take it that's a common denominator. We
have this little discretion of day-to-day or week-to-week operational
flexibility around $500 million influenced--not solely--but influenced
by exchange market problems in the context of these other
developments. And certainly, if we were really aiming in a semipermanent way as high as $600 million or as low as $400 million--as
opposed to a weekly decision to go to one of those numbers--we would
just have a consultation. Understood?
I guess we can vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
President Balles
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Martin
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

10/1/85

-36-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. I guess we're finished.
We meet again in five weeks. Lunch is over in the other building.
MR. BERNARD.

Dining Room F.
END OF MEETING

