Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July

5-6,

1995

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,

on Wednesday, July 5,

continued on Thursday, July 6, 1995,
PRESENT:

1995,

at

2:30 p.m.,

and

at 9:00 a.m.

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
Lindsey
Melzer

Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter,
Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman, and
Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson. Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Messrs. Clouse 1/ and Roberts, 1/ Economists,
Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research
and Statistics, respectively, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Governors
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum,
Sniderman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia,
Dallas, Cleveland, and Atlanta, respectively
Ms. Krieger and Mr. Miller, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
Minneapolis, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
July 5-6, 1995
July 5, 1995--Afternoon Sesion
MR. BERNARD. The acoustics in this room leave much to be
desired, so you are urged to speak as much as possible directly into
I'd like
the mikes. I have to say that I have an interest in this.
to circulate later a transcript that does not have too many gaps in
it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If anyone heard that, it fundamentally
disproves his proposition, there being no microphone sitting in front
[Laughter]
of Norm!
MR. BLINDER.

Make sure none of them is an 18-1/2 minute gap!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the minutes?
SEVERAL.

Who would like to move the approval of

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

Peter Fisher, you

are on.
MR. FISHER.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Peter?

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I have two, Peter. First, could you just
quickly repeat the part about the Mexican transaction?
MR. FISHER. For value today, the Mexicans are drawing an
additional $2.5 billion on the medium-term facility. That brings to
$10.5 billion the amount that has been drawn on the facility the
Mexicans have with the Treasury. For several months we and the
Treasury each have had outstanding $1 billion drawings on our
respective short-term swap lines with the Mexicans. Those remain
outstanding; the drawings have three-month maturities. We have rolled
them over once. I would expect, because I have heard nothing to the
contrary, to be asked to roll them over again on August 1. That would
be the second renewal. In our agreement with the Treasury, there
could be a third rollover of the three-month swap in the fall.
MR. LINDSEY. Second question: There seems to be a decline
in the amount of liquidity in the foreign exchange markets brought
about particularly by redemptions by hedge funds and others. Do you
think that has implications for the efficacy of intervention down the
road? If the private sector has fewer poker chips, might we actually
see intervention become more successful?
MR. FISHER. That's a very important and difficult question.
I would put the emphasis slightly differently than you. I think the
interbank community has been reducing its risk appetite and has been
quite nervous not just in the last period but for the whole six months
of this year. It's that reduction in the risk-taking appetite of the
dealer community that makes it particularly difficult for hedge funds
to operate in their traditional style. Now, the fact that there might

7/5-6/95

be smaller positions in the market--and we have some confirmation of
that--can cut either way on the efficacy of intervention. If people
are closer to neutral, it's harder to catch them far off guard-leaning far the wrong way. On the other hand, if positions are
smaller and people are slightly off guard, it may be easier to
frighten them back to neutral. There is not much science to that
assertion and a lot of feel. I think there is something to your
point, but there could be occasions where it would be harder to
intervene effectively because everyone is sitting happily at neutral
in terms of their own risk appetite.
MR. LINDSEY. We only know about the individual withdrawals-I guess they are called redemptions. Do we have any sense at all of
how big the market is and how much it has shrunk?
MR. FISHER. We have a survey on turnover in the foreign
exchange market, based on April data. We still don't have all the
data, but it will give us a three-year to three-year snapshot. The
better comparison is to talk to the major interbank firms to get a
sense of foreign exchange market liquidity and what is happening to
their volume. In the last month it has certainly been thin. There is
some variance among firms; different banks have had good months and
bad months this year, and I don't feel confident that we can say
something definitive about turnover in the foreign exchange markets
this six months as contrasted with the first six months of 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Peter, I want to follow up on what you said
about Mexico, because something went by me awfully fast there. You
said the Treasury has monetized SDRs to fund the Mexican drawing. Can
you explain that a little?
MR. FISHER. One of the resources of the ESF is SDRs.
The
process of monetizing them and presenting them to us--let me say if I
am explaining something wrong, Sandy, please bail me out--we take them
in and they get dollars for them. And that is the major-MR. TRUMAN.

They sell us SDR certificates.

MR. FISHER. They sell us the SDR certificates; they get the
dollars and we have the SDR certificates. That then is an injection
of liquidity that we have to worry about and sterilize as we would any
other form of intervention in that sense. So, that's the process of
providing them dollars:
monetizing the SDRs.
MR. JORDAN. But we, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, own
our respective shares of these SDR certificates based on the capital
of our banks?
MR. TRUMAN.

Right.

How are we informed that we own them?
MR. JORDAN.
my bank informed that we now have that in our portfolio?

How is

MR. KOHN. It's published on the weekly H.4.1 statement; I
don't know whether there is a separate internal notification. There

7/5-6/95

already are $8 billion of special drawing rights outstanding in
addition to the $11 billion of gold stock.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think President Jordan is asking
whether somebody is going to call him up and say "You have just become
the proud possessor of an increased amount of SDR certificates."
He
is asking:
"What's on my bank's liability side?"
MR. FISHER.

Initially, it would--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless the New York Bank is holding them
all and the increase is offset by deposits at the Fed wholly in New
York-MR. TRUMAN.

The Treasury balance goes up.

MR. FISHER. The mathmatical way is that the Treasury balance
goes up, as we are all saying. That's the narrow answer. But the
Chairman is asking-MR. KOHN. And then we sell government securities, as they
draw down the balance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not the question I am asking. If
the liquification were wholly an issue of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York taking onto its books an SDR certificate and crediting the
Treasury account for the $2 billion, then the transaction is complete
and the Cleveland Bank goes its merry way and nothing happens. I
think the question is: Are any of those certificates going to show up
throughout the System and what are the transactions on the liability
side and against whom--the New York Bank, the Treasury, or what?
MR. KOHN. The current SDRs are distributed throughout the
System the way every other asset is.
MR. FISHER.
System Open Market--

I may be missing the point, but in terms of the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
liquification-MR. TRUMAN.

No, the point is that the

What's on the liability side?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Treasury takes its SDR certificate,
gives it to the Federal Reserve, which simultaneously places the SDR
certificate on the asset side of our consolidated balance sheet and
increases the Treasury deposit on the liability side. That's what
happens to the consolidated system. President Jordan is asking what
happens among Federal Reserve institutions? If you are going to
allocate SDR certificates to the various Banks, then what appears on
the liability side? Are we creating a deposit for the Treasury on all
twelve Banks?
Is it a transfer from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York? What actually is done?
MS. MINEHAN.
account.

It's done through the inter-District settlement

7/5-6/95

MR. KOHN. It could be the inter-District settlement account;
Cathy says it is.
But the other point, Mr. Chairman, is that that
deposit never shows up. The Treasury knows in advance that it is
going to get $2 billion. It doesn't call $2 billion of funds in from
the commercial banks. So, the Treasury deposit is $5 billion or $7
billion or whatever it is the Treasury is targeting that day.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This has nothing to do with commercial
banks. This is basically a Federal Reserve crediting of the Treasury
account for the amount of the SDR certificates.
funds.

MR. KOHN. Right. Then the Treasury doesn't call in the
The Treasury's account--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
funds to Mexico.
MR. KOHN.

No, the Treasury then disburses those

On the same day.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
assets on the balance sheet?

Wouldn't we just have a change of

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. In other words the check is then
drawn on the Treasury account, if you want to put it that way, and
will end up in the Fed account for foreign central banks, or whatever
we do with it.
MR. KOHN.

Maybe.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. But on the Cleveland bank's account
their share of SDRs goes up and another asset goes down, right?
MR. KOHN. That other asset is Treasury securities tHat Peter
sells to offset the increase in SDRs.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
balance sheet.

That's what happens to Cleveland's

MR. KOHN. And it happens the same day. The Treasury's
balance at the Federal Reserve never changes, whether the SDRs are
issued or not. They target that at a given number; they know in
advance what it is. They don't raise cash; they don't sell bills.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So ceteris paribus, the total on
Cleveland's balance sheet stays the same? SDRs go up and Treasury
securities go down.
MR. JORDAN. You sterilize immediately so that our share of
the Treasury portfolio goes down by the same amount at the same
moment?
MR. KOHN.
MR. TRUMAN.

Right.
If I could just add one other factor--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
transaction.

I'm still not sure I understand this

7/5-6/95

MR. FISHER.

We will endeavor to have a simplified--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We still haven't discussed how the money
gets to Mexico, where it is, and who draws the check. It's an
interesting issue that I will reraise outside of this meeting, unless
somebody needs to know. Maybe you already understand all this.
MR. TRUMAN. One more fact is that this is a case in which
the Federal Reserve has no choice as to whether it accepts SDRs.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I understand that.

MR. TRUMAN. In a lot of other transactions with the
Treasury, the Federal Reserve has some choice. But the law says, I
think, that the Secretary of the Treasury may issue SDR certificates
and the Federal Reserve shall accept them. Period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we shift U.S. Treasury securites from
our account to Mexico? Never mind!
MR. FISHER.
interested parties.

We will endeavor to clarify it for all

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Actually, I had a related question. I was
curious about the same thing Jerry raised. Do we end up with an
earning asset? Is there a way to earn anything on the SDRs that we
hold or is that, in effect, a nonearning asset?
SPEAKER(?).

It's nonearning.

MR. JORDAN. We reduce our earnings. When you're clarifying
this, another question is:
This is a repurchase agreement, right?
It's outright.

MR. TRUMAN.

No.

SPEAKER(?).

It's an outright purchase.

MR. TRUMAN. Like gold certificates, it's an outright
purchase; there are no repurchase agreements on the gold certificates.
They are required to redeem them under some circumstances.
MR. JORDAN. This differs from my understanding, then,
because in February or March or whenever, my understanding when we
were going to take yen or deutschemarks-MR. FISHER.

That would be warehousing.

MR. TRUMAN.

That's warehousing.

MR. JORDAN. You are saying this is not warehousing, this is
not a repurchase agreement? So, this is permanent.
MR. MCDONOUGH.
MR. TRUMAN.

Correct.

Permanent, yes.

7/5-6/95

MR. MCDONOUGH.
MR. JORDAN.

It's an acquisition of an asset, not a swap.

I didn't know that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.

Any further questions for Peter?

MR. MOSKOW.

This is on another subject.

MR. FISHER.

I want to thank you!

MR. MOSKOW. Peter, I was on the "morning call" this morning
and one of the subjects was the fed funds futures rate. My
recollection from this morning was that the fed funds futures rate is
now indicating a 60 or 65 percent probability of a 25 basis point cut
in the fed funds rate this month. I was just wondering how that ties
in with what you were saying here this morning.
MR. FISHER. I think we heard the same thing from the same
sources at different times this morning. Looking through the pricing
of the contract and the different time horizons one has to adjust for,
there is a 60ish percent probability, if you read it literally, of a
move early in the month--meaning now. And there is an implied
probability closer to 100 percent of a 25 basis point easing by the
end of the month. Without going too far into the gymnastics of it,
that's how one interprets 14 basis points on a contract that settles
near the end of the month, given the different probabilities and
different time horizons.
MR. MOSKOW. But I thought I heard you saying that the
majority of the opinion in the market was that there would not be a
move.
MR. FISHER. Yes.
I was trying to offer a note of caution
about whether you should read that price literally as saying that
everyone in the market has agreed that those are the probabilities
attached to a move or whether it's a clearing price between some who
have a much higher sense of confidence that there will be a move
earlier in the month and others who don't think there will be a move
this month at all. There is room for all sorts of interpretations as
to whether a given basis point implication in the fed funds contract
indicates a consensus view or a range of different views that find a
clearing price.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think I've got it!
[Laughter]
You
are telling me that the SDR certificate comes out of the Treasury and
we cancel the Treasury obligation and it is wholly an asset swap so
that the debt to the public of the U.S. Treasury goes down by that
amount. Is that what happens?
That solves President Jordan's
[Laughter]
problem too!
MR. JORDAN. Can I follow up on that? The same thing
happened when we changed the price of an ounce of gold from $35 to $38
The Treasury got a windfall of about $1 billion
and then to $42.22.
to $1.2 billion in both of those so-called devaluations. So an issue
What was the dollar price of SDRs that we monetized? You
on this is:
say I have an asset on my balance sheet and I don't know what the
value of it is.

7/5-6/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
price of gold.
MR. JORDAN.

It's about $42.

It's $42.22;

it's equivalent to the official

We do this at the official U.S. Treasury price

of gold?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you mean that we can lower the debt
to the public by moving the price of gold up to the market price?
That could cut the debt back by a not insignificant amount!
MR. JORDAN. I have been trying not to mention that publicly
for fear that someone might want to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
mentioned it.
MR. JORDAN.

It's probably too late; we just

It will become known five years from now!

MR. LINDSEY. Five years from now, it will be read in the
transcript for this meeting.
MR. BLINDER.

By which time it already will have been done.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter?
If
not, would somebody like to move to ratify the foreign currency
transactions during the intermeeting period?
SPEAKER(?).

I so move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Similarly, would
somebody like to move to ratify the domestic open market operations?
MR. MCDONOUGH.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then let's move on to the Chart Show
with Messrs. Prell, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Johnson.
MR. PRELL.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. SIMPSON.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. SLIFMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MS. JOHNSON.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. That was a very
interesting around-the-world evaluation. Questions for our
colleagues?
MR. BROADDUS. Tom, could you briefly describe how that model
that you mention on the bottom of Chart 8 is set up?
I'm not sure I
followed it.
MR. SIMPSON. This is an exercise using the quarterly
macroeconometric model. What is assumed here is that you are willing
to lock in inflation basically at current or recent levels and to hold

7/5-6/95

output at potential. Then, in the case of the so-called baseline
here, we are taking the CBO's current raw estimate of the fiscal
deficit. So basically, the things I just mentioned are exogenous to
the model:
the fiscal deficit as well as the inflation rate and the
output levels you are assumed to accept. Then we solve for the
federal funds rate. Basically, it's the long bond rate that is
driving spending and it's the funds rate or the bill rate and other
short-term rates that have the biggest influence on the bond rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I want to follow up on that same chart, Tom.
If I'm reading this right, it says that if the bond market, looking
forward, feels that lower future debt is going to lead to lower future
real interest rates, the fed funds rate stays fixed for four or five
years. Is that what it says literally?
MR. SIMPSON.

Yes, right.

MR. BLINDER. That means that rates on instruments with
maturities up to four or five years ought not to fall. Isn't that
right?
MR. SIMPSON.
MR. BLINDER.
happened recently.

Yes.
But this doesn't look a lot like what has

MR. SIMPSON. No. I might also point out that in this
exercise the simulation starts in the second quarter. It doesn't
start in the third quarter, so it doesn't acknowledge the large
declines that we had in the second quarter.
MR. BLINDER.

Right.

MR. SIMPSON. But you're right. In the model, the longerterm rates that relate to housing and capital spending are driving the
economy. The decline in the shorter maturities would not have that
much effect on spending in the model.
MR. BLINDER. Does it follow that expected future deficit
reductions should not move rates on intermediate maturities--say, twoyear, three-year, four-year maturities? What you just said is that if
the ten-year rate stays fixed, those maturities won't have much effect
on spending, right?
MR. SIMPSON.

That's in the eyes of the model.

MR. BLINDER. Yes, absolutely, that's right. The other
question I had was for Karen. In all of the G-7 economies--or rather
the G-6, leaving out the United States--the forecast is for growth in
the near term to accelerate by various amounts over what it recently
has been. Presumably, in all the cases except Japan--and, heaven
knows, maybe even in Japan--there will be fiscal consolidation over
the next two years. You mentioned it in some cases. What does this
imply about monetary policy and interest rates in those countries?

7/5-6/95

MS. JOHNSON. We actually have explicit interest rate paths
built into what we have to say about these countries. I guess I would
invert the question just a bit.
I will deal with Europe first and
return to Canada. These are countries that, as we perceive it, were
exhibiting considerable momentum around the end of last year and even
into early this year. So, the questions I ask myself are:
What has
slowed these economies in the first half of 1995 and will that
persist?
Will policy action be needed to stimulate those economies?
In some cases that may be, but I think the answer that we get for some
of these countries is "no."
For example, in Germany the impact of the
tax surcharge, which for reasons that I can't fully explain did not
seem to have been anticipated, was not visible in the earlier data.
But when the tax surcharge went into effect in early 1995, one does
see it in the data; we expect to see that reversed in early 1996 when
other taxes are reduced. Some effect of the exchange rate
appreciation is certainly a piece of the story in Germany and maybe
even in France, but there are flip sides of that in Italy and in the
United Kingdom. We got GDP for Italy this morning, for example, and
it was very strong in the first quarter. So, I guess what I am left
with by way of describing our forecast is to say that a piece of this
policy story is that the tightening that we thought would come on line
early in 1995 has been postponed. And that, in a sense, is monetary
easing relative to the baseline from which we were starting. And at
least several of the factors that we see as explaining the slowdown in
the first half of 1995 we view as having transitory characteristics.
They are either already built in, as in the case of the German taxes,
or are not seen as persistent enough to require a real policy
response.
Canada is quite different. The drop in Canada was far
stronger than I think I can rationalize in these terms.
It was
related in part to the U.S. economy, but it certainly was of an
amplitude far greater than we experienced in the United States. I
suspect that there will be a need for more monetary policy easing in
Canada for recovery really to take hold again. We have seen actions
by the Bank of Canada already, so I think some of that monetary easing
will in fact be forthcoming.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, I have a question, not specifically about
something that came up in the Chart Show but about a paragraph that
jumped out at me in the Bluebook, and I thought you might want to
comment on it. There is a reference to a change in the NAIRU; it is
now 5.9 percent in terms of your analysis. My recollection is that
the very thick study that was done several years ago came up with a
number of 6.1 percent. Would you explain what elements have changed
to produce this? Obviously, longer term, it does have policy
significance. Secondly, there is a footnote indicating that there are
no adjustments for demographics. I think Kansas City found out how
interesting it is to talk publicly about such demographics estimates!
They clearly are relevant in terms of estimating what the NAIRU is
likely to be in the future. Are we going to get another thick study
about this or a little more detail about how this change was made?
MR. PRELL. I guess it would be a fair request at some point
for us to do another thick study.

-10-

7/5-6/95

MR. PARRY.

A thin one would be even better!

[Laughter]

MR. PRELL. One of the problems of comparing past studies
with where we are now is the change in the current population survey.
Even at this point we have some degree of uncertainty about how to
translate today's unemployment rate into pre-1994 terms.
So, that can
be one ingredient in a comparison of old NAIRUs to new NAIRUs. As we
have gone along, we have had to adjust our sights on what this is and
now we also are trying to incorporate the experience over the past
year and a half with respect to wages and prices and trying to surmise
whether we might have been too high or too low. We have inched down a
bit our working assumption about where the NAIRU is--the number around
which our price forecast, in effect, pivots. At this point we are
talking 5.9 percent; it is a little lower than it was previously. The
allusion to demographic adjustments in the Bluebook was merely to
recognize that, as we look out over the next five years, there will be
compositional changes in the labor force and there could be movements
in the NAIRU as a consequence. For this kind of schematic
presentation, though, we thought such adjustments would greatly
complicate matters and get us into areas of increasing uncertainty to
try to maneuver them over the five-year span that we were portraying.
But we wanted to alert you that there were a number of subtleties that
we didn't address in this and that you shouldn't be thinking
necessarily that the 5.9 percent unemployment rate would be the
pivotal rate for each of the next five years.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I have a couple of questions. I'm not sure
whether the first one is for Mike or for Tom. Going back to Chart 8
on real interest rates and fiscal scenarios and so on and comparing
that with a statement in the Greenbook, I'd like a little further
elaboration. You make references to what you call fiscal restraint.
I understand what that is supposed to mean. But as you describe it in
the Greenbook, fiscal restraint has the effect of lowering equilibrium
real rate . Normally, most people would think that lower interest
rates, real or nominal, mean easier monetary policy. So, a tighter
fiscal policy causes an easier monetary policy.
MR. PRELL.
MR.
JORDAN.

Let me interrupt you there.
Okay.

MR. PRELL. We wanted to make that as clear as we could--and
I guess w failed--or maybe we did do it as clearly as we could but
that wasn't clear enough! We didn't mean that adjustment in the
nominal rate, which we took to be a reflection of a change in the
natural r :e, to be viewed as monetary stimulus. In effect, it keeps
things neutral as the fiscal restraint tends to lower the natural
rate--the rate that would prevail when the economy was in a steady
state, operating at potential. I apologize if we confused you on that
score. In fact, what we were doing was recognizing something that I
think you raised at the last meeting about how high the real shortterm rate should be expected to be over the longer run and whether we
felt that 3 percent, or wherever the real rate is, was the sustainable
rate. I noted then that if we looked out several years that would

-11-

7/5-6/95

become a relevant consideration. I said that we felt it was higher
than the longer-run equilibrium or natural rate and that in prior
Bluebook simulations we had introduced a downward tilt. Since we were
going out a bit further with the Bluebook simulations and we were
building in a somewhat more substantial fiscal consolidation, we felt
that it would be appropriate for us to introduce that into this
forecast. So, that's how that should be interpreted.
MR. JORDAN. Okay, and I have absolutely no problems with
that. I do still have a little problem with the references to bond
If the bond market rallies
markets being adaptive. It's like saying:
enough, we don't have to lower the funds rate, and that gives me a
little problem. But let me hold that for a second. The Greenbook
says:
"We have introduced a downward tilt in the funds rate. This
decline in rates, though, should not be interpreted as implying any
impetus to aggregate demand," meaning that this downward movement
would equilibrate. I can read that statement to say also that because
the natural Wicksellian rate or some equilibrium real rate has moved
down, failure to move down the nominal rate would be a de facto more
restrictive policy stance.
MR. PRELL.

Assuming inflation expectations remain constant.

MR. JORDAN. So, whatever causes the equilibrium rate to move
down--fiscal policy, or God, or something--you would say, even though
the headlines may say a lower nominal rate is an easing, that failure
to lower the nominal rate is in fact more restrictive.
MR. PRELL.
MR. JORDAN.

That's right.
Okay.

MR. PRELL.
I should emphasize that, given our limited
ability to predict these relationships, the calibration of this is
clearly very uncertain. I think the point of Tom's presentation here,
which is a schematic one in a sense, is simply that if there are large
anticipatory reactions in the bond market, then you do not need to
move the short rate as aggressively in order to give a greater
stimulus to private investment spending. It's a simple point, and we
don't want to suggest by the precision of these charts that we can
calibrate that very neatly. Again, it's a broad conceptual issue and
one that, obviously, I would think you folks would want to contemplate
in thinking about where funds rates might be over time.
MR. JORDAN. I want to draw out this conceptual aspect.
I do
have a problem with this last point about the rally of the bond
market, but that's because I translate it into supply and demand for
And that's
reserves and what that might do in terms of quantities.
because I have a different framework. Let me hold that one, though,
because I don't want to take too much time and I want to ask Karen to
help me through thinking about something about Japan. You used the
word "deflation" and I know a number of Japanese commentators have
denied vigorously that they have deflation. I don't know what they
mean by that, but the word deflation in the abstract means that the
purchasing power of the yen is rising. I'm not sure whether that is
really what people have in mind when they say those things.

7/5-6/95

-12-

If you go back to the beginning of this decade, commercial
real estate prices were such that the Japanese would say such things
as that the land under the Imperial Palace was worth more than the
State of California. We would say "Yes and try to get it."
All the
stocks listed on the Nikkei, if aggregated, would have exceeded the
present value of GDP for the world. We thought it probably wasn't
true.
Or at that time a cantaloupe cost 70 U.S. dollars.
If you
think during the course of the decade that you are going to remove the
impediments to the workings of the market so that the law of one price
starts to operate in tradeable goods and asset prices and things like
that, then one of two things has to happen. The price of these
things, converted into the equivalent of some other currency, has to
fall either by a depreciation of the yen or by declines in absolute
yen prices. Whether it is proper to think about that as deflation or
not, I don't know. What else could happen? If the yen is not going
to fall in value on the exchange market, then our economics would tell
us that asset prices and goods prices had to move toward world levels.
How else could this adjustment possibly be made?
MS. JOHNSON. I did not mean to suggest any pejorative notion
by using the word "deflation." I meant it literally as just that the
rate of change of certain prices was negative. Now, it is certainly
true that it is happening in the goods sector because to some degree
what you described has happened. That is, we have opened up--a little
maybe--Japanese markets to world trade. For example, if you use
Japanese national income account data in real terms, the share of
imports to GDP has risen sharply. In that sense, imported goods and
the competitive pressures that they can apply through market phenomena
are having an effect of the sort you might want.
I'm not so sure that
I see that as much of an explanation for why land prices have been
falling and are still falling. Nor do I see it really as an
explanation for the stock market behavior. So, the asset price story,
which had its own special factors on the up side in the late 1980s--a
speculative bubble kind of story, fueled perhaps by what in retrospect
seems like a too easy monetary policy--has a different story on the
down side as well.
I am not particularly alarmed that Japanese goods
prices are responding to competitive pressures from the outside world.
I would think that it might be easier on all concerned if it happened
through an end to the upward pressures on the yen rather than through
falling prices of Japanese goods. But I am not aware of any rigidity
stories, for example, that suggest that because prices have some
downward rigidity all sorts of problems are being created. I am
merely suggesting that in that environment Japanese monetary policy
looks to be a bit tight, given what we know about capacity
utilization, the behavior of wages, and what is happening to asset
prices. All the pieces fit together to suggest that the stance of
monetary policy could be eased a bit in an effort to get that economy
growing again.
MR. JORDAN. I didn't think you were being pejorative but I
wondered about that policy conclusion. I don't see how what you
called fiscal stimulus, which I assume is more resources flowing
through the government or less taxes, or monetary stimulus is
necessarily called for. If what is happening is a breakdown of the
various types of impediments to the working of the marketplace in
Japan, one should think of that as a wealth gain for the Japanese
people. And other things the same, something that produces

-13-

7/5-6/95

miraculously a wealth gain would not lead to the conclusion that you
need an easier monetary policy.
MS. JOHNSON. True, but I am taking into account the other
things we know about what is going on in Japan.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Mike, I have a question that relates to current
activity. I have been struck by the fact that nonwithheld income tax
payments this April were about $20 billion higher than in each of the
two previous Aprils. I wondered what your assessment was as to the
impact of that on personal consumption expenditures this spring. Is
that a significant factor in your mind acting as a depressant?
MR. PRELL. It was one of the laundry list of factors that we
mentioned in our discussion of consumption in the Greenbook. It works
in the right direction. We certainly are not going to argue against
that as a possible drag on consumer expenditures.
While we are on the subject of consumer expenditures--and I
may get additional information later and I certainly would not want to
interrupt your discussion at that point--but assuming you were
interested in motor vehicle sales, Ford has released its data earlier
than we anticipated, so we now have Ford and GM, the Japanese
transplants, and a number of other manufacturers--that is, everyone
but Chrysler. The ones we have are essentially unchanged from May.
Chrysler has been indicating that they are fairly optimistic. They
actually have seen their numbers, so I assume that their numbers will
look fairly decent, and this would suggest that total light vehicle
sales in June will be unchanged to slightly higher, which would be
right in line with our forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for anybody?
somebody like to start our roundtable?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
volunteer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would

I can, if you don't have another

Go ahead.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
economy of the Second District remains weak, but earnings in the key
financial sector appear to be on the rebound. That bodes well for the
financial industry itself, for the service sectors which support it,
and for needed tax revenues in New York City and the states of New
York and New Jersey. Sales of existing homes are down from 1994 but
are less weak recently than in the first quarter; they are now down
about 5 percent as compared with 10 percent in earlier months. In the
most recent month, permits fell 10 percent in New York and 14 percent
in New Jersey, year over year. Payroll employment in May fell 1.2
percent in New York, reflecting cutbacks in local governments, and
payroll employment was flat in New Jersey. Retail sales in May are up
2 to 11 percent over last year depending on the region, and they seem
to be snapping back from disappointing sales in early spring.
On the national level, we see the economy working through the
present weakness and growing stronger in the second half, entering

7/5-6/95

-14-

1996 at about a 2-1/2 percent annual growth rate and achieving a 2-3/4
percent growth rate in 1996, Q4 to Q4.
We see CPI inflation somewhat
more pessimistically than the Greenbook at 3-1/4 percent in 1995 and
inching up to about 3-1/2 percent in 1996. You will recall that
traditionally we are rather bearish in our view of price trends. Not
surprisingly given the foregoing, we see the unemployment rate
reaching 6 percent this year and dropping back to about 5-3/4 percent
toward the end of 1996.
Looking only at the domestic economy, I believe that the
risks to our forecast and the risks to the Greenbook forecast are
rather well balanced. However, I am very concerned about the possible
dangers from what may be at least somewhat greater than projected
economic weakness abroad to considerably worse than that. I do not
say that the international part of the Greenbook is lacking in its
usual realism, but rather that the risks are mainly negative.
In the last several months I, like many of you, have had an
unusual number of Japanese visitors including

They would be less
optimistic than Karen Johnson on the growth of the Japanese economy in
the next year and a half. Manufacturers must invest in capacity
outside Japan to be competitive in world goods markets, leaving real
and disguised unemployment behind in a country that is not accustomed
to handling that problem. We believe the Japanese price data are
distorted on the up side, and therefore there may be price deflation
in the neighborhood of 2 to 4 percent. With few exceptions
institutions in the financial services sector--banks, securities
firms, and especially life insurance companies--have been severely
weakened by operating losses and bad debts. Land prices fell 20
percent in 1994, and I agree with Karen that the land prices are
likely to drop another 10 percent or so this year, at least that is
how I interpreted the graph. The paper profits of many firms are
largely gone at a Nikkei level of 14,000, which we are relatively
near, and at 12,000 they disappear altogether. The Bank of Japan
finds itself in the trap of low nominal and high real interest rates.
Monetary policy is tight,
A
series of fiscal packages has been inadequate to provide needed
stimulus. In the confused political situation, career bureaucrats
have both more power and more fear of using it. A downward spiral of
the real economy and the associated declines in financial--especially
equity--markets are possible and could have a serious negative effect
on world markets both directly and through generalized investor
concerns.
In Europe a not very robust recovery suffers from two
possible threats to European unity, which is the underpinning of
recovery in many European countries. Those two threats, it seems to
me, are the growing awareness of the difficulties of monetary union
and the possibility that an even worse conflict in former Yugloslavia
could separate the major European powers based on traditional and
conflicting friendships with the various protagonists.

-15-

7/5-6/95

The jury clearly is still out and the verdict uncertain on
the three major economies of Latin America--Mexico, Argentina, and
Brazil. Positive verdicts are largely reflected in financial markets.
I was in Brazil at the end of last week and met with the President,
his economic team, and leaders of the private financial sector.
Ongoing success of Brazil's Real Plan depends on superb financial
management and near magic in working constitutional reforms in the
fiscal area through a divided Congress. Among other things, the
members of Congress from the various states have to agree to reduce
the automatic division of tax revenues to those states, an act of
considerable political courage. Any problem in Brazil would almost
certainly mean further backsliding on their trade opening-particularly their Mercosur arrangements with their two small
neighbors and, of special interest to us, with Argentina. And
absolutely key to Argentina's ongoing success is market belief that
Argentina will benefit from exports to the much larger Brazilian
market. Private-sector investment, both domestic and foreign, is
based on that assumption, and the future of Mr. Cavallo's
convertibility plan in turn depends on private investment. Now, these
foreign risks may remain risks and not realities, and let us fervently
hope that is the case. However, the existence of these risks is of
particular concern as our domestic economy passes through the present
adjustment process when it is especially sensitive to shocks. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, most of the recent slowing in the
Twelfth District economy has been in fast growing states, including
Arizona, Idaho, Nevada, and Oregon. California has experienced less
of a slowdown than other states and continues to expand at a moderate
Several large local governments
pace, but from depressed levels.
within the state of California need to establish a path to longer-term
solvency. Los Angeles County recently proposed to curtail
expenditures severely.
Orange County is working to avert a short-term liquidity
crisis, but it is having difficulty resolving its insolvency. Because
Orange County voters rejected a proposed sales tax increase,
additional measures such as cuts in county spending will be required.
These recent developments have had surprisingly little impact on other
municipal issuers in California. However, a persistent premium on
California state debt suggests that the market expects the county's
problems eventually to revert in part to the state.
Turning to the national economy, I am somewhat more
pessimistic about the second quarter than the Greenbook. Our monthly
indicators model suggests that real GDP declined at a rate between
1 and 2 percent in the second quarter. It appears that a good deal of
this weakness reflects a small drop in final sales. While the economy
is flirting with recession, it seems more likely that real GDP and
final sales will increase somewhat in the third quarter and grow
moderately over the next year and a half. Our staff has used our
structural model to try to make sense of the unexpected surge in
growth last year, which has been followed by surprising weakness
recently. They found that in the latter half of 1994 household
spending came in well above levels predicted by historical
relationships with income, interest rates, and other variables.

-16-

7/5-6/95

Developments in the second quarter seem to bring these relationships
back more into line so that the recent declines may have been in
effect a payback for earlier strength in household spending. One
partial explanation could be that consumers accelerated purchases to
lock in interest rates in a period of rising rates. There certainly
were anecdotal reports of this happening in the housing market in
1994.
Finally, I might note that we have raised our inflation
forecast a bit for 1995, based on developments so far this year, but
we have marked it down a little for 1996 in view of the excess
capacity that is likely to develop later this year and the recent
deceleration in unit labor costs. Overall, the longer-term inflation
outlook seems to have improved in our view since we met in May. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, the economic data for New England
as for the nation indicate at least a pause in the recovery. The
anecdotal evidence is more positive. In sum, total employment,
housing activity, and confidence indexes have weakened in the region.
However, the jobless rate continues to drop. Inflation on both the
price and the wage side remains well in check. And many manufacturing
contacts describe themselves as wavering between hopeful optimism and
watchful concern as they contrast their own order books with media
reports on the national situation.
Moving to a little bit of detail:
Employment in the region
fell in May with the weakness concentrated in construction and
manufacturing. Services and trade, which have accounted for most of
the job growth we have had in this recovery, also had a relatively
weak May. Despite the lack of job growth, the regional unemployment
rate was 5.2 percent in May. A decline in the regional labor force is
one reason for the apparent inconsistency between the weak job figures
and the low unemployment rate. Consumer confidence in New England has
declined sharply, with the index dropping from over 80 in May to 60 in
June--the sharpest decline in any region in the country. To contrast
this a bit, business confidence in the region also deteriorated quite
sharply in June according to a survey of Massachusetts companies,
though it still remains above the level consistent with optimism on
the part of more than half of those surveyed. So, consumer confidence
has dropped quite a bit more sharply. Business confidence has
declined but the way those indexes are figured it remains consistent
with some optimism.
Our informal discussions with area manufacturers and
retailers again have a somewhat more positive tone. Manufacturers in
particular report good growth in shipments, and several high-tech
companies in the electronics and medical areas are planning large
hires. Nevertheless, there are some companies that see evidence of
slowing and the performance of the auto industry in particular is
being followed very closely. The retail situation is mixed. The
weaker performers may be more representative of the general state of
the regional economy. Our retail respondents who are doing well seem
either to be gaining market share or sellers of specialty products.

-17-

7/5-6/95

Lastly, since the latest national data on new home sales were
so strong and I reported the last time that there was a better picture
in New England on home sales in general, I would note that our latest
housing market data in New England have been quite sluggish, though
again that is not without its bright side. Some contacts have noticed
a pickup in sales in the past month.
On the national scene, we are largely in agreement with the
Greenbook forecast this time around. Based on information to date, we
see inflation, particularly for the last part of 1995, a little higher
than the Greenbook is forecasting. All in all, we find the baseline
Greenbook forecast appealing, but we are concerned about the risks to
that forecast and, given those risks, how we should be looking at
policy going forward. That is the subject for later on in the
discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Overall, the Philadelphia District economy is
flat to down, probably down in the second quarter going into the
third. Manufacturing has been the hardest hit, more so than in the
nation as a whole. There is a tentative sense among District
manufacturers that the bottom may be near and that an upturn is in the
offing during the fourth quarter and into 1996. Most say a healthy
export business to Europe and Southeast Asia is cushioning the
downturn in domestic demand. Housing activity appears to be
responding positively to lower mortgage rates, although the level of
activity is still down from a year ago. Retailers say sales are up
but below expectations. They are cautious about the rest of the year.
They say that a period of pent-up demand has passed and customers are
again more susceptible to postponing purchases. Retailers look to a
continuation of discounting to keep sales growing. Loan demand at
banks is soft and most bankers say their customers are more cautious
than several months ago. The region has been hit with more major
corporate downsizings, which make for headline news, and these
downsizings greatly outdistance interest rates as a matter of general
concern. There are still a lot of help-wanted signs in the region, at
retail shops as an example, but they are mostly for lower-paying jobs.
Wage and price pressures remain subdued. My sense is that
expectations in the District about whether the economy is headed for a
recession or a rebound are in a sensitive stage. Business people
generally are cautiously predicting a bounceback, but these
predictions are vulnerable to shocks or continued signs of weakness.
Expectations could change quickly. Consumers seem more cautious than
businesses, judging from comments from retailers.
Turning to the nation, I think the most likely outcome is a
resumption of growth, although the risks of a self-feeding downturn
clearly have increased significantly for all the reasons that we have
discussed. There is little room at this point to absorb additional
downside developments without causing a recession. These downside
developments are easily imaginable. They may occur if we don't get a
rebound in exports, say, because of less growth abroad as detailed by
President McDonough. Consumer or business confidence may deteriorate
much further as recession talk increases, and one can add to that
list. We could conceivably get a much stronger rebound in the economy
than expected for the opposite reasons, but this outcome seems to me
to be much less likely at this point. As for inflation, there has

-18-

7/5-6/95

been an uptick in cyclical inflationary pressures. However, with wage
pressures subdued and price competition intense against a background
of timely monetary restraint earlier, we still appear to be on track
for achieving price stability over time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BROADDUS.

President Broaddus.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I would like to take

just a couple of extra minutes tomorrow when we talk about the longerterm strategy of policy, so I'll try to make these economic comments
this afternoon as brief as I can.
As our Beigebook report indicated, our three latest monthly
mail surveys of retail, service sector, and manufacturing activity all
indicated somewhat slower growth in these key sectors in our region in
May; again, these surveys were done in May. More recently, I found
the tone of the anecdotal comments at our June board meeting, at which
we invite not only the Richmond directors but also our Charlotte and
Baltimore branch directors, somewhat more bullish and at least mildly
encouraging. On the whole, I would say they suggested that business
activity in our District may be bottoming out and getting poised for a
bit of a revival going forward. Our regional anecdotal tidbit of the
month is that the recent closing of Pennsylvania Avenue is going to
cost the D.C. Government about $3/4 million in parking meter fees.
I
don't know what that implies for the fund rate, but that's a fact for
whatever it's worth.
Regarding the national picture, as I think I have mentioned
before, we use a VAR model in developing our Humphrey-Hawkins
projections and this time our projections are very close to the
Greenbook's except for inflation; we are on the high side there. We
are showing about 1/2 percentage point more CPI inflation in both 1995
and 1996--to be specific, 3.5 percent for 1995, which I think is the
upper limit of the estimates you received from the members, Mike, and
3.3 percent for 1996.
Even allowing for the rising inflation in our
forecast, I would say that both the Greenbook projections and our
projections in a sense are pretty rosy, at least from here on out.
They both say that real growth hit its low point and inflation hit its
high point in the second quarter, and they both project rising output
and employment and generally declining inflation going forward.
Frankly, this gives me a little pause since, as we all know, rosy
In general, along with my staff, I
scenarios often don't play out.
still think the risks are pretty well balanced, but I have to confess
I
that I am still worried about the downside risks on the real side.
think the recent weakness in employment and income growth could feed
back into spending. Moreover, a slowing economy is always more
vulnerable to downside risks, and I think Bill McDonough's comments
about the downside risks in the external sector are reasonably well
taken. Against that background, I very much hope that the June
employment report is a little brighter than the last two.
One final comment I would make on the financial side--I think
the 15 basis point jump in the long bond rate in response to that new
homes sales report in May was remarkable. It was, to be sure, a very
large jump. But this is a series that everybody knows is unusually
volatile and it usually does not get anything like that kind of
reaction in bond markets. I think that reaction indicates how super
sensitive even the longest-term inflation expectations are to

-19-

7/5-6/95

relatively small bits of information. That suggests to me that we
need to provide a firmer anchor for these longer-term expectations and
I'd like to come back to that tomorrow if I may.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well done!

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, the recent indications of
economic activity in the Atlanta District are fairly mixed, but the
important housing and manufacturing sectors are beginning to show some
signs of accelerating. Employment growth has pretty much leveled off
in the District, although District unemployment rates generally remain
below those for the nation as a whole. The retailers in the District
have met most of their expectations, at least in most parts of the
region, and merchants are fairly optimistic about the third quarter.
Apparel sales, for example, have improved but sales of household goods
have slowed down. Throughout the District auto sales remain weaker
than they were a year ago. Tourism is strengthening in the District,
with only central Florida remaining somewhat weak. Manufacturers'
shipment and production activities have increased recently, but the
number of contacts reporting that they have added to payrolls has
declined since earlier in the year. The domestic market for paper
producers is cooling, but export demands remain pretty good in that
sector and are bolstering production, and chemical and plastic
shipments also continue to be quite strong. Apparel production is
steady for some products but demand has fallen off for other
categories. This is resulting in slowing factory activity in that
area. Building-related producers of such items as carpets and lumber
are reporting some slowing. Residential building is also slowing in
the region and builders are quite cautious, but realtors are
optimistic; that is a change.
I thought realtors were always
pessimistic, but apparently they are not at the moment. Realtors are
reporting that single-family home sales are up for May and early June,
and they attribute much of this rebound to lower mortgage rates.
Home
inventory shortages are reported in very few of our markets.
Multifamily construction continues to increase with rising rental
rates and occupancies, although realtors anticipate that the rate of
increase in rental rates should slow in most areas of the District.
Nonresidential construction also continues to increase, with rising
rental rates and occupancies now notably spreading into industrial
space.
Lending activity throughout the District again is quite
mixed. Demand for auto loans and most other types of consumer loans
is generally soft, but commercial and industrial loan demand is
strengthening. Wages remain essentially unchanged throughout the
District, and we continue to get scattered reports of shortages of
skilled workers, particularly construction workers in Tennessee. As
was the case at the time of the last FOMC meeting, fewer manufacturers
than before reported higher prices for both materials and finished
products, although we are getting reports from industrial contacts
that materials prices charged by paper, plastic, tire, and chemical
producers continue to go up. Though I said at the outset that I think
the picture is decidedly mixed, the anecdotal information that we are
getting from our directors and other business people is definitely
very, very cautious, a little bit on the pessimistic side.
With respect to the national economy, our outlook shows a
pickup in growth toward the end of the year and we expect that growth

-20-

7/5-6/95

For that reason we are somewhat more optimistic
to continue in 1996.
on the growth side than the Greenbook, and naturally with that kind of
forecast our employment gains are a little better. On the other hand,
we show very little improvement in inflation. Now, some of these
differences might be accounted for by the fiscal policy assumptions in
the Greenbook that we don't have in our forecast, and that would
minimize the differences in the two forecasts.
I think both forecasts
are similar in that they view the current slowdown as a mid-cycle
pause rather than the onset of a recession. I think that both of
these forecasts are reasonable and within the usual range of forecast
errors. But I must say that I continue to be disturbed by the
incoming data, which are below the expectations that we had earlier.
Clearly, as many people have indicated, the risk of recession has
risen. It's not difficult to imagine, as Ed Boehne has suggested,
that this decline in industrial production and weak employment could
lead to a decided softening in demand. And built into at least some
of our earlier forecasts was greater growth in our trading partners,
particularly in western Europe. And as Bill McDonough and others have
pointed out, that may be an optimistic view at this point since we are
looking at a lower rate of growth in those countries. To sound like
an economist, I would say on the other hand [Laughter] that underlying
conditions are not unfavorable in the economy. The imbalances that we
had during the last recession clearly are not present; household and
corporate balance sheets are much better, the banking system is in
relatively good shape. While we do have an inventory overhang, that
seems to be in the process of being corrected. As I look at the
entire picture, I think a recession is probably not the most likely
outcome, but I think that the risks are definitely on the down side.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District economy remains
moderately strong, but signs of slowing have emerged in recent months
as I reported earlier. For example, District employment growth slowed
in March and actually turned down slightly in April and May, and the
decline was rather broad-based. However, total employment in May was
still almost 3 percent higher than a year earlier, and our
unemployment levels across the states are consistently below the
national average. In addition to slow employment growth, activity in
the energy industry remains weak in our region, and the farm economy
has been hurt recently by unfavorable weather and weak prices. Other
indicators, though, point to continued underlying strength in our
District. In construction, we have had recent job losses, but an
upturn in housing permits and other construction contracts suggests
the decline will be reversed in the months ahead. In manufacturing,
our survey of recent conditions indicates that this sector continues
to expand, albeit at a somewhat slower pace. District manufacturers
also indicate that they still are operating at relatively high rates
Retail sales other than automobiles have been
of capacity use.
holding up quite well in recent months. Moreover, retailers are
generally optimistic about their prospects, although some inventory
trimming has occurred. Confirming some of this underlying strength in
the District, loan growth at our banks remained relatively strong in
May after moderating somewhat in earlier months this year. Against
this backdrop, wage and price pressures are easing to some extent. We
are seeing price increases in raw materials and manufacturing and we
still have some shortages in labor in District markets. But price

-21-

7/5-6/95

increases for finished goods have moderated and prices remain
relatively stable on the retail side.
On the national front, our projections are relatively similar
to those of the Greenbook. We believe the economy is going through a
pause and an adjustment phase right now. We expect that there will be
a couple of quarters of growth below trend, but at the current level
of fed funds we would also expect the economy to return to growth near
potential by the fourth quarter and into next year. This view is
based on the fact that the fundamental determinants of consumer
spending and business fixed investment are positive. The outlook for
net exports, while less robust than earlier thought, remains generally
sound. Inventory excesses do not appear large enough to require a
prolonged correction. This outlook permits the labor market and the
industrial sector to return gradually to levels of activity consistent
with more stable inflation. We are looking for inflation to be capped
at about 3-1/4 percent, which is not quite as optimistic as the
Greenbook. Looking beyond that, we see continued growth near the
economy's potential in 1996.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, reports from our District ccntacts
have been more mixed lately. While economic conditions in certain
sectors of the District continue to show signs of slowing, some pickup
in activity was reported in other industries. Reports from our
contacts in the automobile industry and, of course, today's
announcements indicate that autos and light truck sales in June moved
slightly above May's annual rate of 14-1/2 million units, but not up
to the 15 million units that we were expecting just a few weeks ago.
I think that's because of lower sales at one of the Big Three and
lower expected sales at one of the foreign nameplates that has not yet
announced its sales.
I don't view this as a pervasive, industry-wide
slowing in the last couple of weeks in June. I think the slowing is
more focused in those two companies. And, as Mike mentioned, Chrysler
has not yet announced, but we are expecting its sales to be up 11 to
12 percent; of course, that number is confidential until it is
announced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think Chrysler has announced its

sales.
MR. PRELL.
MR. MOSKOW.

You have the numbers!
They announced today?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. The Chrysler numbers, seasonally
adjusted by the Fed, went from a rate of 2.22 million in May to 2.43
million in June. According to Dixon Tranum, our analyst, that puts a
rough estimate of total sales in June up slightly from the seasonally
adjusted May level.
MR. PARRY.

Is this the first month that Chrysler had the new

MR. PRELL.

I don't think they have the new minivans.

MR. PARRY.

They are out.

minivans?

-22-

7/5-6/95

MR. BLINDER.

I hope this is not going to throw the seasonals

off.
MR. MOSKOW. Of course, they are the one company that has
widespread incentives for both their cars and their light trucks now.
None of the other manufacturers has incentives across the board.
Despite the production cuts so far, it is likely that inventories at
the end of June remained near the 70-day supply that existed at the
end of May. This year's weakness in light vehicle sales may reflect
factors other than overall consumer demand because the total number of
light vehicles sold, including both new and used vehicles, actually
has risen slightly this year from last year. I think an important
factor is the rise in the supply of used vehicles coming off lease,
and this trend is going to continue to accelerate in future years as
well.
In addition, despite the incentives on new vehicles, relatively
high prices and finance company auto loan rates may be shifting demand
from new vehicles to used vehicles. Orders for heavy duty trucks are
exhibiting signs of weakness. However, the back orders remain quite
high and cancellations have not picked up. On a seasonally adjusted
basis, heavy duty truck production in the third quarter is planned to
be about even with the first and second quarters of 1995.
For other manufacturing firms, particularly in the consumer
durables sector, inventory pruning has been a major factor
constraining production, but we do not believe that operating rates
are falling to recessionary levels. Industry reports have indicated
noticeable reductions in order backlogs for heavy equipment, further
slowing of durable goods production, and planned cuts in overtime and
weekend operations and in temporary workers. One large producer of
heavy equipment has seen a drop in the number of their models on
allocation from 30 to 15 in the past few months but, of course, they
still have 15 models on allocation at this point. Indeed, producers
of construction equipment believe that orders and probably production
peaked in the second quarter, and firms are now focusing on managing
the expected economic slowdown. One District appliance maker reported
cutting production and workers in May and June in an effort to trim
factory inventories accumulated earlier when sales were softening.
But this contact also noted that the inventory adjustment by appliance
dealers appears to have been short-lived. For the industry as a
whole, factory shipments of appliances strengthened in May and
strengthened again in June. Purchasing managers' surveys in our
District indicate slowing activity overall, with the latest Chicago
On the consumer
survey dropping to its lowest level since June 1992.
side, although reports were mixed, most retailers in the District
report that sales growth improved in May and again in June on a
seasonally adjusted basis. Reports from several national retailers
reflected less concern about inventory positions than in previous
months, although some added that stocks were still above desired
levels. Others indicated an inventory buildup at specialty and
discount retailers as a result of deteriorating sales.
We have not yet seen a widespread revival in the housing
sector, although realtors and homebuilders are optimistic and there
are increasing signs that lower mortgage interest rates are beginning
to have an impact on activity. In agriculture, weather-related delays
during the spring planting season trimmed this year's crop acreage
from initial intentions and increased the odds that per acre yields
will be reduced by other problems during the growing season. Because

7/5-6/95

of the increased chances of a significant tightening in supplies,
grain prices have risen sharply and are likely to remain quite
volatile for the rest of the summer.
Although the labor markets in the District remain relatively
tight, slowing economic growth had tempered demand for workers and
some easing of wage pressures was reported. Our average unemployment
rate in the Seventh District is 5 percent now compared, of course, to
the 5.7 percent rate nationally. On the price side, reports generally
have indicated some abatement in upward pressures, mainly in input
prices. Reports of renegotiations of earlier steel price hikes
continue to surface. Of course, the planned July increase is widely
expected not to go into effect. The auto parts producers are
reporting renewed pressures from the Big Three to cut prices. Energy
prices in the District have eased, partly due to soft demand. Freight
haulers report competition for slower business is pushing down rates.
One notable exception is paper and paper products, where prices
continue to move up.
Overall, we agree with the Greenbook that the current outlook
is for slower growth in 1995 rather than a recession. Even though the
second quarter may be worse than the Greenbook forecast, as long as
some key expenditure categories do not turn sour, especially business
fixed investment, 1995 should not yield to recession. While the core
CPI has increased at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent so far this
year, we agree with the Greenbook that the inflation outlook is
improving. There remains substantial uncertainty about the actual
level of inflation, but the expected path is one of improvement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. As has been noted, there has been
a mix of positive and negative indicators of U.S. economic performance
recently, and it is not easy to know what such indicators portend for
the future. It's my opinion, however, that the economy has enjoyed a
very balanced expansion since its cyclical trough in March 1991,
weathering major changes in federal spending and corporate
restructuring. Like the Board staff, I am inclined to think that the
recent spate of negative indicators reflects a pause in the current
cyclical expansion rather than the onset of a recession. We are
forecasting real GDP growth in the range of 1-1/2 to 2 percent this
year, with such growth returning to near its potential in 1996. With
an appropriate monetary policy I also believe that inflation could
drift down from current levels in 1996, although we would still be a
good distance away from price stability. On the positive side, the
financial indicators are generally looking good. The equities market
is riding high, and long-term interest rates are down significantly
from their peaks of last November. Indeed, there are indications that
investment spending, including housing, and durable goods may be
responding positively to lower long-term interest rates. Bank lending
is strong, and in the Eighth District loan quality is very high. Over
the economy as a whole, bank lending is being reflected in an
extraordinary increase-in the broad monetary aggregates, which on a
longer-term basis are roughly linked to demand growth and inflation.
There are few signs of structural imbalance. The ratio of inventories
to final sales remains low; the consumer installment debt delinquency
rate is near a 20-year low; and the ratio of debt service to
disposable income is well below peak levels reached in the late 1980s.

-24-

7/5-6/95

Furthermore, the value of the dollar has declined significantly in
real terms, so much so that U.S. goods and services must certainly
look like bargains in the world market. I expect that this will
stimulate domestic production later this year and into 1996.
Although growth in the Eighth District has slowed, the
District economy remains strong. Unemployment in District states
continues at well under the national average, and employment has
continued to grow in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing.
District firms producing prefabricated metal buildings, mobile homes,
and furniture are experiencing strong demand. Perhaps this says
something about the durables sector. Currently, foreign markets are
providing good outlets for the products of many District firms, but
sharp increases in import prices are adding to costs. In the Eighth
District, we see little letup in pressures to raise prices. We
continue to receive anecdotal evidence that qualified workers are in
short supply. Most contacts in our District report rising costs and
some moderate wage pressures.
Given this outlook, I am more concerned about long-run
inflation than the prospect of a sustained decline in output. CPI
inflation accelerated to 3-1/2 percent during the first half of 1995.
Such an enormous amount of liquidity was added to the economy in 1991
through 1993 that I remain concerned whether our restrictive policy
stance since then has been sufficient to cap inflation and make
further progress toward price stability. In my opinion, the declines
in inflation and inflation expectations have contributed to the
current expansion. Comparatively low inflation has kept U.S. output
competitive in both foreign and domestic markets. Moreover, the
decline in inflation expectations, which is critically linked to our
credibility--the point Al Broaddus was talking about before--has
reduced uncertainty, encouraged investment, and enhanced productivity.
A continuation of the downward trend in long-run inflation is
essential for achieving maximum sustainable economic growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Growth in the Dallas District has slowed
considerably from the pace earlier in the year, but we are still
seeing positive employment growth. With high levels of resource
utilization still being the norm, the attitudes of our directors,
Beigebook contacts, and others remain fairly good. I might say that
while our directors read the same newspapers as everybody else and
are aware of the weakening in the national economy, their anecdotal
stories are more positive than what they are reading. The drop in
mortgage rates is beginning to have a positive impact on building
permits, single-family housing starts, and forecasts of real estate
activity for later in the year in our District. The impact of the
peso devaluation, while it has been serious for our District, has been
mitigated by several special circumstances. One is a surge in petrochemical exports that has helped especially the Houston economy in
recent months. Another is a pickup in foreign demand for computers
and electronics components produced in our District. Also, the weaker
peso has helped the Maquiladora industry along the Texas-Mexico
border. El Paso is particularly a beneficiary and is having good
overall employment growth despite the very weak retail markets in the
area right along the border. So, while export growth has slowed from
what it likely would have been had exports to Mexico continued to grow

-25-

7/5-6/95

at their 1994 pace, our overall exports have continued to grow
sufficiently to offset some of the weakening in domestic demand. Our
directors continue to report exceptionally easy credit standards
throughout the District, which probably have reduced the effective
cost of bank credit and made the impact of current short-term rates
somewhat less restrictive than we might normally expect.
On the national side we have no major arguments with the
Greenbook. One anecdote is that J.C. Penney's sales in June were very
disappointing and they described their inventory accumulation during
June as being at recessionary levels.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As at the last few
meetings, I wanted to give a fiscal policy update, and I have
distributed a table to the members of the Committee. I think the
table carries with it several messages. First, I would refer you to a
comparison of the two columns labeled "1995 Enacted" and "1996 602B
Allocation."
The 602B allocations are given by the budget committees
to the various appropriations committees, and this is the amount of
money they can divide up for actual spending. I think the first thing
that is instructive is that the basis for comparison on this table is
nominal 1995 levels of spending. We are not cutting from some
baseline that includes growth; we are cutting from 1995 nominals. The
amount of the cut is just shy of $22 billion. This is not mandatory
spending; in other words, Medicare is not in here; Medicaid is not in
here; food stamps are not in here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Social Security?

MR. LINDSEY. Oh yes, Social Security is not in here;
interest payments are not in here. These are real-money-out-the-door
types of programs. The $22 billion figure roughly contrasts with the
discretionary number of $18 billion that is in the Greenbook. The
fact that these cuts are from a nominal level leads me to make some
adjustment to see just how much contraction is occuring. If we
thought that real spending should be roughly constant next year, we
would need to have an idea of GDP in 1996 and we would at least want
to assume some kind of constancy in real spending and perhaps a little
above that.
If we add a 3 percent inflation factor, we really are
cutting real spending by something on the order of $37 billion as
opposed to $21 billion, and that is before we get to the Medicare
adjustments.
The second observation I would make--we have a small sample
of only five subcommittees on the table here--is that four of the five
subcommittees have cut more than their 602B allocations. These are
appropriations subcommittees that refer back to the Appropriations
Committee. I can't remember this ever happening before.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
has not happened.

The reason you don't remember is that it

MR. LINDSEY. It hasn't happened, yes. The chairmen of these
subcommittees often are called the 13 cardinals. If you have a
problem, no matter what party you belong to, you go to one of the
cardinals and their job is to take care of your post office or your

-26-

7/5-6/95

road or something like that. Needless to say, when they are up
against a 602B allocation they manage to spend all the money.
Otherwise, they don't keep their robes very long or whatever, I don't
know what the analogy would be.
So, four of the five committees that
have come in have cut below their 602B allocations. The only thing I
can read into that is that there is perhaps more political seriousness
than is usually the case.
The third thing to keep in mind here is that what is being
balanced is that one has to successfully logroll to get a majority
among two different groups of people. The Budget Committee
allocations involve one group of people, but they don't really have
responsibility here. These appropriations committee people are
another group, and the fact that they are managing to get majorities
in both is very, very instructive. Basically, these are going through
on party-line votes. So, the amount of cohesion is quite high. This,
of course, is very, very early in the process. We go from here to the
Senate and then to a conference and then to the presidential veto, but
so far I would say that the Appropriations Committee actions suggest
that deficit reduction is at least on track. Perhaps we are seeing
some reductions below 602B allocations to have as bargaining chips
later on. You have to have something else you are willing to cut in
order to get your program back. But I think it is very, very striking
that we are truly in a new world, as the Chairman just noted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you, quite interesting.

President

Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District economy
continues to do reasonably well based on the available objective
measures. There are some problems in agriculture related to weather,
but otherwise things seem to be moving along reasonably well. A
couple of bright reports have come in recently. One is a firm with a
large mortgage banking operation that says business has been quite
good recently and the improvement is only partially related to
refinancing activity. And a large appliance and electronics retailer
says that business has held up well. Having said that, I think there
is a sense of disappointment in some parts of the District, and it is
not because activity has contracted in an absolute sense.
I think it
has more to do with what people thought this year's business growth
might turn out to be for their firms, what they took to be a trend as
opposed to what economists might consider trend rates of growth and so
forth. Actual developments just have not lived up to those more
favorable expectations. I think there is some of that going on.
With regard to the national economy, I do have some concerns.
First, I will talk briefly about some things that don't concern me.
Our model is also a VAR model. We update it as new data become
available and it is giving us a forecast not precisely equivalent to
that of the Greenbook, but not very different--a continuation of
modest growth and some slowing in inflation over time. What strikes
me about the forecast is that the most recent run of the model does
not differ very much, if at all, from the run we did prior to the May
FOMC meeting. So, even though a lot of the data that have come in on
the national economy in that intermeeting period were on the soft
side, our model continues to generate the same forecast. That says
that either those numbers are consistent with what the model in some
The offsets, of
sense was expecting or there have been offsets.

7/5-6/95

course, could be on the financial side because of the continued
improvement in the bond and stock markets. In some sense it is as if
we almost have an automatic stabilizer working in the bond market,
with interest rates declining as this has unfolded. That, as I
suggested, doesn't concern me.
What does concern me are some other things. First of all,
like the Greenbook, when we interpolate the second quarter we get a
contraction in activity; and if we go back and look at the preliminary
GDP data--not the data that are finely smoothed and reported several
years later--it's rare, though not wholly impossible, to find a
contraction in GDP that isn't ultimately associated with a recession.
I don't know what its implications may
I just report that as a fact.
be this time around. What concerns me are a couple of things that
have been mentioned. One, I share Bill McDonough's concerns about the
foreign situation. I have a sense that we have looked at the sunny
side of a lot of those economies for a time, and that things just are
not panning out and have not for a while, and I am concerned about
what that implies for domestic activity.
I am also a little
the effects of the 1993 tax
apparently were much higher
see where the repercussions
least, thought earlier.

suspicious that we may have underestimated
increase. It's not just that tax payments
than anticipated in April 1995, but I can
of that may be more important than I, at

Finally, I am uneasy about this so-called inventory
adjustment. My experience is that those kinds of inventory
adjustments never turn out to be as quick and as easy and as painless
as we hope.
It is a truism that if demand holds up they do turn out
to be relatively easy and relatively painless, but that is a big "if."
In listening to the explanations about why demand might be expected to
hold up, I agree that it might well.
But I don't know that I heard
anything newly compelling about that, and so my concerns are not
entirely assuaged as I listen to those explanations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. The staff at Cleveland did a survey of various
companies across the District on the subject of inventories. The main
objective was to gauge business sentiment about current inventory
levels. In line with what Gary was just remarking, given their
comfort levels with their order books and projected sales, our
business contacts simply had no complaints about their inventories.
They might talk about problems relating to the mix of their
inventories, sometimes referring to thin inventories in some lines
that were balanced by too much of something else, but they did not
have an overall concern. And that was just as true of manufacturing
companies as it was of retail companies and distributorships.
What has changed in the last few months is that we have heard
far fewer stories about overworked workers--workers complaining about
too much overtime. So to the extent that there has been an
adjustment, our anecdotal information would suggest a change from
something that was perceived as being unsustainable to something that
is much more comfortable all the way around. We recently had a joint
meeting with all three of our boards and the reports were the most
remarkably uniform that I have heard yet about how well things are

7/5-6/95

-28-

going from the standpoint of real activity. The directors express
puzzlement over what they read about the national economy, but I took
that to mean that they don't understand the difference between first
and second differences. They think in terms of the level of their
firm's activity compared to a year ago and it is uniformly positive in
every respect. They do not see things as we would in the sense of
changes in the rate of change.
There was one new development that I thought was significant
and that was their expectations about prices. Except for paper, which
Bob Forrestal also mentioned--they say that paper is a serious
problem--there was uniform agreement in line with their earlier views
that prices are going to be less of a problem. Steel industry people
said that the July 1st price increases anticipated earlier simply did
not happen, would not happen, and in fact that there would probably be
some rollbacks in steel prices. They reported that prices of carbon
steel were already being rolled back. Specialty steel people said
that they had finished with their price increases for this year and
were not planning any price increases even for the first of next year.
said that he had come
back from an international trade convention of their association, and
he said that in the last few months there had been a dramatic shift in
thinking about prices of paints and resins and that sort of thing-from expectations that firms could get further price increases to
expectations that prices would be flat for the balance of this year.
On the labor markets, sometimes when I think about all that
is being said about the minimum number of people that are not working
and how we have to maintain this reservoir of unemployed people, I
feel I ought to come to these meetings and apologize because we have
so few people who are not working in our District. There are ten
counties in Kentucky and more than ten counties in Ohio that report
unemployment rates of under 3 percent; some reports are down around 2
percent or even lower. If we have so few people who are merely
consuming the product of other people instead of producing something
themselves, one might conclude that maybe we are going to have an
inflation problem. If I thought that this was going to lead to a
problem of cost push, wage push, or rising prices I would be as
In trying to
concerned as anybody else, but I simply don't see it.
find inflation out there, I mostly get an indication that the
productivity increases that are being sustained are warranting the
kinds of demand for labor that our firms are registering. It is not
the kind of thing that I think people have looked at in previous
cycles as a source of future inflationary pressures.
Turning to the national economy, when I was looking at the
Greenbook I was pleased to see the slight downward tilt in the
inflation number for 1996. But then Mike gave us Chart 18 showing the
ranges and central tendencies of the FOMC members' forecasts, and that
leaves me still puzzled about consistency. The Greenbook projects an
upward tilt in intermediate- and long-term rates this year. It
suggests that the absence of some downward adjustment in the funds
rate that is assumed in the Greenbook will disappoint the markets, and
so longer-term rates will go back up. But except for that kind of a
linkage, when I look at the staff's nominal GDP forecast for this year
and next year I don't understand why we should have higher
intermediate- or long-term rates than currently--not with 4.1 percent
nominal GDP growth this year and 4.5 percent next year. If anything,

7/5-6/95

rates of 6-1/2 percent on 30-year bonds and 6-1/4 percent on 10-year
issues are still a bit too high for any sort of sustainable
equilibrium. But when I look at the members' forecasts of nominal GDP
for 1996, the range goes as high as 6 percent, and if that kind of
forecast for next year and its mix of output and inflation are
correct, then the consistency problem is in the intermediate- and
If the central
longer-term rates, not in the short-term rates.
tendencies of the members' projections--they are above the Board staff
forecast--are the best guess as to what is going to happen, then I
would think that the adjustment has to be in the shorter end. I
certainly don't sense any urgency on anybody's part--the directors of
our boards and other people that we talk to--that we move toward
something that would be perceived as monetary stimulus, with or
without an idea about needing to offset some fiscal restraint. Yet, I
think that very few people would be arguing at this juncture that we
ought to be moving to what would be a de facto more restrictive policy
stance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, when the economy is experiencing a
slowdown, we can't be comfortable about its potential length or depth
until it is over--and this slowdown is not over.
I feel that
particularly strongly in light of many of the reports that we have had
around the table so far today. But that said, I still have to be on
the more sanguine side as I watch the data that come through here.
The consumer does not look as if he is scared to death. Retail sales
have come back some already, not strongly, but nevertheless they are
not falling any more. Credit is still flowing nicely, maybe in the
view of some a little too strongly. With regard to the surveys of
consumer confidence, the Michigan survey has now turned back up just a
little. The Conference Board survey is still showing a little
weakness, but both surveys are at fairly high absolute levels.
Capital spending was certainly going to slow down from its earlier
pace, and I guess it has, but it still looks good. Orders and
backlogs are still up. Housing and autos appear to be stabilizing on
the most recent numbers that we have received, and certainly the
strong rally in long rates has helped that. The stock market must be
helping sentiment and certainly the wealth effect that goes along with
that. All those good things being said, however, it is hard to find
where there is a strong growth engine anywhere that is really going to
kick this economy into overdrive. One of them that could have done
that, the outlook for net exports, seems to be increasingly cloudy.
When one can't find real strength anywhere, that could, of course,
presage further weakness. But it does seem to me that the odds are
against a deepening of this slowdown and that the odds favor an
economy that is coasting upward toward a sustainable growth rate. For
my part, I would put that rate somewhat above that in the Greenbook.
Turning to inflation for just a minute, the battle for price
level stability certainly has not been won yet, but I must say that I
feel better about that prospect than I have at any time I can recall
since I have been here. The evidence on inflation and its course is
positive. Everybody here is familiar with that evidence so I won't
recite it.
But it does look now as if inflation may be peaking
cyclically somewhere right in here. If so, we are entitled to take
some satisfaction from that. It would represent considerable progress
both in terms of a substantial reduction and also the fact that a

-30-

7/5-6/95

secular downtrend has been going on for a long time and is continuing.
To be sure, we are not at price level stability and we have to keep
our sights on it.
A couple of observations if I may: Number one, I think this
Committee has always envisioned attaining price level stability as a
project to be accomplished over some period of time. If in fact the
rate of inflation is peaking right in here for this cycle, that will
occur at a pretty high level of economic activity. I think most of us
anticipate that we are going to go back to a sustainable level of
economic growth that should not kick off any new inflationary
pressures. If this expectation is at all reasonable, then I think we
are in a fairly comfortable position for the moment. Second, I think
it is of key importance that we maintain the secular downward momentum
toward price level stability. That has been in place for a number of
years now, and I think it still is.
I believe it is the number one
duty of this Committee to make sure that the secular downward trend
continues in place. But if all of this is in the ballpark, I do think
it may imply that we have more flexibility for positive kinds of
reasons than we have had since I have been involved in this whole
business. We do have some flexibility to move responsibly if there
should be a desire to do so. I'll stop right there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. I think the preparation for this
meeting has been for me the most difficult of my tenure, and that is
because we are seeing so many conflicting economic signals. We seem
to be at the classic fork in the road--whether or not this inventory
correction will work itself into a downward spiral or will turn out to
be an air pocket as we approach a soft landing. There has been a fair
amount of discussion today about the conflicting real economic data
signals. We have talked about auto sales, housing, the inventory
buildup, and the consumer sector--these are areas where the signals
are mixed. But if the real data signals are mixed, I would have to
point out that the monetary aggregates are giving us even less
consistent signals. The current frenzy of economic analysis and
spinning of the econometric forecasting models probably are more than
can be supported by the meager data to date. We are all struggling to
look inside the models, questioning assumptions, questioning this, and
questioning that. However, because we are on such a narrow path and
the adjustment is likely to be so fine, it is difficult for the models
to pick up some of these fine gradations.
Well, having been a bit frustrated by that process, like Bob
Forrestal I went back to the question of whether some of the
fundamental strengths that propelled the economy forward in 1994 were
still present. They are not as strong they were, but they are still
definitely present. Business investment, while not growing at a high
double-digit rate, is still relatively strong. The financial markets
are not pointing to an economic downturn. The banking system is
strong. There is no credit crunch in sight. In the labor market,
even if unemployment does notch up a bit, we are still relatively
close to full employment. In the manufacturing and financial sectors,
the productivity improvements are holding up. On the inflation front,
the uptick that we have seen this year does appear to be related to
cyclical pressures, as Mike Kelley observed. Since wage inflation
appears to be in check, it is unlikely that the upward adjustment that

-31-

7/5-6/95

we have seen in 1995 is going to be permanent. On balance, the
fundamental strengths that brought us to where we are now in this
cycle remain, but I think the economy is vulnerable to the inventory
correction that is under way. And as Bill McDonough and others
mentioned, there is a potential risk from international weakness or
other shocks. When the economy is in a weakened situation, any kind
of shock can have more of an impact. In short, while I think the
fundamental strengths remain, I think the downside risks are stronger.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. During the last six weeks my optimism has
diminished that the inventory adjustment process is going to be behind
us after two quarters and that thereafter the economy will return to
trend growth with unemployment in the vicinity of the NAIRU. The
inflation outlook, however, has correspondingly improved. Although
the most recent employment report was a wake-up call, I think the news
since our last meeting has been predominantly negative. Governor
Blinder's prescient prediction at our last meeting that the Greenbook
forecast for the second and third quarters of 1995 would once again be
written down by an average of 1/2 percentage point per quarter has
proven accurate, although he, too, underestimated the downward
revision. Even so, I still consider the Greenbook's forecast a bit
optimistic because I think the bulk of the risk with respect to real
activity is on the down side. With even a modest further shortfall in
final demand growth, it is easy to elaborate a scenario in which the
inventory adjustment process is more protracted than previously
foreseen, and the longer-term outlook, once inventory factors have
turned to neutral, entails higher unemployment and a larger output gap
than the Greenbook envisions. We could easily end up I think in an
extended growth recession.
At our last meeting, I was somewhat sympathetic to the
Greenbook's conclusion that the bond market rally might be overdone,
and I was a bit concerned about the upside risk that interestsensitive sectors might rebound too strongly. My concern on this
score has faded. I now see the bond and stock market rallies
functioning simply as automatic stabilizers that partially cushion the
downside risks. I think the impetus of lower long-term interest rates
and wealth effects that are working their way through the pipeline
will buoy spending on housing and related consumer durables later in
1995 and in 1996. That impetus is needed to avoid a hard landing. If
longer-term bond yields were to back up, which is an outcome
anticipated by the Greenbook under the baseline fed funds assumption,
the downside risks would be greater.
Let me just briefly enumerate what I see as the major sources
of downside risk at this stage. They have all been mentioned in the
discussion during the go-around. The first concerns inventory
investment, which I think could easily turn out to be higher this
quarter than the Greenbook forecast of $29 billion in real terms.
This forecast is guesswork since, as Mike noted, a lot of crucial
second-quarter data are missing. And if inventory investment is
higher, more of the adjustment remains ahead than the Greenbook
contemplates. I mentioned this last time and I just want to reiterate
it because it is very important in my own thinking. There is always
the downside risk that an inventory adjustment could trigger a

7/5-6/95

snowballing process of cumulative decline through the multiplieraccelerator process with negative feedbacks on consumption as
disposable income falls and on investment as business expectations are
disappointed in line with what Gary Stern said had happened at firms
in some parts of his District. As firms see their expectations for
growth on which their investment plans are based being disappointed,
that could trigger a decline in investment. Governor Lindsey voiced
concern at our last meeting that credit terms may stop easing or may
even tighten during a process of slow growth or conceivably recession
if default rates, which are now showing some hints of picking up, were
to rise further.
Another risk concerns consumption, which has been sluggish
this quarter and could easily rebound less strongly toward year-end
than the Greenbook assumes, particularly if a backup in long rates
puts downward pressure on the stock market. The Bluebook's
simulations reveal that a higher saving rate poses serious risks to
the forecast. With a 1/2 percentage point increase in the saving
rate, those simulations show unemployment rising to 6.8 percent by
mid-1996.
A third risk that many of you mentioned and also concerns me
has to do with export growth, which is a needed source of strength as
we go forward. The depreciation of the dollar has left American goods
very well priced in world markets but, like many of you, I am
concerned about growth prospects in Canada and Japan and our other
trading partners. Karen Johnson gave good reasons to believe that
growth will rebound later this year in the rest of the world as in the
United States, and I certainly hope that comes true. But it does seem
to me that most of the risk is on the down side and the downside risk
here is magnified through multiplier spillovers across countries. It
comes through one country spending less and other countries seeing
their exports fall and their growth prospects disappointed.
And then, of course, there is fiscal policy where since our
last meeting I think the prospects for a contractionary fiscal package
have improved considerably.
Now, to offset those sources of weakness, the Greenbook
forecast relies on a strong rebound in housing demand and associated
spending on furniture and other durables, including motor vehicles.
But under the baseline fed funds assumption with some backup of long
rates, I see a real risk of insufficient revival in these sectors.
Moreover, as the Bluebook baseline simulation makes apparent, and Mike
Prell reiterated this, by 1996 the tighter fiscal scenario alone
clearly points to reduction in the natural, equilibrium, or whatever
you want to call it, Wicksellian real rate of interest consistent with
an economy operating at potential. In the Bluebook baseline, the real
funds rate must decline to 2-1/2 percent by 1996 and 2 percent by 1997
to keep the economy operating at potential. So, I agree with the
conclusion of both the Greenbook and the Bluebook that as we go
forward the real funds rate will have to decline from its current
level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

7/5-6/95

MR. BLINDER. I have five points to make. I tell you that
because then when I get to point four you'll know I am almost
finished.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Why don't you start at five?

[Laughter]

MR. BLINDER. All right, I'll start with five. That was
about inflation. I thought it was a good place to finish.
At the last two FOMC meetings I expressed two views-Governor Yellen has scooped me on this.
I said that I thought the
Greenbook was a shade too optimistic, and I said that history tells us
that forecast errors are serially correlated. I say this not to
gloat, because I am just as guilty of this as anybody else. I was
below the Greenbook both times, but I was also too high both times.
I
am again a little below the Greenbook. In none of those cases was the
discrepancy very large, although this time I see that I have the
distinction of being just enough below the Greenbook to be outside the
FOMC range. But that has to do with rounding to quarters, I hope. If
not, there is a stronger message there!
[Laughter]
I should add,
however, that since we have free rein in these forecasts regarding
what we assume about monetary policy, I did not make the Greenbook's
assumption about interest rates, but rather I embedded in my forecast
the assumption that the fed funds rate would be 50 to 75 basis points
lower by year-end than it is today, starting immediately.
I have several reasons for coming in with a forecast that is
below the Greenbook, and I am just going to mention them very briefly
because someone around the table has mentioned each of them by now.
The one I want to emphasize is that while it is not unreasonable to
have an expectation of a fairly smooth inventory adjustment the way
the Greenbook has it, there is up to now something between scant and
no evidence that things are working out that way so far--that is to
say, that inventory accumulation is coming in substantially lower in
Q2 than it did in Q1.
The data on that are very scanty, and so the
Greenbook may in fact turn out to be right; I don't rule that out.
But I think we should keep in mind that, when it comes to inventory
adjustments, the bigger they come the harder they fall.
Second, for
reasons many people have mentioned and as you probably guessed from
the question I raised earlier, I think foreign GDP is likely to be
weaker than our forecast, and so exports will be commensurately
weaker. Thirdly, I am worried about the consumer, or really the right
way to say it is that I am worried about the multiplier-accelerator
mechanisms being more severe than those embodied in the Greenbook. As
I look at this list, I figure that one of those three downside risks
is bound to materialize--I don't know which one--which is the reason
my point estimate is lower than the Greenbook's. So, take the
Greenbook and subtract any one of those three, and you get outside the
FOMC range.
Now, more important to me than that is the risk to the
forecast. I must be almost the 18th person--17th, the Chairman hasn't
spoken yet--to say that the risk to me looks lopsided on the down
side. That says to me that I have this point estimate and, as I look
and think about the probability distribution around what I guess is
the mode--don't ask me how I come up with a point estimate, I think
it's the mode--the risks are clearly on the down side. I mentioned
the risk of the inventory adjustment being more severe than the

7/5-6/95

-34-

I can think of a
Greenbook forecast, and I put that high on my list.
risk on almost every component of spending. On consumption, I already
said that there is a serious concern that, with lower employment and
real wages, falling income will lead to weaker consumer spending than
is in the Greenbook. There is also a risk, as somebody said--it was
Bob Parry--that 1993 and 1994 were unusually buoyant years for
household spending and we simply are not going to repeat that again.
On business fixed investment, which has been holding up remarkably
well, I am very worried about the accelerator taking hold as GDP
growth turns from positive 5 percent in Q4 to negative. As in the
Greenbook forecast, falling capacity utilization and weaker sales are
going to bring falling profits, which I think companies have not
really factored much into their thinking as yet. Lower sales imply
less need to add to capacity. I hope business fixed investment will
hold up in response to that, but it is a downside risk. Governor
Lindsey mentioned the downside risk on the fiscal side. I am a little
less anxious about that than I was at the time of the previous FOMC
meeting, but I don't rule it out at all. And we have already
mentioned the foreign demand risk. Frankly, none of those worries, as
I look at them, is that huge. But they are all going in the same
direction. The odds that we will dodge all those bullets are not very
strong.
The third point I want to make has to do with the relevance
of the latest tea leaves to surface to the top of the cup, which have
been a bit better than the news of the previous several months. I
think the news of the last six to eight days is better than the news
of the last six to eight weeks. But I don't think we should get
carried away by that, just as we should not have gotten carried away
by the news of the last six to eight weeks. Had we taken that news
literally, and if it was the only information that we had, we should
all be forecasting a deep recession. That would have been a great
overinterpretation of those numbers as they came in. All of us
avoided that overinterpretation I am sure.
Similarly, the mixed bag
of numbers, including finally a few bright spots in the cloud, does
not obviate the fact that we are in a cloud. Mainly, these reports
look good in relation to the unremittingly bad news in the preceding
weeks. When I look at these numbers, I don't look so much at the last
six to eight days or even the last six to eight weeks, but the last
six to eight months.
If we look at the last six to eight months, we
find that retail sales were up just 0.4 percent from November to May.
That is 0.4 percent in nominal terms and not at an annual rate. If
June is down, industrial production will be down for four straight
months, and if industrial production comes in close to zero in June,
that will leave it barely above its December level. Household
employment--again, depending on the way it comes in, if the June
report is close to market expectations for total payroll employment-will be unchanged from what it was in November. That is not about tea
leaves; that is about what the economy actually has been doing in the
near-term past.
All of this does not spell a disaster scenario, but it is
negative news relative to what we thought six months ago. And it
does, as many people have remarked, leave us with an economy that is
highly vulnerable to an adverse shock. This is my fourth point. You
could think of a whole variety of such shocks, and when you are
sitting that close to the edge, it does not take very much. In line
with that, I examined--with some help from staff here and also at the

7/5-6/95

New York Fed, which I thank--several statistical indicators of
recession. I am not quite sure how many there were because some of
them were variants--putting different things on the right-hand side to
come out on the left-hand side with a probability of recession. There
is a whole bunch of these, more than I realized. I have learned that
it is now a small cottage industry. Almost all of them seem to be
flashing a number in the 30 to 60 percent range right now as the
probability of a recession, which, ironically, is almost exactly what
you would get if you just did the most naive thing. The old rule says
that if the leading indicators go negative three times in a row, that
predicts 10 of the last 5 recessions. That is to say, it gives you
about a 50 percent chance of a recession. That is what the leading
indicators are saying now and what these statistical indicators also
are saying. My personal probability is actually at the lower rather
than the higher end of this range, more like a third than 60 percent,
but it is enough of a risk to leave me uncomfortable.
The fifth and last point, which should have been the first
point, has to do with inflation. On the Greenbook forecast, and
certainly with a weaker forecast, the risk of rising inflation now
looks to be minimal. In the Greenbook, the unemployment rate is
rising from just a tad below the natural rate to just a bit above the
natural rate. Capacity utilization is falling to and then below its
historical average, which leads me to conclude, exactly as the staff
does, that the pressure for rising inflation is either gone right now
or is soon to be gone as the GDP gap changes sign from positive to
negative, if one signs it that way. This is particularly clear if you
look at the long-run Bluebook projection, which shows inflation
falling ever so slightly for the next several years. This leads me to
the final point, and it is echoing what Mike Kelley said a few moments
ago. If this inflation outlook turns out to be right--and that seems
to be a reasonable expectation--the peak rate of inflation in this
cycle, because there are cycles as well as trends in inflation, will
be 2-1/2 percentage points below the peak inflation rate in the last
cycle. That is very substantial progress. We have been talking here
about individual inflation forecasts that differ very little. People
have said that their forecasts are higher or lower than the Greenbook
forecast by .2 percentage point or so. Nobody can forecast inflation
that accurately; nobody on earth. So, a likely reduction of 2-1/2
percentage points from the last cyclical peak is very significant
progress. It suggests, furthermore, that one more cycle, hopefully
not starting imminently on the down side, is going to bring inflation
almost to zero. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. On that beneficent note, we
have come to a termination of today's agenda. I want to remind all of
the FOMC members of our usual annual dinner at the British Embassy at
7:30 p.m. In the past we have been quite successful in being as
obscure as we are usually. But we need to be a little careful because
I think there probably is going to be some awareness outside that we
are there, and I suspect that there is going to be some attempt by the
press to approach some of the people who will be at that dinner. So,
if we can create some-constructive ambiguity, it will not be a great
loss to the world at large and especially for ourselves.
MS. MINEHAN. It should be easy to keep them talking,
shouldn't it, given everything that has happened?

7/5-6/95

-36-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good point. I think there are
a lot of questions about the future of the U.K. economy. We will
reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.
[Meeting recessed]

-37-

7/5-6/95

July 6, 1995--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With respect to your projections, Mike
Prell is keeping an open book and corrections may be submitted through
Monday, July 10th. I would also like to call on Mike to bring us up
to date on the data that just came out.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be very brief.
Initial claims for the week of July 1 were published this morning and
were unchanged at 369,000. You will recall that two weeks ago they
showed a spike up to 396,000; they came off last week and were
unchanged in the latest week. Insured unemployment was up to 2.7
million. That has been trending up recently, so the rise wasn't
particularly surprising in light of the initial claims. The leading
economic indicators were down 0.2 percent in May, as we and most other
people had anticipated. The change in the prior month stood at minus
0.6 percent; there was a revision from minus 0.5 percent to minus 0.4
percent, I believe, in the preceding month. For what it's worth, we
were speculating that the measure of the probability of recession that
we presented in the Greenbook would be about 54 percent and, with the
revision to the earlier month--this is a very sensitive measure--it is
now at 48 percent.
[Laughter]
The Johnson Redbook came out yesterday
afternoon--up 1.4 percent for June--and you have the auto sales
figures before you. As I indicated yesterday, they were up slightly
in June to 14.9 million units for light vehicles, which is in line
with the Greenbook forecast. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the translation of the Redbook
into reality? What is your guess as to what that means?
MR. PRELL. We find it to be terribly unreliable, but a
change that large might be a signal that we can look for a positive in
the retail sales numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Maybe up 0.1 percent!

MR. PRELL.
It is hard to say.
which probably is not fit to print.

That is all the news--some of

It will be in five years!

MR. STERN.

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Mike?
If not, let us
proceed with the agenda. I call on Don Kohn to bring us up to date on
the long-run ranges for monetary policy.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. LINDSEY. Don, do we have evidence--I think there was
some earlier--that the velocity of M2 is now back closer to zero.
MR. KOHN.

The trend in velocity growth?

MR. LINDSEY.

Yes.

7/5-6/95

MR. KOHN. The whole level of M2 velocity has shifted up by,
I think, about 15 percent; M2 is about 15 percent lower than we would
have thought using old standards. There is some evidence that the
growth rate relationships among M2, nominal income, and opportunity
costs have come back roughly on track in the last two years or so.
If
that were the case and if we had any confidence that it would persist,
we might be able to imagine a situation in which the growth rate of M2
demand was back on track and velocity then would fluctuate around its
current level rather than around the lower old level.
That is a
distinct possibility, but the point I was trying to make in my
briefing is that, given our uncertainty about these relationships, I
think it is a little early to pronounce M2 velocity back on track.
MR. LINDSEY.

But it looks stable for the last two years?

MR. KOHN. Approximately, yes. Now, we have had more M2
growth in the second quarter--by several percentage points--than this
model was predicting. In growth rate terms, the model was right on
for 1994. I think what happened in the second quarter of this year
was that M2 was reacting to the decline in intermediate- and long-term
rates, whereas the model uses the bill rate to proxy for alternative
investments.
So, it didn't capture those declines. Going forward,
whether this old standard model--it is now nearly ten years old--will
capture the dynamics will depend in part, I think, on whether shortand long-term rates move together in their traditional cyclical
relationship.
MR. LINDSEY. I will phrase this as a question, but it is
really a statement:
If in fact we are back to a more stable
relationship, wouldn't a 1 to 5 percent growth range for M2 be a bit
low?
MR. KOHN. That would give you a midpoint of 3 percent. The
Committee has looked at that as providing some sort of benchmark for
what it might expect from M2 when reasonable price stability had been
reached.
MR. LINDSEY.

That's the year 2000!

MR. KOHN. For next year the models actually see growth at
the upper end of that range--perhaps consistent with what you are
saying--in the 4 to 5 percent area, approximately.
MR. PRELL. Let me remind you again that we ran those models
off our nominal GDP forecast, which is a pretty low number, and you
would want to make a mental adjustment for your own forecasts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Don, applying the same logic you described with
respect to how the 1 to 5 percent range was set for M2, do we have
enough confidence about M3--its stability over time and its
relationship to M2--to say, if historical relationships obtained, what
a comparable range for M3 would be?
MR. KOHN. No, I don't have enough confidence. In the past,
M3 growth has tended to run approximately a percentage point above
that of M2, so a 2 to 6 percent range for M3 would not seem to be a

-39-

7/5-6/95

bad alignment. But the past experience applies to a period in which
depositories were capturing an increasing share of credit extensions.
If your best guess were that their share of credit flows would remain
about constant, then perhaps the M3 range ought to be about equal to
the M2 range, assuming that depositories rely on retail and wholesale
deposits in roughly the same proportions. So, it is hard to know. It
really depends on the role depositories will play in the financial
system. To repeat the earlier point, an M3 range of 2 to 6 percent is
roughly consistent with a range of 1 to 5 percent for M2 in terms of
historical relationships. Whether it would be consistent going
forward is a much harder question.
MS. YELLEN. In setting these M2 ranges, do we normally look
for some consistency between the target range and the Committee's
nominal GDP projections? We just did our nominal GDP projections for
1996. Their full range is 4-1/2 to 6 percent and the central tendency
is 4-3/4 to 5-1/2 percent; we were asked to prepare our individual
forecasts on the assumption of a desirable monetary policy. So, if we
take those nominal GDP forecasts and assume that M2 velocity is
constant, wouldn't that suggest that 5 percent M2 growth would be
consistent with the forecasts we are providing to the public and
Congress? And shouldn't 5 percent be the midpoint of the M2 range?
If it is not--and it is not even under alternative II for 1996--it
seems to me that adopting the alternative II range, and certainly the
alternative I range, communicates a lower real growth target than our
nominal GDP forecasts imply. A growth rate of 5 percent for M2 is
probably consistent with, say, 1-1/2 or 2 percent real GDP growth. If
our M2 target is taken as the middle of our range, a 1 to 5 percent M2
range implies lower target real growth than that.
Even under
alternative II, the midpoint of the M2 range is 4 percent and that
could entail perhaps 1 or 1-1/2 percent real GDP growth for 1996.
MR. KOHN. I think you are right, Governor Yellen, because
for a number of years the Committee really has not been taking these
aggregates seriously as guides to policy, and as a result it has not
been moving the ranges around to make them consistent with its
outlook. Part of the problem is that it is very hard ex ante to know
what those ranges ought to be. We may now have a little more
confidence about that, but even relative to the staff's nominal GDP
forecast, which is 4-1/2 percent for 1996, the 1 to 5 percent range
for M2 is obviously low. And if I took the Committee's nominal GDP,
which is higher than the staff forecast--and especially if I assumed
that interest rates would have to be lower to get that nominal GDP--we
might have a decline in velocity. That is, we might need even more M2
I have not run the exercise, but I would
as market rates went down.
guess that we would be talking about an M2 projection of 5 percent or
even a little over 5 percent to be entirely consistent with the
Committee's nominal GDP forecast. The other way to work this, which
is more or less what the Committee has done over the last few years,
is to say that we see this range as something that is out there to
provide a benchmark in the future, and we are not paying much
attention to this now--and let it go at that.
MS. YELLEN. But we were asked to communicate our goals for
1996 and not for 2000.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

7/5-6/95

MS. MINEHAN. I was going to comment a bit on what Governor
Yellen was saying and also point out that I think we are really on the
horns of a dilemma. Governor Yellen's point stands by itself in terms
of the logical consistency of what the ranges ought to be relative to
the central tendency of our nominal GDP forecasts. But it is hard to
separate that from the message that changing the ranges for M2 and M3
would convey to Congress in terms of the way we have been reducing
these ranges over the years and the consistency of that with the
credibility of our inflation objective. Given that we don't yet have
firm evidence as to whether these measures have trended back to a more
reliable long-term relationship with other economic variables, if we
take what might be the logical step and increase these ranges to
levels that theoretically make sense vis-a-vis the members' nominal
GDP forecasts, we would be increasing both ranges to a degree that
might be considered inconsistent with the way that the Committee has
been reducing them over time. That is the concern I would have on
that.
I wanted to raise a question on another subject, although
other people may want to jump in on the current subject. The question
that I had has more to do with your longer-run trends.
I had some
trouble sorting out the distinction between the downward funds rate
path that you talk about in the Greenbook as a function of the change
in equilibrium real rates of interest--which is part of the baseline
forecast--and what you mean when you talk about a demand shock as a
result of fiscal tightening. Are we double counting there?
MR. KOHN. There is a demand shock built into the baseline,
which is the fiscal restraint needed to balance the budget by the year
2002. That is already in there, so you would not add more fiscal
restraint on top of that unless you thought even greater fiscal
restraint would be forthcoming. One could also imagine a situation in
which the path of fiscal policy is a little more front-loaded than the
staff is assuming and therefore the restraint happens sooner rather
than later. As Mike noted yesterday, the assumptions for 1995 and
1996 on fiscal policy lie somewhere between those of the President and
the Republicans. So, if you thought about a situation where the
Republicans somehow prevailed on the stance of fiscal policy, that
also would be a demand shock--at least over the next few years.
MS. MINEHAN.

But that is not the demand shock that you had

in mind?
MR. KOHN. What we used was a saving rate shock, but I
believe we noted that you could think of it also as a situation in
which we had more fiscal restraint than we were expecting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I just want to ask a very brief question to
follow up on what Governors Lindsey and Yellen were pursuing. If the
M2 demand function works, what interest rate is assumed tacitly in a 3
percent M2 growth forecast? How much higher is it than current
interest rates?
MR. KOHN.

In terms of a trend interest rate?

7/5-6/95

MR. BLINDER. No, in terms of 1996. The point was made that
what we would like any of these things to be doing over the longerterm horizon may be one question, and what we would like for 1995 and
1996 may be another question. I was trying to ask the easier
question--from now until the end of 1996.
MR. KOHN. I'm not sure it is easier! Of course, the staff
has 4-1/2 percent M2 growth projected for 1996 with the interest rates
of the Greenbook, and that means a gentle decline in interest rates
toward the middle of 1996. If I used the interest rates of the
tighter scenario--that is, the 75 basis point increase--that gets the
projection for M2 down to 3-1/2 percent.
MR. BLINDER. The question is what interest rates would we
need to make the midpoint? The staff has M2 growth of 4-1/2 percent
But as
in the baseline and 5-1/2 percent in the easier alternative.
was pointed out, those are funny numbers if you are aiming for 3
percent.
MR. KOHN. It would require slightly more tightening than the
tighter forecast. The tighter forecast has M2 growth of 3-1/2
percent; to make the 3 percent you would need slightly higher interest
rates, perhaps avoiding the drop in interest rates in the second half
of 1996 or you might have to raise rates a bit and keep them up. I
think the tighter scenario gives you a baseline to think about that.
MR. BLINDER.

Thank you.

MR. PRELL. I would like to emphasize the point that there
are many kinds of interest rate paths that one could imagine.
If you
moved rates down very sharply in the short run and they were to
flatten out or even come back next year, that might have some
implications for growth next year; in particular, M2 growth might not
run appreciably higher than our forecast. There are lags here and we
still don't know all of the behavioral relationships--what would
happen to mutual funds flows and so on under some of these rate
scenarios.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I want to explore a little further Don's answer
to Governor Yellen. I think in the past the Committee has lowered the
ranges in part because we thought that the trend velocity of M2 had
increased somewhat. It was not that we believed that the ranges
should be consistent with 3 percent growth in nominal GDP. The latter
was closer to 5 percent. I think the fair question to ask is whether
we think the velocity trend has shifted back to something closer to
zero, and if we believe that, then I think it would be consistent with
the Committee's forecast to change the M2 target range. So, I think
the rationale had more to do with our beliefs about the trend in
velocity than it did with our trying to establish a range consistent
with price stability in the year 2000.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. It seems to me that we are still in a position
where we don't have a great deal of confidence about the relationship
between the growth of the aggregates and the growth of the economy.

7/5-6/95

-42-

In the past, I think we have acted in a way, as Cathy indicated, where
we have used the ranges to convey a message, and I think we probably
are most comfortable in continuing to do that at the present time. We
would be able in my view to increase, as Don explained, the range for
M3 and still be consistent with our longer-term objectives.
One point I would make, Don, about your comment to Governor
Yellen is that I don't think there is a consistent basis for the
members' forecasts. That needs to be kept in mind. If we were to go
around the table, I think people would give different responses about
what their forecasts assume, and I am not sure that all make explicit
policy assumptions. There also is a difference between what they
think is going to happen and what they think should happen. We are
not given consistent statements about what we are supposed to assume
in doing this exercise. So, I think we have to be a little careful
about what those forecasts in fact are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don? If not,
let me just say something that I think is on the table, and I will
start off the roundtable. If we presume that the velocity of M2 is
finally going to return at some point to the stability experienced for
a very long period of time, all the arguments that are being made with
respect to the ranges are very appropriate and to the point. However,
the prospect that we will take them seriously, in the sense that their
behavior may alter policy, is still a very long way down the road. It
just does not seem credible that we will develop enough confidence by
next year, or maybe even in two years, to be able to say that M2 is
back on track in a manner that will affect the way we conduct policy.
As a consequence, were it not for the Humphrey-Hawkins
legislation at this point, we would not be having this discussion. We
would not even have the aggregates, so far as I can judge, as a
significant part of the Humphrey-Hawkins report. I am not saying that
we would not discuss them; obviously, they are not an irrelevant
issue. So, that really gets us down to the question as to what type
of signal we want to put out there. In a sense, what are we trying to
do if we make changes in the ranges?
If we don't make any changes,
our decision will get zero publicity; indeed, that is what we found
out after our February meeting. No one cared; no one commented; my
recollection of the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings is that no one raised
the issue. I may be mistaken on that, but if they did it certainly
did not make an impression on me.
If, as I hope and suspect, we may vote later to ease policy,
superimposing on that a signal that we are changing the ranges would
worry me in the sense that we could be conveying more policy
implications than I think we want to convey. I am persuaded that the
position staked out by Governors Yellen and Lindsey is a perfectly
sensible one, especially a year from now if I may put it that way. I
would doubt very much that it is useful to make any changes at this
stage, and I think that there are more downside than upside risks
because we are not in fact using these ranges for policy purposes.
Unless I am mistaken, there are very few of you around this table who
would consider that your views on policy will be affected to a
significant extent by whether or not we move the M2 range today. That
is a view which, I will grant to everyone, is disputable because we
got to the 1 to 5 percent range to a large extent by accident. We got
there because it was very embarrassing to have higher growth cones

7/5-6/95

when the growth figures were falling through the floor, so we decided
to adjust and we ended up at 1 to 5 percent. That range is not a
rational position; it is an accidental one, but if we change it we
will be giving a signal which in my view would probably be a mistake
at this stage. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE.
In my view, Mr. Chairman, that is both an
accurate and a sensible statement. There is a dog over in the corner
and he is asleep and his name is Aggregates and we ought to let him
sleep for another year or two.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I agree that it would
be ill-advised to change the M2 range at this stage, especially in
light of the possibility, as you postulated, that we might ease
monetary policy. You would spend an hour and a half of your HumphreyHawkins testimony explaining the changes in something that we don't
take seriously. The risk of the body politic thinking, thanks to the
press, that the central bank had decided to undertake a major
softening of monetary policy would be very high, and I think it would
be very unwise to take that risk. So, I agree very much that we
should keep M2 where it is, and that would be alternative 1 for both
1995 and 1996.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. I certainly agree with your recommendation
regarding M2, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the other aggregates, I
would favor alternative II for 1995 and alternative I for 1996.
Having said that, let me make just a couple of additional comments, if
you will indulge me.
I think, as the discussion is showing, that we
all acknowledge that the monetary targets no longer serve much of
their original purpose, at least for now or the foreseeable future.
Among other things, that purpose was to underline the System's
commitment to price stability and to serve as a nominal anchor for
monetary policy. I think many interested parties outside the Federal
Reserve, including some key Congressmen, are well aware of that. Of
course, the Humphrey-Hawkins law requires us to set monetary targets,
and we will have to continue doing so in the foreseeable future to
comply with the law. However, the current short-term policy situation
gives us an unusual opportunity to argue for some changes in the
Humphrey-Hawkins law that may put us in a position to develop a more
effective and a more meaningful longer-term strategy for monetary
policy.
Let me clarify what I mean by opportunity. As everybody
knows, the recent fairly sustained deceleration in economic growth has
a lot of people calling for the Fed to ease policy. A case can
certainly be made for that today. I am not going to be the one to
make it, but I am sure someone will; and should we not do anything
today, the case will become even stronger as we go forward if the
sluggishness persists. I think it is fair to say, though, that many
of us would be concerned that reducing the funds rate target, even in
these circumstances, could seriously damage the credibility of our
longer-term and oft-stated commitment to price stability, because at
this stage policy has no firm longer-term nominal anchor.
Consequently, within a short period of time--it probably would not

7/5-6/95

-44-

happen immediately--if the performance of the economy does not play
out exactly as we anticipate, a drop in the funds rate could produce
another inflation scare.
If that happened, long-term interest rates
would shoot up and greatly complicate policy going forward.
So, as I see it, we have a dilemma. The way out of the
dilemma in my view is for the Committee to develop a new and more
meaningful longer-term nominal anchor for monetary policy that would
tie down longer-term inflation expectations and really make our
commitment to price stability more credible than it is now. That
would free us to take more flexibly the short-term policy actions that
we need to take. Monetary aggregates may have played this anchoring
role in the past, but clearly they can't do it now. Against that
background, Mr. Chairman, I would respectfully urge you to try to
point this dilemma out in your testimony.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you have raised some very
interesting points. May I ask, if you are not going to use the
monetary aggregates, will you just give us 20 seconds on what you
would propose?
MR. BROADDUS. I was going to lay out a strategy as briefly
as I could. A key point I want to make is that the current situation
gives us an opportunity to recommend something in terms that are
fairly concrete rather than in the abstract. In my view, we can
develop a more operationally meaningful longer-term monetary policy
strategy. It would have three components. First, as I said in
February when Janet and I had our little exchange, we should commit
ourselves publicly and firmly to the price stability objective put
forward in the Neal amendment--both its definition of price stability,
whose language I think was negotiated at the time, and also
importantly its 5-year longer-term horizon. It is that specific time
horizon that I think would make it meaningful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you talking about a statute or
unilateral action by the Federal Reserve?
MR. BROADDUS. It would be preferable to have a statute, but
I think we can go a significant distance in the direction I am
recommending even without a statutory change. I am not recommending
It seems to me that it is feasible to
explicit numerical targets.
adopt something like the Neal language in the context of the current
law. I would like to emphasize that the 5-year time horizon would
represent a difference from what we have now. We have said a lot
about our commitment to price stability, and if we had a specific time
horizon for its accomplishment, that would make us more accountable
and would make that goal operationally much more meaningful. If we
adopted that, we should issue an accompanying statement that says that
we expect to continue to take short-term policy actions that are aimed
at stabilizing the economy in the short run. As we continue to take
those short-run actions, we ought to emphasize that we would in each
case evaluate them against our longer-term objectives.
Second, if we were to refocus our longer-term strategy that
way, I think it would be very helpful to revamp our semi-annual
Humphrey-Hawkins reports in a way that would conform to that. Under
the refocused strategy that I am proposing, the main purpose of the
report would be to explain how our policy actions over the preceding

-45-

7/5-6/95

six months have been consistent with advancing us toward our longerterm objective and also to explain how any short-term actions that we
might have taken to deal with short-term economic conditions are
consistent with our longer-term goals. If we were to revamp the
report in that way, I think we would be in a better position to
communicate our policy to the public and the Congress and that would
help to increase our credibility.
Third, at the operational level, if the Committee refocused
its strategy this way, we would need to alter in a conforming way our
short-term policy deliberations and refocus them in terms of the
options that we consider for the short run. This would mean revamping
the Bluebook to some extent--especially its discussion of short-term
alternatives and options. In some ways that has already been done.
In particular, the current attention that we give to the relationship
between our alternative short-run actions on the one hand and the
behavior of the monetary aggregates on the other should be reduced and
replaced with more discussion of the relationship between alternative
short-term policy actions and our longer-term inflation objectives.
Again, some of this is already being done, as is evident in this
meeting's Bluebook, but I think we need to give it more prominence.
It needs to be done at every meeting, not just in July and February.
Now, I recognize as well as anyone that developing an operationally
meaningful linkage between short-term actions and longer-term
inflation goals is extremely difficult because there are long lags
between the time we take short-term actions and the time they have an
effect on inflation. That is why the intermediate monetary targets,
when it was feasible to use them, were so useful. It is a difficult
issue, but I think there are some things we could do. For example,
the Bluebook could routinely assess the inflation expectations
embedded in bond rates and perhaps speculate on how alternative shortrun actions might affect those expectations going forward. Again,
some of that is done already, but the effort could be sharpened and
given more emphasis. We might also want to experiment with some sort
of nominal GDP feedback rule, not externally but internally, as a
benchmark in considering short-run policy alternatives. Clearly, the
short-term operating issues are tough problems and some
experimentation is needed, but I think that would be appropriate.
If I may end up with one last comment, Mr. Chairman, I feel
very strongly that we have made enormous progress in the Federal
Reserve System over the last fifteen years in moving from a dangerous
situation with very high rates of inflation to where we are now. We
have gone a considerable distance in increasing our credibility as
protectors of the value of our nation's money, and that achievement
among other things has helped us to foster growth in employment and
output over time. As I see it, the task now is to put in place
institutional arrangements that would allow us to extend and solidify
those gains. So, I would vote for something like that. I think the
time to do it is now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I want to start off with a couple of comments
related to what Al Broaddus was just saying. This is the 20th
That resolution was adopted
anniversary of Concurrent Resolution 133.
in the aftermath of the first oil shock as a device to put boundaries
on inflation in keeping with the notion at that time that there was

-46-

7/5-6/95

some stability in the demand function for some measure of money and
that constraining the growth in that measure would put boundaries
around the rate of inflation. I think that after twenty years we have
learned a lot; we have unlearned a lot; and it is time to rethink the
underlying premise of Concurrent Resolution 133, which was codified in
legislation enacted during 1977 and 1978. We are still being
hamstrung by something that simply does not fit our objective. That
objective is to give definition to the dollar and to maintain that in
the minds of the people. The Humphrey-Hawkins statute, as we call it,
as was true of Concurrent Resolution 133, does not do that.
For about 30 years the mean level of M2 velocity was about
1.65, with significant cyclical movements around that mean, but still
it was a mean in which we had some degree of confidence. The ranges
were related to historical experience.
There is some very tentative
evidence that the mean level has moved up to about 1.9, but that
evidence is very tentative; and even if the new level is true there
are still significant cyclical variations around it. Right now, with
the recent acceleration that is being observed, we basically have two
choices of assumptions to make. Either the mean level has shifted up
and we are getting a cyclical increase in velocity and the recent
growth in the aggregates should be very worrisome, or we should expect
a substantial deceleration in the rate of change in M2.
If someone
wants to make the assumption that the level of velocity is going to
shift back down to what it once was, then they have a bigger problem.
As a device for communicating intentions to the public and
Congress, I think the ranges can be useful if properly explained. I
don't think they are useful as a way of indicating to anybody how the
short-run decisions about changing the funds rate will be made. I
look at a lot of indicators of all sort of things; I look at the price
of gold; I look at exchange rates; I look at yield curves.
I would
not want people to think that decisions on changing the funds rate
from one meeting to the next are influenced by any single measure. We
would have what former Governor Wallich used to call the Goodhart's
law problem if people started to attach our actions to a single
measure. So, I agree with the Chairman's initial remarks that
changing the announced ranges of M2 in this environment, especially if
we also decide to take action in the near term on the funds rate,
could miscommunicate what we are doing. A reduction in the fed funds
rate or the discount rate at this point, whether we like it or not, is
going to be interpreted as an easing in policy. Whether we think it
is a more stimulative policy or not is something else again, but we
know how it will be interpreted. Associating whatever explanation we
give to that short-term action with our long-run objectives is what I
think we should be doing and we should not associate it with where
money growth is relative to some announced target range. They serve
two different objectives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I agree with where you are coming
from. We have systematically deemphasized these ranges because they
have not been reliable, and I think it would be presumptuous at this
stage to conclude that we know where velocity is going to be. And so
I would feel comfortable with alternative I for the 1995 ranges; I
would leave them where they are for 1996, although alternative I,
which includes a higher M3 range, is acceptable to me for next year.

7/5-6/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I had the unfortunate pleasure of
having my maiden interview with the American Banker quoting me as
saying that I am an M2 kind of guy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I really thought that was a small
[Laughter]
typographical error!
MR. LINDSEY. I understand exactly where you are coming from,
but I will phrase it a little more cynically. If after a year M2
growth is above the top of the target range, you will suggest then
that we once again shift the range up as we shifted it down because
growth was coming out near or below the bottom of the range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was suggesting that when it is our
judgment as a Committee that M2 is something that we should be
discussing and focusing on with respect to policy, we really ought to
be serious at that point as to where we want to set the M2 range.
In
that context I think the types of arguments that you and Governor
Yellen are making will be the right ones. My own view is that it
would be premature to reach that conclusion.
MR. LINDSEY. Given that you are the one who will be up on
the Hill to testify on these issues, I am willing to go along with
your suggestion. My preference would be to go back to a higher range.
I would go for what I would call alternative III for 1995, which would
mean raising M2, and alternative II for 1996.
In fact, there is no
alternative III listed in the Bluebook. Even alternative II for 1995
has an M2 range of 1 to 5 percent. I think a 2 to 6 percent range
would be better and that is the range associated with alternative II
for 1996.
I remember well our embarrassment when M2 growth fell below
the range.
I am a little concerned that we will have a similar
embarrassment when M2 growth ends up above the range and folks who
might want a tighter monetary policy will use that as evidence against
us.
But, again, you are the man who has to be up there, and so in the
end I will support whatever recommendation you make.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Along the lines of my comments earlier, I am in
agreement with not making any changes in M2. You did not address M3
in your comments, Mr. Chairman, but I would be a little more
comfortable making a change, particularly for 1996, basically because
I think that range has gotten extraordinarily low. The arguments the
staff makes that the changes in intermediation trends probably will
affect M3 over a longer course of time seem to make sense. So, I
would like to cast my vote for alternative II for 1995 and alternative
I for 1996.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the aggregates, I
certainly take your comments to heart. In light of that, I would
favor alternative II for 1995 and alternative I for 1996.
I would not
change the M2 range. After listening to Don, the explanation for

-48-

7/5-6/95

changing the M3 range seems straightforward, and in that sense I would
go ahead and do that.
I don't think that would cause any problems
with your testimony.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
aggregate.

I agree with that.

M2 is the crucial

MR. STERN. With regard to some of the issues that Al
Broaddus raised, I think his points are well taken. We ought to be
looking at monetary policy as it relates to inflation. My
reservations have to do with my impression that a couple of his points
in some sense jump the gun. They have to do with two issues in
particular. Don Kohn raised a question about the quantification of
the benefits of price stability and indicated--or at least I took his
comments to mean--that the evidence was mixed and uncertain. If we
started doing present value calculations, depending on what estimates
we believed, we might find significant benefits or we might find that
the benefits are rather small relative to their cost.
I happen to
believe that there are benefits there and that they are sizable, but I
think it is incumbent upon us to make that case more compellingly than
we have to date. I don't see any way around the difficult research
that probably involves.
Another related and important issue has to do with public
support for any objective that we adopt, whether it is mandated by
statute or we do it ourselves. To some extent, it falls on us to
build the public support for a price stability objective. I don't
think that support is totally lacking, but I don't believe there is
any great conviction among the public at large that price stability
ought to be the preeminent objective of monetary policy. Until we put
together some of that evidence I was referring to earlier, I think
moving way out ahead and trying to bring the public with us might be
very difficult. So, for the reasons that I stated, I would be
cautious at this juncture about going down that path. I do think
there are issues there, and I suggested before that we ought to be
discussing and looking at them and probably finding some research to
do. I am concerned about moving too far too quickly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of sympathy for
what President Broaddus said, and I think we ought to give serious
consideration to it. With regard to the upcoming Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony, I favor setting monetary targets that are likely to be
consistent with policy goals in the long run. The current range for
M2 would be consistent with low inflation in the long run if growth in
M2 velocity returns to its historical zero level. On the other hand,
if growth in M3 velocity returns to its historical average of roughly
minus 1 percent, the current M3 range would have to be revised upward.
Since there is some evidence that M3 velocity is reverting toward its
historical norm, I favor Bluebook alternative II for 1995, which in
fact does raise the range for M3, and alternative I for 1996, which
preserves those ranges into 1996.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I agree with your concerns about moving
the M2 range now and how that might be interpreted. I would not

-49-

7/5-6/95

change that range. With regard to M3, I am most comfortable with the
rationale that Bob Parry just described with respect to taking a look
at long-term trends and viewing M3 on a basis consistent with what we
have been doing with M2 in recent years. That would lead me to favor
alternative II for 1995 and alternative I for 1996.
I would add that
our discussion today points up to me that we are in an increasingly
untenable position with respect to how we communicate to Congress our
long-term intentions about monetary policy and the need for some sort
of nominal anchor. I don't expect anything necessarily to come out of
what Al has suggested today, but I think we ought to have that as an
important topic of discussion well in advance of our February meeting
next year. We might be thinking about the need to revise our approach
for 1996 and perhaps begin to move our time horizon further out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We probably will have to respond to a
bill on the Hill at some point. Our response will have to capture the
view of this Committee in its various aspects as they have been
raised, largely pro and con, by you, Al Broaddus, and the rest of us.
It is going to be our one shot at the legislation, and I am a little
concerned that if we don't focus on this issue, we could suddenly find
ourselves with significant mandated revisions in what we do. Those
revisions may not involve what we wanted, and in retrospect we may
find that we could have gotten a different and more favorable outcome.
MR. MELZER. I agree and I felt that way when we talked about
this in February. The more leadership we exercise in this, the better
off we are going to be in terms of the ultimate outcome. There are
different points of view on this issue, but I think it would be very
unfortunate if, for example, we got to a year from now and we were
debating how we might adjust the M2 and M3 ranges and never got to
this topic.
Price stability is what a central bank is all about. We
ought to be quite explicit about that commitment, and we ought to
discuss how we might achieve it operationally. So, that is very
consistent with the sorts of topics that Al is raising. Ultimately, I
think it would improve our accountability, which would in turn improve
our performance and lead to higher economic growth and employment than
we otherwise would have achieved. Gary Stern made some good points
about documenting that case. I think that is becoming increasingly
urgent, as pointed up by this discussion today, and it is something we
have to pursue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, your initial remarks about the
ranges for the monetary aggregates are quite appropriate and I agree
with them entirely. We are confronting a number of issues in monetary
policy at the moment, and some of those are going to come up as they
usually do in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. Changing the ranges
would just draw more attention to them and provide a real distraction
to the essential conversations that I think we need to be having.
With that in mind, I would favor alternative II for 1995 and
alternative I for 1996. That encompasses M3.
Let me just add one other thought, since there has been some
discussion of possible changes that Al Broaddus brought up. I will
throw on the table the possibility that if we really do not believe
that the aggregates are going to return to providing us with some
nexus to the real economy, the time might be coming if it is not here

7/5-6/95

-50-

already to think about a change in the statute. Not only is this
setting of the ranges a distraction for the Congress in some sense,
but it is occupying a lot of this Committee's time for no good reasons
except, as you said, Mr. Chairman, that the law is there.
If we
remove the statutory provision, the focus of Committee discussions can
be better directed to more important issues. I realize that there are
risks in going forward with that kind of legislative request, but I
think it is something that we ought to think about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS.
I favor alternative II for 1995 and
alternative I for 1996.
I find myself quite frustrated with this
discussion. I think part of it has to do with our not really knowing
whether the ranges are something we should be shooting for--whether
they are long-term objectives, or whether they are in effect shortterm monitoring ranges to be explained. So, I support the notion of
having a more extended discussion of what our goals should be in terms
of thinking about restructuring the Humphrey-Hawkins statute and the
kinds of things we monitor. I don't think this is the time to do it,
because I am not sure we know enough now about what range we should
monitor, whether it should be M2 or M3 or something else. At this
point, I certainly agree with the notion that if we change the M2
range now, we are going to draw more attention to it.
But at some
point I think we do need to address the kinds of issues that Al
Broaddus has raised and decide whether or not we are going to support
legislative changes that would get us off the horns of this dilemma.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My suspicion, incidentally, is that if
we are confronted with a legislative initiative to which we have to
respond, that might require us to have a special meeting to discuss it
or an addition to the agenda at a regular meeting that extends the
discussion. It is not going to be easy to respond. However, if we
have specific language proposed in draft legislation, that will focus
where this Committee wants to come out in the recommendation that we
as a group will want to send up to the Hill.
President Moskow.
MR. MOSCOW. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative II for 1995
and alternative I for 1996. In terms of the last point that we were
just discussing, assuming that we will have to respond to some type of
legislative initiative, I think it would be desirable for us to try to
get ahead of the curve, as you were anticipating in your earlier
comments. Perhaps we could have staff work done to identify some
options and some specific language that we could plan to consider at a
special meeting or at an extended meeting as you suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have been doing that for the last
several years in part to respond to and capture--not to an exact
extent but to a large extent--what we have been hearing around this
table. However, when we are confronted with specific legislative
language we will have to try to tie down the issue and not just float
interesting ideas across the table. It is going to become the law;
the law is going to affect how we behave; it is something that we are
going to have to deal with as we operate in an institutional context
on a day-by-day basis.

-51-

7/5-6/95

MR. MOSKOW. I agree and the legislative proposal would be
the action forcing the event. What I am suggesting is that in
anticipation of that coming legislation-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that and I think we will
start doing that as we begin to interact with the committees up on the
Hill.
MR. MOSKOW. I was hoping that in the work that will be done,
we could see some alternative specific language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't I suggest this: Don Kohn is
doing a good deal of work on this sporadically; he is the staff's
point person on this issue. If you have any ideas that you want to
put forward, I think it would be very useful for you to communicate
them, hopefully in writing, so that we can all see them. You might
send them to Don so that he can coordinate getting the various ideas
circulated and we can then decide where to go from there if the
legislative issue arises. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer alternative I for
1996.
In the case of 1995, I would also prefer alternative I because
I have a problem with changing benchmarks in the middle of the stream.
I think we lose a lot when we do that in terms of our ability to
discuss and judge changes that have occurred intra-period. Certainly,
we can conduct policy just as well without making this change. But I
think we can also have a better and a cleaner discussion in this
Committee, in the press, wherever, without the distraction of having
made a change right in the middle of the year and having people trying
to read into that something that was not meant to be there in the
first place, however clearly we may explain it.
So, I would prefer to
stay with alternative I for 1995 and for 1996 as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Alternative II for 1995 and alternative I for
1996 seem okay to me.
I would like to associate myself with remarks
that Al Broaddus and Tom Melzer have made. On our discussion relating
to possible legislation, has there been any further dialogue with
Senator Mack and is his proposal still the most likely that we will
need to respond to?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It seems to be the only operative
proposal at the moment. We have been trying to persuade the Senator
and his staff to take an approach similar to what has been sort of the
generic thinking here. If we have not circulated a copy of my letter
to Senator Mack, I think it would be quite useful to do so.
MR. KOHN.

Your letter has not been sent yet, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
would be going out.
MR. KOHN.
the letter over.

It has not been sent?

I thought it

I wanted to talk to them about it before sending

[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A letter will be going out!
I said in the letter that I was not speaking for the Board or the FOMC

7/5-6/95

but was expressing my own views on certain issues. But I must say
that I tried, as I formulated my letter, to take into consideration a
number of the views that I have heard around this table.
I said that
my thinking was still in a very preliminary stage, but it might be
useful, when we get that letter out, to circulate it to the Committee.
The letter might be useful as a vehicle to start getting your
responses.
MR. MCTEER. I think it would be important for us to give
Senator Mack the impression that we are eager to work with him on
this--not the impression that he is dragging us along kicking and
screaming.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, and we are trying specifically to do
that. Where we think he has a view that would be very difficult to
implement, we have been trying to communicate that opinion. Does
anybody else want to comment? Governor Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. I would like to associate myself with Governor
Lindsey's comments. I would favor alternative III for 1995 [Laughter]
and alternative II for 1996.
I certainly understand the sentiments
that you expressed, Mr. Chairman. This is not the most important
decision we are going to make this morning. I think we are dealing
with an imperfect law that asks us to communicate our objectives in an
imperfect way. I certainly understand why you don't want the ranges
to be the focus of your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, and I understand
that they can be confusing. Nevertheless, at the end of the day it
seems to me that this is the law of the land and we ought to do the
best we can to live with it and to have the forecasts that we put
forward be ones that are defensible. If you are asked why we have
selected these monetary targets, I hope you would be prepared to
answer. Then I ask myself how you would go about answering. If you
were to say that we are assuming a continuing upward trend in M2
velocity and if that were a defensible assumption, that would be fine.
That would imply, in turn, real objectives that I would find perfectly
appropriate. But if you were pushed that far, as I imagine you won't
be, and if you were not prepared to say that an upward trend in M2
velocity is our underlying assumption, then you in effect would be
communicating on behalf of this Committee objectives which I would not
regard as my objectives and I don't think they are the objectives of
this Committee. After Bob Parry said that our nominal GDP forecasts
don't represent our objectives, I reread the instructions. They said
the projections for both 1995 and 1996 should be based on what in our
judgment would be an appropriate monetary policy. So, I thought that
was the instruction under which we were to be operating.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think it said money supply.

SPEAKER(?).

You have a point.

MS. YELLEN.

It would be an appropriate monetary policy--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

However defined.

MS. YELLEN. --consistent with our projections for nominal
GDP.

-53-

7/5-6/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
specified in the instructions.

There is no M2 or anything else

MS. YELLEN. But I think Bob Parry said that the nominal GDP
projections, or their central tendency, should not be interpreted as
our objectives. Did I misread that?
MR. PARRY. No, you didn't.
I get the impression that people
have at times forecast what is going to happen as opposed to what they
would like to see happen. I could be very wrong on that.
MS. YELLEN. That is where I was coming from. I understand
why you don't want this to be a central issue of the testimony. In
the case of 1995 we have language for M3 that says that raising its
range is a technical adjustment. You don't seem to feel that M3 is
going to be the focus of the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. It seems to
me that we could adjust up the range for M2 for 1996 and make a very
similar statement about a change in our views about the velocity trend
for M2 and say the increase is a technical adjustment. At any rate,
that is where I would come out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I am in the Lindsey-Yellen camp here, but I
must say that I have a little trouble articulating a view on the Ms.
I find myself mumbling with great incoherence in the extreme; these Ms
are a problem. On your first point, I agree entirely. These are
basically gibberish numbers; we don't take them seriously; the markets
don't take them seriously; economists who pay attention to monetary
policy don't take them seriously; and it is hard for me to get very
exercised about them. Having said that, I think there is some
argument for consistency with the nominal GDP target, and I also
wonder why an M3 shift is a technical adjustment and an M2 shift is
not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason basically is that the M2
range is wholly an accident of history. M2 has become a crucial
variable in discussions on the Hill.
SPEAKER(?).

It used to be M1.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. I am just saying that if you are
asking for a rational reason for the current M2 range, I can't find
one.
MR. BLINDER. Right, I don't think there is either, and it is
hard for me get exercised about this issue one way or another. Now,
unlike the mumbling with great incoherence, there were two things that
were said around the table that I can relate to very strongly. First,
the kind of plan that Al Broaddus outlined seems to me greatly
superior to these M ranges. I don't mean that to be an endorsement
word-for-word; I don't think Al wants to hold it word-for-word. But
it surely has to be a much better route than the M2, M3 mumblings. I
just don't have any doubt about that. I think that something along
those lines ought to be explored. The other thing I can relate to is
what Gary Stern said. Mike and Don may remember that my first FOMC
meeting was the Humphrey-Hawkins one last July, and I came out of that
meeting saying that we really ought to get the staff working and put

-54-

7/5-6/95

together all the research there is on the costs of inflation versus
the benefits of disinflation; we should put together some kind of
compendium of research, which is just what Gary suggested. Those are
two very coherent thoughts that I can relate to on these ranges.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
the vote on them?

Are we returning to the ranges and

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Even though we are required to vote on
1995 and 1996 ranges, let me suggest--can we vote on M2 separately for
1995 and 1996?
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As far as I can judge, there seems to be
a broad willingness, if I may use that term, to do nothing on M2 for
either 1995 or 1996, but I sense that there is a significant split
with respect to M3; there may be a majority in favor of raising the M3
range.
I am reasonably certain about the first proposition, and what
I will do is put to a vote a range of 1 to 5 percent for M2 for both
years, which is unchanged from the current range.
I would like to put
that to a vote.
MR. BERNARD. So the vote is whether people prefer 1 to 5
percent for M2 for both years?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On M3, the issue is whether to raise the
range to 2 to 6 percent for both years or to stay where we are.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
of 2 to 6 percent.

There was a big majority in favor

CHAIMAN GREENSPAN. That was my impression. I think nearly
everyone was more comfortable with that higher range. So, let us vote
on 2 to 6 percent for both years.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

7/5-6/95

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Short-term monetary policy--Don Kohn.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Let's cover any questions
for Don; then we'll take a break for coffee. Yes, President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN.
MR. KOHN.
characterize that.

We have alternatives A, A-prime, and B?

Right, or A-minus.

MS. MINEHAN.
considering.

I don't know how you want to

I just want to be sure that that is what we are

MR. LINDSEY.

You can do what I did.

MS. MINEHAN.

What is that?

MR. LINDSEY.

I gave him alternative C.

MS. MINEHAN.

I think three alternatives are enough!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don?
why don't we break for coffee.

If not,

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me start off the discussion as
usual.
First, I might indicate that I was somewhat surprised
yesterday by the degree of convergence on the outlook. As I saw it,
virtually all of us were concerned about asymmetric risks on the down
side, but no one thought the probability of a recession was better
than 50/50. Indeed, all your forecasts imply that the economy will
work its way through this period. There was clearly, in the
discussion and in the evaluations, some uncertainty as to how the
current adjustment process ultimately will unfold. In my judgment,
the crucial issue is whether the inventory adjustment will reach a
critical mass that will weaken incomes sufficiently to upend final
demand. Such a development would in turn set in motion a typical
recession driven by inventories in a vicious circle downward until it
exhausts itself. At this stage that does not appear to be the likely
outcome, and indeed time is on the side of emerging stability. All we
really need is sluggish final demand that persists until the inventory
adjustment finally dissipates.
Three or so weeks ago I must say that I interpreted the risks
as still increasing, because all the evidence that I could see
suggested that the economy was moving to the down side. The inventory
adjustment process was under way, but not as rapidly as I thought was
going to be needed to be easily successful in removing the adjustment

7/5-6/95

-56-

in inventories as a retarding element overhanging the expansion; and
there was an increasing danger that it could reach a critical mass.
But the data of the last few weeks clearly are moving in the direction
that, while the downside risks are still there, we at least seem to
have reached the maximum risk potential and probably are now somewhat
on the other side. But by no means have we reached the point where we
can very readily presume that the major threat to the recovery is over
at this stage.
The key variable that I think is crucial in this process is
that durable goods tend to be the major adjustment vehicle. Usually,
one can learn a great deal about that by looking at how the orders
structure at the bottom of the durable goods pyramid is behaving-steel, aluminum, and other metals to a lesser extent. An initial
evaluation, coming largely from contacts at U.S. Steel, was that the
steel industry was extraordinarily weak. In fact, conditions in that
industry looked very much like those I have seen in the past on the
way to a major inventory liquidation. It is turning out not to be
that big a problem, because when we surveyed
operation, to get an idea of whether or not we are looking at
competitive shifts or whether we are looking at real changes, our
contacts
while sensing that orders were weak, displayed
nothing remotely close to some of the negative vibes we were getting
from
Indeed, the fact that ingot production
and, as best we can judge, finished goods production are holding up
raises questions about how weak these markets are, because history as
I remember it for the steel business tells us that when the markets
really start to evaporate, shipments fall very dramatically and before
that the ingot level goes down very sharply. That has not happened.
The price of steel scrap has held up, apparently bolstered to an
extent by export demand. Mill product prices seem to have eased, but
it is not terribly clear by how much. We had a significant decline in
aluminum orders three or four weeks ago. As best we can judge, it
reflected developments not dissimilar to what is going on in steel-the automobile backup, excessive inventories of steel and aluminum at
service centers, and to a small extent weak forward orders. Aluminum
orders have come back from the low point. They are still lethargic
but are scarcely evidencing the type of underlying metals inventory
liquidation that usually is at the forefront of some of the bigger
declines that we invariably have seen in conjunction with a major
inventory correction.
We are, as best I can judge from the purchasing managers'
data, beginning to see some significant retrenchment in lead times on
deliveries. This is probably also affecting the holdings of
inventories of component parts and peripherals in the producer
durables area because orders for nondefense capital goods weighted by
the demand for final producer durables are holding up better than the
total durable goods orders for nondefense capital goods. This implies
that orders for peripheral parts and components of the nondefense
capital goods are coming down, which would be consistent with the type
of durable goods inventory correction that we would expect. We have
seen significant inventory liquidation in both cars and trucks in May
If one looks at the data on inventories, the motor vehicle
and June.
inventory accumulation in the. first quarter was $14 billion out of the
$49 billion NIPA inventory change. Preliminary data on motor vehicle
sales and production for the second quarter suggest zero inventory
change, which effectively means that most of the implied $20 billion

7/5-6/95

reduction in inventory investment in the Greenbook stems from the
motor vehicle area and is pretty much on schedule. The big surge, or
apparent surge, in book value of manufacturing inventories excluding
motor vehicle finished goods inventories in May evidently got marked
down in constant dollars to a level which, combining April figures, is
a shade--$1 or $2 billion--under the first-quarter level for that
segment. Looking across the board, it strikes me that the estimate of
inventory investment in the Greenbook for the second quarter seems a
not unreasonable number especially when we also look at the shifts
that have occurred in C&I loans and commercial paper. Those shifts
suggest a fairly pronounced decline in June inventory investment and
probably in May as well, but it is hard to say. While the adjustment
in inventory investment is not moving at a pace that suggests it is
going to be over fairly rapidly, it is moving at a pace that does not
seem inconsistent with the view that final demand will hold up enough
for it to work its way through. I suspect this is the reason why the
general view around this table has been one of mild optimism even
though the members recognize that the downside risks clearly have
increased since the last meeting.
So far as final demand is concerned, we saw that the motor
vehicle sales figures were a shade stronger in June, largely as a
consequence of Chrysler and the Chrysler sales incentives. The
important issue is probably not so much that sales were up over May
but that they were up significantly over April.
told me that the market disappeared in the
second half of April. They didn't have a clue as to why. The market
came back in early May, and they did not have clue as to why it came
back. It wasn't a terribly useful insight [Laughter], but the market
does not seem to be too bad at this point. The new home sales figure
for May, at an annual rate of 722,000, is bizarre as most of those
home sales figures are. But we have other evidence that suggests that
the residential building sector is clearly turning. As you well know,
mortgage applications for purchasing new and existing homes have been
moving up in both the series put together by the Mortgage Bankers
Association and that by Morgan Guaranty, which has a slightly broader
sample. The home builders data clearly indicate that things are
moving. This is important not only because of the importance of the
residential construction sector, but also because history suggests
that motor vehicle sales and some parts of the residential building
industry move together. If there is firmness in the home building
area it has to exert, if history is any guide, some upward movement in
the motor vehicle area, which would be very useful.
With regard to the weakness in the rest of the world, I must
say that I subscribe to the concerns that the Vice Chairman and others
among you have indicated. There is something going on in the rest of
the world that I find somewhat disturbirg. One gets a sense that the
pickup that seemed to be under way earl er is having great difficulty
gathering strength in Europe. In Japan, the odds that something
adverse of significance is going to happen seem high enough to make
one quite uncomfortable, and the Canadian economy clearly is in
something of a swoon. Nonetheless, our export orders, probably
largely as a result of the improved competitive position of American
producers, suggest that the foreign market is still moving.
The equipment markets, especially when we adjust the orders
figures for the final PDE as distinct from all the components and

7/5-6/95

-58-

parts, remain quite solid. Unfilled orders still seem to be rising at
a modest pace, though some slowdown in the rate of increase is
probably on the horizon as some around this table have argued, mainly
with respect to the deceleration risks that Governor Blinder
mentioned. Although we are not yet getting any material evidence that
profits are weakening, there is some evidence that the underestimation
by the analysts of a continued rise in earnings through the first
quarter shifted in the second quarter. But it is largely a change in
their views rather than any really significant decline in earnings.
Indeed, one crude measure that I tend to look at because it is useful
on occasion--manufacturing prices over manufacturing unit labor costs
as a measure of margins--continued to move up through May. So, we are
not yet seeing the underlying earnings deterioration that one would
expect at this stage. I do think that it has to emerge because it is
hard to visualize that earnings are going to hold up through the
second and third quarters. But at least there is no evidence that
they are pulling back to a degree that could undercut the capital
goods markets, and certainly the nonresidential building area remains
quite strong. As I said before, it looks as though, or at least there
is a possibility, that we are passing through and maybe have passed
through the period of maximum risk. But just remember that business
cycles are not smooth even if large external shocks are missing.
In summary, I would say that we clearly have managed to
contain a highly unstable and inflationary business cycle expansion
that was taking on some fairly strong characteristics in the second
half of last year. I think we have cut the top off this boom and
thereby significantly reduced the probability of having to deal with
what was going to be a heavy and very distasteful inventory correction
and perhaps a capital goods correction late this year or next year. I
don't think we have solved the problem of the business cycle. I don't
think human nature has changed. All we can hope for perhaps is to
limit the degree of fluctuation. But somewhere, somehow, by some
means, we are going to get something that is going to be called a
recession unless somebody finds that human nature has changed in a
manner that it has not in eons.
So far as policy is concerned, we concluded in late 1993 that
the appropriateness of a 3 percent federal funds rate was no longer as
evident as it had been before the elimination of the balance sheet
adjustment strains and the 50 mile an hour head winds to which that
rate was addressed. We accordingly and appropriately moved the rate
up as we confronted new circumstances in early 1994. Today, we have
defused to a significant degree the inflationary pressures that were
building through the early weeks of this year. At this point we have
to ask ourselves whether a 6 percent nominal federal funds rate, or a
3 percent real federal funds rate, is the appropriate level we wish to
be at in the next 6 to 12 months.
In this regard we have quite encouraging evidence that the
cyclical peak in inflation may be close at hand. I think inflation is
being held down by events in the rest of the world. The crucial
question we must ask ourselves is whether we need a 3 percent real
federal funds rate to continue the secular disinflation that we have
been involved with for a number of years and specifically the points
that were made by Governors Kelley and Blinder with respect to the
downward moves of the cyclical peaks of inflation. Remember that the
cyclical peaks were all moving up throughout the 1970s and into the

7/5-6/95

-59-

1980s--indeed, the cyclical lows were moving up as well--and these
highs and lows are now moving down.
If as Don Kohn says, and I think
he is quite right in this regard, the current real short-term federal
funds rate is above some notion of the equilibrium or natural rate,
and hence that rate is consistent with a degree of restraint that is
not appropriate to the disinflationary trend that we envisage is
occurring, then the issue is whether we should bring the rate down.
If the argument essentially is that the 3 percent real rate is indeed
appropriate for the future, I would ask how do we know that 4 percent
real or 6 percent real is not more appropriate?
The point I am trying to make is that we are not, as a
Committee with a goal of price stability, saying that the rate of real
interest consistent with that is infinity. We obviously are arguing
that there is a certain path which is consistent with that. We have
to come to a conclusion of where we think that path is, and this gets
to the point that Al Broaddus was raising about how we are focusing on
the appropriate longer-term path to price stability. As I read what
it is that we know, the real federal funds rate consistent with
achieving price stability is something under 3 percent--not for
certain but with some degree of reasonableness. If that is our
conclusion--and that is what I would conclude, though everyone has to
make his or her own judgment on this--the question is what do we do
about it. A month or so ago when a very rapid decline in inflationary
pressures seemed to be building up, I would have been inclined to say
that we probably were safe in moving the rate down 50 basis points as
a mid-course correction. In retrospect, I think that was a wrong view
because I don't think the markets would believe an announcement in
which we tried to make clear that it was a mid-course correction and
that it was as far as we would go, which is frankly as far as I think
we ought to go. We tried to make that point last August going in the
other direction and we failed. That is, the markets didn't believe us
and responded pretty much against it.
I have concluded that, since the risks are beginning to ease
slightly, there is no urgency here; but I do think we should move
because I find it increasingly difficult to argue in favor of staying
where we are right now unless one can argue that inflationary
pressures are still building. I personally find very little, if any,
evidence that that is the case. I have concluded that probably the
best thing to do is to move the funds rate downward by 25 basis
points, which I must say likely will be a big deal because we would be
changing the direction of policy. I am concerned about going further
than that in part because I am really concerned about spooking the
markets, especially the foreign exchange markets in this context. And
I don't think a larger reduction now is necessary. We could readily,
if we so chose, add another 25 basis points in August or later. In
that sense, I think what we would do is probably create an expectation
in the marketplace that indeed we will move again since everyone says
"well, the Fed never moves only once."
I am not sure that is all bad
because it probably would mean that we would support gradually
declining long-term rates, including mortgage rates, which would
create support within the economic system. I find it very difficult
to envisage inflationary pressures emerging at any point in the near
term. If we were to lower rates by 50 basis points, I am fearful the
I would be uncomfortable
markets would ask "when is the next 50?"
with that because it is very difficult to dissuade the markets from

7/5-6/95

-60-

that point of view, and I think we would drive the federal funds
futures rate down to a considerable extent.
I come out with the view, which strikes me as consistent with
the Committee's basic economic outlook, that an appropriate monetary
policy at this stage would be to move 25 basis points. The choice of
an asymmetric directive is implicit in the notion that we might want
to move again before the August meeting, while a symmetric directive
implies that we wouldn't choose to move until that meeting. I am
marginally in favor of going asymmetric, but I must say I don't feel
strongly about that one way or the other. That is because I think
events will determine what we will do. We are going through a period
when we will know within 6 weeks or 2 months at the latest whether the
adjustment process that is going on will cumulate into significant
recession pressures or whether it will end up as a pause in the
expansion. I don't think we can make that judgment today, but we will
know a very considerable amount more the next time we meet. So, that
is my view. Who wishes to begin? President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as you have indicated, in
February of 1994 we set in train a series of actions to stem the
rather robust economy in pursuit of our goal of price stability. I
think no one on this Committee should be surprised, and I am sure no
one is surprised, that we have experienced some slowdown in the
economic expansion. I guess the surprise for me and perhaps for
others has been the extent of the downturn that we have had. Now, the
question in my mind is whether or not this slowdown will result in a
cumulative downturn and a recession. My view is that that probably
will not be the case and, as their forecasts indicate, that view is
shared by the other members.
If I were to look at my forecast and
indeed the forecast in the Greenbook and the other forecasts that I
have seen, I probably would not want to move because I think the
results of those forecasts are reasonably favorable. Some of the
forecasts anticipate growth a little below potential but not seriously
so. The further question I ask myself is whether I believe even my
own forecast. There are enough uncertainties surrounding all these
forecasts to make me a little cautious about the downside risks.
Those risks clearly are there although, as you said, they probably
have dissipated a little over the past couple of weeks. Also, I think
that the market is telling us that the 3 percent real federal funds
rate that you talked about is a little on the high side.
In terms of policy I think it is wise and prudent for us to
take this action at this time--as an insurance policy in a sense.
When I came into the meeting, I must say I was thinking more in terms
of a 50 basis point drop because I thought that 25 basis points would
only compel the market to keep asking when the next move is going to
take place. But hearing your rationale for 25 basis points, I would
be prepared to support that. While 25 basis points is a close call
for me, I think it is highly desirable for us to move at this time,
whether it be 25 or 50 basis points.
I think an asymmetric directive
is appropriate. The risks of easing at this point are fairly minimal
in my view. The inflation rate is not that bad. As I have said
before and other people have said today, we have made substantial
progress, and I think that we are going to reach the cyclical peak of
inflation. I am not at all concerned by the argument that I have
heard outside of this room that we may have to move again on the other
side and therefore we should not move now. That argument does not

-61-

7/5-6/95

carry much weight with me because I think we are compelled to move
when conditions so warrant.
In summary, I would support your 25 basis
point move at this time with an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I strongly feel we should be easing today.
Indeed, it seems to me that we are already somewhat behind the curve,
which is something we rightly feared greatly on the up side. We never
really did get behind the curve then, fortunately. But I think we now
are behind the curve. We would be terribly behind the curve I might
add, and staring into the mouth of a recession, were it not for what
you said in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in February, Mr. Chairman.
That statement, for which I think we should all thank you, in
conjunction with the incoming data has created an interest rate easing
that was not of our making. And that, indeed, is what all of us are
expecting is going to support the economy in the second half of 1995,
which is the crucial period for this episode. That is why I and, I
think, most of us are not looking for a recession later this year and
into next year.
I want to say for the record, Mr. Chairman, that I wrote
these notes on the 4th of July, because what I am going to say about
the reasons is so similar to what you just said. With that in mind, I
am going to be extremely brief. The case for easing now starts with
the presumption, or the guesstimate, that the 3 percent real funds
rate is too high for the long or intermediate run. Were it not for
that belief, I think we would have a much weaker case for easing now.
But I certainly think that it is true.
I think it is very, very
likely true with the current fiscal stance, and just about as sure as
one can be with the significant deficit reduction that appears to be
in train. So, I feel pretty confident that a 3 percent real funds
rate is not something that we want to live with for very long, or
another way to put the same thing, that a 3 percent real funds rate is
restrictive at a time when we should not be restrictive.
The second part of the case is exactly what you said also-that calling this a 3 percent real funds rate assumes that we have
capped inflation at about 3 percent, which is the way it looks to me.
If so, bringing down the nominal
That seems quite likely as well.
funds rate at this point is in no sense abandoning the long-run
movement toward price stability. It is capping the cyclical peak,
exactly as you said.
The third part of the argument--again you said it and
everybody around the table said it in the go-around--is that the
economy looks highly vulnerable to a negative shock right now. As Bob
Forrestal just said, that means we ought to be taking out some
insurance against recession. It would have been nice if we had taken
this insurance out some months ago, but we didn't have that kind of
foresight. We ought to take it out now.
The final nail in the coffin is something you did not
mention, but something that I know you believe as well.
It is that,
given what the markets have done, if the Fed does not ratify it with
some easing--and it doesn't have to be today, but soon--the bond
market is likely to back up. I might add that I would expect the
stock market to crack as well. So, the very things that we are

-62-

7/5-6/95

expecting to support the economy and prevent a recession will
evaporate right before our eyes, if we don't act. Now, having said
that, as you know Mr. Chairman, I feel that a 50 basis point,
symmetric move would be better than 25 basis points, asymmetric, which
in turn would be better than 25 basis points, symmetric. Let me very
briefly give you the reasons why I think doing 50 basis points would
be preferable today.
It starts with the belief that the ultimate need is going to
be more than 50 basis points. If you don't believe that, doing 50
basis points today would not be a smart action. There is definitely
room for disagreement on that.
I feel that with the fiscal
contraction in train, more than 50 basis points is likely to be the
end of this episode. That is to say, at the end of this episode the
nominal funds rate will be below 5-1/2 percent. If I didn't feel
that, I would not be arguing for 50 basis points now.
The second part of the argument is, as I said before, that I
think we are already behind the curve and it is useful at this point
to give a signal to bolster confidence that the Fed is watching and
not asleep at the wheel.
In addition to that, doing 25 basis points will be read as a
fairly timid action suggesting a very tentative Federal Reserve not
quite sure about what should be done. Now, maybe that is in fact
accurate, and we are certainly seeing a lot of newspaper reports
suggesting that. But again, it is not the image that we would like to
project, if we can help it. Related to that, I think that doing 25
basis points now would create more uncertainty about our near-term
future intentions than doing 50 basis points. We will have the
markets constantly looking for the other shoe to drop and envisioning
that this is the start of another downward staircase. I think there
is more credibility that minus 50 now would be a mid-course correction
or whatever you want to call it--I would call it a temporary resting
place--a movement that we would be comfortable to sit with for a while
and observe developments.
Finally, no matter what we say, a downward move of 25 basis
points is going to be read as evidence of a divided Committee that a
very clever Chairman was able to hold together on an in-between
compromise. That, again, is not a total disaster. The situation is
somewhat equivocal and reasonable people could have different views.
But I would say it is not the image that we should want.
So, for all these reasons I think doing 50 basis points now
would be better than 25 basis points now and 25 basis points in
August. But, for the sake of unity, I could go along with your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I basically agree with many of the
comments that Bob Forrestal made. If I were certain of our forecast
and that in the Greenbook, I would probably favor leaving policy
unchanged at present. However, as we all know, forecasts are often
wrong and they often underpredict the size of cyclical swings in the
economy. Therefore, I support a 25 or a 50 basis point cut in the
I would have some preference for the latter with
funds rate.

-63-

7/5-6/95

symmetric language as insurance against a more prolonged decline in
real GDP than I think is most likely. I want to emphasize, however,
that we should be prepared to reverse course and raise rates if
circumstances change and growth looks as though it will exceed the
growth rate of potential output. In fact, I don't think we should cut
rates now unless we are prepared to raise them again fairly soon,
should that become necessary.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. In my judgment, and I expressed
some of this yesterday, the current slowing in the expansion will be
followed by a rebound of growth at a rate near the economy's long-term
potential. In fact, I think the recent evidence suggests, and you
mentioned this in your comments, that lower intermediate- and longterm interest rates have in effect put a floor under the housing and
auto markets. So, at this time my principal concern is really with
the long-run inflation trend. Trend CPI inflation of 3 percent or
higher is reflected in the forecasts, including the Greenbook
forecast, and in long-term interest rates.
In my view trend inflation
of 3 percent just isn't good enough. With CPI inflation during the
first half of 1995 running about 3-1/2 percent at an annual rate and
the economy expected to continue to expand at or near its potential, I
don't believe the current economic outlook warrants a change in the
stance of monetary policy. Easing policy at the first sign of
economic weakness after a period of what I think we would all agree is
unsustainable real growth undermines our credibility and could
adversely affect the bond and foreign exchange markets.
In effect, we
would be engaging in short-run fine-tuning under conditions of great
uncertainty with respect to the economic outlook. Accordingly, my
preference would be to maintain the current restrictive policy to
ensure that the acceleration in inflation that began last year is
capped and to bring trend inflation to a level significantly below 3
percent.
Now, having said that, if it is the strong consensus of this
group that a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate is warranted, I
would not dissent on that even though that is not what I would favor.
But I would say that if we did that we should make it clear that this
action does not reflect a change in our commitment to reduce the trend
rate of inflation. And, as Bob Parry suggested, we should be prepared
to reverse course and allow the funds rate to rise should the evolving
situation warrant it. Any change in the discount rate at this time or
a larger change in the funds rate would be most inappropriate in my
view.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Going back to
February 1994 when we began the process of raising rates, I remind the
Committee that at that time the unemployment rate was still above the
natural rate and inflation was still coming down. We made the very
wise and prudent decision to take a forward-looking stance on monetary
policy and not react to current conditions. I am glad we did. I
think it was the right thing to do, and I would suggest that we do the
same thing today. When we look down the road 6 to 12 months, we are
looking at the first half of 1996 when our action will have its
impact. Therefore, I agree with the point that was just made that we

-64-

7/5-6/95

cannot think of ourselves as reacting to the current slowdown because
there is nothing we can do about the current slowdown. What we can do
is affect what we think is going to be the economy in early 1996.
In
that regard, I think we are fortunate that we have had the slowdown in
the second quarter of 1995. Had we had the slowdown in the fourth
quarter of 1995 or the first quarter of 1996 when some other factors
that I foresee are going to come into play, we would be in the
proverbial soup.
I think the Greenbook, although I am glad to see they have
made an assumption of fiscal policy contraction, understates the
actual amount. What they did was to average the President's proposal
and the Congressional proposal when, in fact, these proposals start
from different baselines. The Medicare saving that the President
proposed is from a rate of growth in Medicare spending that is the
same as the Senate's, and on the appropriations side that is not where
the differences really are. I think we may see something a lot closer
to $40 billion followed by another $40 billion rather than the numbers
in the Greenbook. In addition, in the first half of next year, we
have to add to that the potential of three other downside risks.
In
the order of their likelihood I would call them Japan, Canada, and
Europe. None of us can really bet on the state of the Japanese
economy. The chances of something significant happening there are
probably less than 50/50, but they are high enough when we add that to
the probability of continued sluggishness in Canada and/or less
expansion than the Greenbook forecast for Europe; the latter seems
high to me given that they have to have both a fiscal and a monetary
contraction to meet the Maastrich criteria. It all adds up to a slow
first half of 1996.
I agree, therefore, with Governor Blinder that ultimately we
are going to need more than a 50 basis point reduction. If I were
betting I would say that a year from now we will be 100 basis points
under where we are now, and we still may be chasing where we want to
be. However, Mr. Chairman, I agree with your point on tactical
grounds. I think that 25 basis points is the right move to make today
largely because of those foreign exchange rate considerations. I
would be very nervous, given the current state of the yen, about
making a move that was considered bold and aggressive and might send
the yen up, with all kinds of perverse implications for our bond
market and for the Japanese economy. And so, I support your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I can be brief; I planned to say a lot about the
debt aggregate! [Laughter]
We probably have one negative quarter in
the bag and we may have a second in the bag. If we do, that will be
embarrassing. It will be called a recession; and if we have a
recession in the second and third quarters, looking back on it in the
future, we will be a lot happier if we had eased today. If we barely
escape a negative third quarter and barely escape the recession label,
the economy is still likely to be weak and an easing will still look
Only if we have a booming
to have been appropriate at this time.
third quarter will we look back on a decision to cut the fed funds
target now as something of an embarrassment. If the economy last
February had looked like it does now, I don't believe we would have
It now looks like we may have gone
gone that last 50 basis points.

-65-

7/5-6/95

one bridge too far. I don't regard a 25 basis point reduction in the
fed funds target as much of an easing of policy, but even if we call
it an easing, it is consistent with our long-term goal of fighting
inflation for much the same reason that a race car has brakes. The
point is not to reduce the average speed of the race car but to keep
it on the track for the maximum sustainable speed. A recession now is
not in the best interest of the Federal Reserve in the future and our
future will be to fight inflation. As for tactics and the probable
reaction of the markets, I'll have to defer to your judgment. I must
admit, though, that coming into the meeting my rationale was that a 50
basis point reduction would leave the markets more settled than a 25
I think they are going to start clammering for
basis point reduction.
the next 25 basis points immediately. So, I would have recommended a
50 basis point move, but I will defer to your judgment on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. This is a fairly difficult policy decision for
me. When I reviewed all the materials for this meeting, I realized
that any decision that I would make would really depend on the
interplay of three different factors. The first relates to my own
preference among the three longer-run policy alternatives that Don
laid out, and I must confess to some preference for the baseline
strategy among the three, recognizing that they are all forecast-based
and so forth. Second, and probably more important, is my view of
short-term risks to the baseline forecast as we see it in the
Greenbook. And finally, even if the risks are skewed to one side or
the other, what are the costs of being wrong? That is, are the costs
of being wrong relatively high even if the risks are low?
I think I view the risks to the forecast pretty much the same
as everybody else here sees them. I think those risks have changed
over the last few months from being on the up side--that is, that
growth would be faster and inflation more of a problem--to being
fairly evenly balanced; and now they seem to be much more on the down
side--that is, in the direction of slower growth than the forecast
suggests. However, I think these risks are wholly in the context of a
pause in economic growth and not a recession. Growth could be slower
than the baseline forecast, particularly in the third quarter, given
the uncertainties about near-term consumer demand, inventory buildup,
auto sales, and other factors that people mentioned yesterday. But I
do think there is a powerful offset to all of this in the drop in
interest rates, the health of the banking system, and the health of
financial markets in general.
In my view, those financial factors
will pull the economy out in fine measure by year-end.
I continue to believe that even though the risks of being
wrong on the up side are small--that is, having much stronger growth
by year-end than the Greenbook predicts right now--such a development
would be pretty costly in terms of central bank credibility and in
terms of what might have to be done in 1996 to rein in excessive
growth should it materialize. In that regard, I think the boom/bust
scenario that DRI plays out in some of its latest releases--even
though it gives those results, as I do, a low probability--is
interesting and instructive. Also, I should note that the data have
been pretty mixed, especially recently, and that recent data tend to
confirm my hypothesis that financial market conditions will spur
growth by year-end. A lot more data will come in by the end of July.

7/5-6/95

Normally, I would not be sympathetic to a wait-and-see attitude, but I
really have these concerns about what would happen if we are wrong on
the up side by the end of the year and what we would have to do in
1996 to rein in that excess demand. So, I came into the meeting
wanting to vote for a no-change, although asymmetric, directive. I am
not going to dissent over 25 basis points, but I did want to convey
these beliefs on my part. I can go with your recommendation, and I
can certainly accept an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think a quarter-point drop in the funds rate
is the right amount at the right time, along with an asymmetric
directive. The current level of monetary restraint has helped cause
more of a correction and associated downside risks than we preferred.
A cautious move toward less restraint, therefore, would help shore up
demand and lessen downside risks. More importantly, it would
demonstrate that the Fed is awake at the switch and wants to avoid a
recession. I think we would be seen as forward-looking both when the
economy is overheating and when it is underachieving. As the central
bank our primary contribution to prosperity over time is price
stability. Within the longer-run context of moving toward price
stability, however, there is some room and indeed an obligation to
take into account shorter-run fluctuations in demand. Now is one of
those times to act promptly. To wait is to risk having to ease more
and faster later on, with a greater probability of boom/bust in 1996
or 1997. A quarter-point drop in the funds rate would be a prudent
magnitude for financial markets as well.
It would in my judgment
balance the need to try to avoid feeding another big run-up in asset
values versus the risk of setting off a major correction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, after listening to the Committee's
discusion yesterday and today, one of the things that strikes me--it
feeds a little bit off the Bluebook--is that if we take the outcome in
the baseline forecast as reasonable and desirable, then we might go
with a no-change policy. In our own Bank's view and in my view that
outcome is reasonable, and in their comments around this table a lot
of people said that they found such an outlook reasonable. This
suggests to me that the real funds rate may be where it should be at
this stage. There is no strong evidence that it is not. When we look
at the risks, yes, there are downside risks.
But as others have
pointed out, the strong financial markets, the favorable banking
conditions, and our own Bank's projection point to upside inflation
risks, and that leaves me inclined to leave policy unchanged. There
is a statement in the Bluebook to the effect that if we want to insure
against a possible further slowdown, we might want to ease. But I am
concerned that that insurance comes with its own price. When we vote
for monetary stimulus, we are also increasing the risk of further
inflation. In addition, some members want to ease in anticipation of
prospective shocks that have not yet materialized. The odds of such
occurrences are unknown and that, too, leaves me uneasy about moving
at this time.
So, I think it would be prudent for us to adopt an
asymmetric directive and wait for information rather than to move at
this juncture based on the projections and the evidence that we have
about the real fed funds rate.

-67-

7/5-6/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I think the appropriate criterion for choosing a
stance of monetary policy is whether we feel it is a move toward the
objective of stabilizing the purchasing power of the dollar. An
inappropriate criterion would be either somebody's idea about what the
impact of fiscal multipliers was going to be, assuming we knew how to
measure fiscal policy appropriately, or some idea about a cumulative
process of decline in the economy in the absence of some pump-priming
to prop it up. I do know that people outside the Fed, who believe in
some kind of stagnation thesis and think that the economy contracts in
the absence of fiscal or monetary stimulus, are going to interpret our
actions differently than I would. But I still think that there are
appropriate and inappropriate reasons for our thinking about whether a
policy adjustment is called for. In Don's characterization of our
move last February, one of his interpretations was that it is possible
for us to take out some insurance, and I think that was correct. The
way I viewed it at the time was that if we enjoyed full credibility of
our commitment to stabilize the value of the dollar over time and felt
that we would achieve a stance of policy that in 1996 and 1997 would
move us decisively in that direction, then I would not have thought
that the action in February was necessary. That is quite different
from what I thought about our November 1994 action. In my view that
action was an adjustment that was necessary to move us toward price
stability. I did not think that the February action in a vacuum would
have been necessary. With the advantage of hindsight, I think the
February action was necessary because of what has happened to the
price numbers and the possibility of our objectives being
misinterpreted had we not done that.
The way I think about policy now is in terms of how much
insurance we need against future inflation. I would not want to be
taking out insurance against a contraction because I think the economy
tends to expand in the absence of adverse shocks or perverse policy.
So, it is a question of whether we should cancel all the insurance now
and whether that would be appropriately interpreted, or in the
alternative that we have a growing confidence that we are back on
track with regard to the future value of the dollar and so we are
going to cancel half the insurance now. We can live with the "other
shoe to drop" syndrome if it is interpreted that when we have further
evidence that everybody agrees that we are moving toward stabilizing
the value of our currency, we will then feel comfortable in canceling
the other half of the insurance policy. At that point I would pause.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, policy changes should
not be based on reaction to present data, but rather on our views of
the economy and prices about 18 months from now. I say that because
if we were dealing only with a response to recent data I would want to
keep policy unchanged because I don't like the price numbers that we
have seen thus far this year. But based on a view toward the future,
I do think that the real,federal funds rate is too high. It is higher
than it either should be or needs to be and thus we should ease. The
question therefore becomes when and how much. Especially because of
my very great concern about possible shocks from weakness abroad, I
think the time is now. From what we know now and not giving credit
for fiscal restraint until the appropriations bills are passed and

-68-

7/5-6/95

signed by the President, I believe that the likely total easing
requirement is 50 basis points.
I think a single 50 basis point move
now would be very likely to destabilize financial markets and lead to
a concern that we know much more than we really do, or fear more than
we really should, about a likely recession. That would disturb
markets greatly, and I agree with Governor Lindsey on the likelihood
that it would disturb the dollar/yen relationship and disturb further
the already weak Japanese economy that is a source of great worry to
quite a number of us.
So, I think the downside risks that many of us
discussed could become downside realities as a result of a 50 basis
point move now.
But I think we also have another reason to be concerned that
our fears about downside risks could become downside realities, and
that would be if leaks were to come from this meeting that would
reveal our very considerable discussion of downside risks. We are in
a particularly delicate period of the business cycle. We are also in
a very delicate period for financial markets, and I think we have to
show an unusual amount of discipline and restraint about what we have
to say for ourselves. Ideally, it would be very nice if all of us
were to maintain a stoic silence until the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony when he could lay out a very balanced presentation of what
the Committee really thinks. Therefore, I support the 25 basis point
asymmetric proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I believe that we should be
forward-looking in setting our monetary policy. While we had two or
three months of bad numbers, there is still a lot of uncertainty about
the economy's underlying strength. As you mentioned, some of the more
recent data that we have seen on housing and orders for durable goods
suggest that the economy is stabilizing at a sustainable level of real
activity. I think it is important that we be careful not to give the
perception that we are tying monetary policy too closely to the
fluctuations in short-run output. That would damage the credibility
of our commitment to reducing inflation. Clearly, if inflationary
pressures are moderating, we should be prepared to reduce the federal
funds rate gradually. I believe the real federal funds rate should be
below 3 percent, especially given the fiscal policy assumptions. At
this point our forecast has the economy slowing to a sustainable rate
of growth with some reduction in inflationary pressures, though not as
much as the Greenbook in 1995. This is based on both the forecast
that we have from our model and my own personal contacts with people
in our District and elsewhere. Our forecast also assumes that the
Committee will be lowering the federal funds rate by at least 50 basis
points by the end of 1995. The timing of this policy action would
have little impact on the economy's performance this year. By our
assessment the 25 basis point reduction in the fed funds rate now will
have little quantitative impact, but it may serve as a signal that we
are indeed forward-looking. However, I think it is important that we
not give the impression that we are simply responding to short-run
fluctuations in output. It must be clear that our action is
consistent with the slowing expansion and moderation in the inflation
outlook. As others have said, I think it is important that we
indicate that this is not a change in our commitment to reduce
inflation. So, I support the 25 basis point reduction and an
asymmetric directive.

-69-

7/5-6/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I will make only a couple of points. I think the
decision does not hinge--some people have made this point already--on
the current weakness in the economy or even prospective weakness, at
least of the type we have been talking about. In part that is because
of the well recognized lags in policy; there is not much we can do
In part also, as people have
about the economy at this point.
commented, the reaction that has already occurred in the bond and
stock markets and the anticipation that the inventory adjustment will
be rather brief and rather shallow--those, of course, are not
independent events--do not suggest to me that a decision today hinges
on the immediate outlook. What I think is important at this juncture
is that the markets have essentially priced in an easing of policy.
We do not in my view want to peg the federal funds rate at any
particular level. Interest rates typically fluctuate pro-cyclically.
If we look at even the relatively optimistic path for real growth in
the Greenbook or the model that we maintain, we get ceteris paribus a
number of consecutive quarters of below-trend growth. That is an
environment in which I would expect interest rates to be declining.
It doesn't seem to me that we should stand in the way of that. So, I
support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. For what it is worth,
though, I would prefer a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.
I am very much where Tom Melzer is.
If I were
a voting member, I would support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,
although I must say with a considerable degree of nervousness. That
kind of nervousness has been underscored by Tom Hoenig and some
others. There seems to be a feeling--calling it a consensus may be
too strong a characterization--that we can be fairly confident that
inflation has reached a cyclical peak. The probability of that is
certainly higher than I would have expected a while back, but I think
we need to keep a longer-term perspective here. It was less than a
year and an half ago that we ended an extended period of substantial
monetary ease. While the risk of further inflation in this cycle is
smaller than it was, I don't think it is zero and we need to keep that
in mind. I think a cautious approach involving a quarter-point
reduction in the funds rate is the appropriate degree of easing now.
As Mike
I would oppose a half-point reduction. One other comment:
Moskow and others have said, it is important in communicating this
action to the public to make clear that it is done in the context of a
continuing longer-term commitment to price stability. I would very
much like to see the words "price stability" in the announcement that
we will make this afternoon if we take this action. I think it would
be highly desirable for you, as I am sure you will, to emphasize that
objective in your testimony a couple of weeks down the road.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as I said yesterday, I think that
we have the flexibility here to move for positive and affirmative
reasons as opposed to negative and defensive ones. Based on my
reading of the likely outlook, I don't see us as driven primarily by
the specter of a collapsing economy, although I would certainly concur
that the downside risks are still there. Rather, I see the likelihood
of a moderate and sustainable noninflationary growth period ahead of

-70-

7/5-6/95

us coupled with a cyclically plateauing inflation rate that is still
in a secular downward trend. I find all of that rather attractive.
It gives the Committee room to move within the context of maintaining
its posture relative to a steady focus on attaining price stability.
The positive reasons to move have been articulated around this table,
and I won't try to recite all of them again. I do think that 25 basis
points is plenty for us to move today. The major significance will be
the change in policy direction as opposed to the amount of the move,
and I share the Vice Chairman's concern about the risk of roiling the
financial markets in destabilizing ways. I believe that whatever we
do, 25 or 50 basis points, there is going to be speculation about what
comes next, either way. I also favor 25 basis points because it is
not at all clear to me what our next move may be or when it may come.
For that reason, Mr. Chairman, I also would prefer to see a symmetric
directive, although I certainly can support asymmetric if that is the
way we are going to go.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I also think that the baseline projection is
probably the most reasonable, but I would support a 25 basis point
move as insurance in the sense of not being 100 percent sure about how
our forecast of the inventory correction is going to work out.
I must
say that I vacillate on this question of symmetry or asymmetry. I
guess I don't have strong views, but I am marginally supportive of
symmetry because I don't think that we would move before August
without talking in any case.
But I wouldn't vote against asymmetry
because of my lack of conviction as to the use of asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation to
lower the funds rate today. As I already emphasized, I am concerned
about downside risks and the possibility of destabilizing feedbacks
that could weaken the economy more than the Greenbook envisions. On
the inflation side, I think a funds rate cut is consistent with our
longer-term objective of gradually attaining price stability, given
the greater slack already in evidence in both product and labor
markets. Moreover, all our forecasts, with or without a cut in the
funds rate of the size we are envisioning here, show a decline in
inflationary pressures as we go forward.
To me, one of the major rationales for such a cut, as
Governor Blinder and others have emphasized, is that we need to cement
in place the existing financial conditions that are already working to
provide the critical cushion against the downside risks.
So, I would
like to see a cut to prevent a further backup in long-term interest
rates, namely, to ratify the expectations implicit in the current
structure of longer-term yields. I certainly am not arguing that we
should be setting monetary policy by following the fed funds futures,
but I think we should recognize situations when the market has gotten
things right and act accordingly. I see the reduction in market
interest rates that has occurred since our last meeting as a very
natural reaction--Gary Stern mentioned this, too--to a softening
economic outlook and as an automatic stabilizer mechanism that
cushions the the economy when it is buffeted by spending shocks. Our
task at this point is to be careful to avoid a pitfall that is well
recognized in the literature on monetary policy. It is that interest

7/5-6/95

-71-

rate targeting has the potential to thwart the operation of that
natural adjustment mechanism, thereby exacerbating economic
volatility. So, I see a cut in the funds rate now as essentially
giving the green light for this market mechanism, which is already
working, to continue its work. I certainly agree that the rationale
is stronger for a cut now. As the Chairman emphasized, and the
Greenbook and Bluebook acknowledge this, eventually we have to cut the
funds rate because the equilibrium real funds rate is tending to fall
as we go forward.
In my view this is a mid-course correction and it is designed
to do a little sooner as an insurance policy what I would envision our
having to do anyhow in the not-too-distant future. In a sense we put
some extra restraint in place last February at a time when it seemed
as though the momentum in demand was never going to subside. That
situation has changed dramatically; it changed pretty quickly after
the February meeting. Now I think of that as extra braking action
that is no longer needed, and I see this as a move to a more neutral
stance. I remember that Bill McDonough warned us at the February
meeting that we needed to be forward-looking and that we would one day
have to make a pre-emptive forward-looking move toward ease that would
catch the market off guard, but nevertheless we should have the
courage to behave in that forward-looking way even though it would be
a surprise. My only regret at this stage is that we really are not as
far ahead of the curve as Vice Chairman McDonough envisioned in his
remarks then.
So a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate is not going
to be a surprise to the market. In fact, for much of the past month
the odds of a 50 basis point cut at either this meeting or the next
have been close to one.
What should we do today?
I guess my inclination would be if
I had my druthers to choose a 50 basis point move today because I
think it is needed, if not now then in the near future, to move to a
more neutral policy stance. In a way, it would be psychologically
stabilizing for households and firms to be able to rest a bit more
secure in the knowledge that the Federal Reserve wants to take actions
to keep the economy growing. But I also recognize the arguments
against such a move today that the Chairman and others among you have
articulated on the basis of the possible impact on financial markets.
So, I can certainly support the proposal for a 25 basis point cut
today. I would have a strong preference for an asymmetric directive,
although I don't mean by that a presumption that there would be an
intermeeting move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. A cut of 25 basis points
with asymmetric language seems to be the general consensus. Would you
give us wording on how that would read?
MR. BERNARD. I am reading from page 25 in the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to decrease slightly the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat greater reserve restraint might or somewhat
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."

7/5-6/95

MR. LINDSEY. I hate to raise the "slightly" versus
"somewhat" issue, but if we are moving only 25 basis points, then we
should make it "slightly."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes, I think you are right.

Let's go to "slightly."

"Slightly" for both?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Call the roll.

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Our next meeting is August 22?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Contrary to the original plan, we are
going to have lunch here since apparently the air conditioning is
holding up reasonably well.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a press release?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am sorry. The draft reads as follows:
"Chairman Alan Greenspan announced today that the Federal
Open Market Committee decided to decrease slightly the degree of
pressure on reserve positions.
As a result of the monetary tightening initiated in early
1994, inflationary pressures have receded enough to accommodate a
modest adjustment in monetary conditions.
Today's action will be reflected in a 25 basis point decline
in the federal funds rate from about 6 percent to about 5-3/4
percent."
We will try to capture all sides of the general discussion at
this meeting in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, is it possible to add one final
sentence there that says "This action is taken in the context of our
longer-term commitment to price stability"?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought of doing that but I concluded
that such an addition would make the statement too complex. I think
the issue is that we are not responding to an expectation of a

-73-

7/5-6/95

recession. We are responding to the fact that we have succeeded in
reducing inflationary pressures enough so that the adjustment makes
sense for the longer term. A reference to price stability is implicit
in there.
I originally had that in an earlier draft and I decided it
was redundant and we wanted to keep the announcement short. We will
have a longer explanation in the Humphrey-Hawkins report.
MR. LINDSEY.

What time does this announcement come out?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

2:00 - 2:15 p.m.

What do you want to

do, Joe?
MR. COYNE.

2:15 p.m.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

2:15 p.m.

Is there a good reason it can't be earlier?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Don, why don't you--

MR. KOHN. We have tried to establish a regular time so that
people, not knowing exactly when it would come out, would not be
hovering over the Telerate machines and reading great amounts of
meaning into the timing of the release, how long you argued about
policy, or whatever. So, we thought it was better to establish a
routine time rather than making it 1:55 p.m. after one meeting and
2:35 p.m. after the next. That was the reason.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Why don't we adjourn and go to lunch?
END OF MEETING

