Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 15,

1995

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Wednesday, November 15,

1995, at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
Lindsey
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist

Messrs. Davis, Hunter, Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Madigan, Associate Director. Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Reinhart, 1/ Assistant Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ramm, 1/ Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs. Board of
Governors

Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rolnick, and
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas,
respectively
Messrs. Gavin and Kopcke, Mses. Krieger and
Rosenbaum, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Boston, New York, and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Stevens, Consultant, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland

1.

Did not attend portion of meeting covering the monetary policy
discussion.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
November 15, 1995
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Regrettably,
this is Bob Forrestal's last outing. I would be inclined to give him
five or six votes for this meeting, but I don't think that
authorization is statutorily available. But spiritually we would like
to do so. We'll be saying more to Bob at lunch, and we look forward
to seeing him there. In the interim, would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes of the meeting on September 26?
MS. MINEHAN.
MR. KELLEY.

So move.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
have the floor for a while.

Without objection.

Peter Fisher, you

MR. FISHER. Thank you. As you can see on the agenda and
also on an outline of my remarks that has been circulated with some
attached charts, I am going to take up four topics separately. I will
be asking for the Committee's questions and relevant vote at the end
of each of the first three topics so that we can get through this
rather meaty portion of the agenda in an orderly fashion. I will turn
first to the report on foreign exchange market developments and Desk
operations.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?
I guess your
report sounded pretty complete as anticipated. Why don't you go on?
MR. KOHN.

The Committee needs to ratify the Mexican swap

renewal.
MR. FISHER. The Mexicans paid down part of their swap line
drawings, and I rolled over the remaining portion on October 30 for
I am requesting Committee ratification.
the third time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Committee will remember that we will
be covered either by Mexico or the U.S. Treasury--by February, I
believe.
MR. FISHER.

Yes, at the end of January.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, this is a relatively safe activity
unless, of course, you know who or what doesn't pay!
[Laughter]
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is it seconded?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

It has been moved.

All in favor say "aye."

"Aye."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The "ayes" have it.

Peter, continue.

11/15/95

MR. FISHER.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY. I just
these reciprocal arrangements
involve warehousing funds for
to engage in foreign exchange

[Statement continued--see Appendix.]

Questions for Peter?
want to get something clear. Do any of
with other central banks potentially
the Treasury, should the Treasury want
transactions?

MR. FISHER. No, I don't see how. At the very bottom of the
list of our swap lines that I have given you, you can see that the
Treasury has two swap lines of its own with Mexico and the Bundesbank.
MR. LINDSEY.

They are separate.

MR. FISHER. They are entirely separate.
So, I cannot see
any way that a drawing on the System swap lines would have any
necessary connection with System warehousing for the Treasury.
If not, is
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Peter?
there a motion to renew the swap agreements that mature in December?
MS. MINEHAN.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

Second?

All in favor say "aye."

"Aye."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The "ayes" have it.

MR. FISHER. Thank you. Before turning to my report on the
domestic markets and operations, I would like to give the Committee a
bit more background on the Desk's cooperation with the Japanese
monetary authorities in managing the liquidity of their portfolio of
U.S. government securities as part of their broader effort to aid the
dollar liquidity of the Japanese banks.
[Statement continued--see
Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the market saying now, if
anything, about a possible spike in the funds rate at year-end?
MR. FISHER. A spike in year-end rates is always there.
don't think it's out of line with--

I

MR. KOHN. The market has built in a spike of about 1 or 2
percentage points as best we can guess. We have to make an assumption
about what the market is thinking the federal funds rate will be and
then subtract that to estimate the spike.
MR. FISHER.
of-year pressures.
MR. KOHN.

But it's entirely in line with the normal end-

Yes.

If anything it may be a little less.

11/15/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
actions from the spike.

So, you can't really disassociate our

MR. KOHN. Right.
It's a highly conditional forecast. But,
if anything, it appears that the markets are expecting slightly less
of a spike at year-end this year than they have at this point in
recent years.
MR. FISHER. But the problem there, just to go into detail,
is that we have to look at the futures contract for December, take
account of the limited probability of a Committee action to ease in
December, and then look at the December contracts. The market
normally does some smoothing in its pricing of the futures contracts.
If there is an assumption of an aggressive easing in policy three
months out, the end contracts tend to edge down a little and to
provide a bit of trend line toward that lower funds rate. That makes
it hard to judge futures prices.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that to a large extent the
Japanese have been a factor in the year-end spike over the years.
Does that propensity exist in other currencies where the Japanese are
heavily involved?
MR. FISHER.

Yes.

MR. TRUMAN.
In some degree, it has occurred in the yen
market itself. That is one of the phenomena.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The year-end spike?

MR. FISHER. Well, their fiscal year-end is March 31st, and
there is some pressure in their funds market then. There are
occasions when the deutschemark money market experiences rather sharp
spikes.
These stem both from the German banking system and from
foreign demand of which the Japanese may be a part, but I don't think
quite as significant a part as in our market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

That is a year-end, December 31st spike?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we infer what the market forces are
abstracting from our actions by looking at the potential spike
characteristics in other currencies where Japanese banks are
operating, like in London?
MR. TRUMAN. That would be a little difficult. One of the
problems is that two things are going on with Japanese banks at this
point. One is the Japanese year-end premium. The other is the
general Japanese risk premium. I think it's a little difficult, for
some of the reasons that Peter just pointed out with respect to the
funds futures, to separate which of the two you are dealing with. You
can make an assumption, such as attributing it all to the year-end
pressures, but there is some leakage in this process. And you have a
phenomenon that whatever the pressures are, they are in both the yen
markets and the dollar markets.
I think that's presumably where most
of it is.
There may be a little in the sterling markets.

11/15/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
don't think it's a big deal.
Peter?
President Minehan.

Okay. I don't want to press that; I
I am just curious. Other questions for

MS. MINEHAN. I have a couple of questions.
On the Japanese
funding situation, I know that all this planning is being done within
the normal framework of Desk operations.
I don't know about the rest
of you, but the headlines in The New York Times about this special
funding arrangement hit me as a surprise when I read them at 7:30 one
morning. If there is going to be a briefing of Congress, I wonder
whether the Committee also could be briefed. It's not that we are
going to say anything necessarily; it's just to make us feel a little
bit in the loop when these things come out in the press.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My recollection is that we thought the
arrangement was so routine and so inconsequential that it did not
enter anybody's mind to raise it.
And, indeed, the way it came out
was so distorted that I got numerous telephone calls as a result of a
comment by Ralph Nader on the radio that we were bailing out the
Japanese and that his listeners should call the Federal Reserve to
complain. When I finally talked to Senator D'Amato, who had raised
all sorts of questions, he said he wished he had heard that
explanation earlier. It would have averted the excessive criticism
that was voiced. The problem existed because there was a miscommunication between us and Jim Leach; he didn't realize that he
should not talk about this because that made it sound like a much
bigger deal than it was.
MS. MINEHAN. Do we have these informal understandings with
other central banks, other than the Bank of Japan, that if they run
into dollar or liquidity problems (a) their banks are not to come to
us and (b) there may be some way in which we can, within the normal
procedures, help them with their funding?
MR. FISHER. The answer is no. Some central banks realize
that if they are talking about $500 million or $1 billion, they can
sell bills to the Desk and we will execute such transactions for them
relatively effectively. There are some less subtle or more anxious
central bankers who approach the Desk to ask if we can guarantee that
we will do a $5 billion repo with them if they need some liquidity
suddenly. What they want to avoid is having to sell the securities
outright and having to take a gain or a loss. We explain to them
that, no, we don't provide guarantees. So, the question frequently
comes up conversationally in that way. As I say, the subtler central
bankers understand that when relatively small amounts of Treasury
securities are involved we can help them by either selling the
securities in the market or taking them into our portfolio. The
larger amounts are not in the nature of what we do routinely and that
was the tenor of our conversations with the Japanese when larger
amounts were clearly what they were interested in.
MR. TRUMAN. President Minehan, I think one dimension of this
that Peter did not include in his report, because he gave a lot of
background and the report was already long enough, is that there is a
particular problem, which I am sure you will appreciate, in terms of
the payments system.
MS. MINEHAN.

Oh yes.

11/15/95

MR. TRUMAN. We have staff who have worried about this
general problem of foreign-held dollars in the payments system for at
least a decade to my knowledge. In some sense, because of the size of
the Japanese banks and their role in the international financial
system, they are a particular problem and this arrangement or
procedure is designed to deal with that problem. One dimension would
have almost a pure payments system set of consequences, but I think we
all recognize that it is a general dollar payments problem and that it
is not unique to Japanese banks. In principle, U.S. banks could have
the same problem elsewhere. Although this arrangement was set up
because of the current situation with respect to the Japanese banks,
it is part of a general problem and I don't think we have a standard
set of procedures to deal with it.
MS. MINEHAN. I totally agree and I certainly understand what
you are talking about. The implication that we would do things after
hours, after the securities wire closes and all of that, did seem to
me to be a move that it would have been interesting at least to know
about.
MR. TRUMAN. Certainly. As the Chairman explained, it got
publicity when it was not intended and the latter was somewhat
premature in any case.
MS. MINEHAN. The second question that I had was on the new
procedure relating to your operations in coupon issues. Peter, is it
your intention over this three- or four-day period, for however long
you might spread your coupon pass, to pick certain portions of the
yield curve on any given day as opposed to preselecting from a number
of points on the yield curve?
MR. FISHER. Yes. We would try to choose an area of the
yield curve, say, the two- to three-year area or the five-year area,
define it for the dealers, and then take propositions only in that
portion of the curve.
MS. MINEHAN. And you don't think that will have any
disruptive effects on that given day?
MR. FISHER. It might the first few times that we use the
procedure. But my hope is that things would smooth out over time, as
the dealers got used to it and they saw that we are like any big
customer who might come along and buy up a certain maturity. I also
want to be clear. I don't think we would necessarily be mechanical
about day one, day two, day three, day four and conduct these
transactions on consecutive days. We might do it that way; we might
break it up and have a day fall in between depending on what other
things are going on--a bill auction, for example.
MS. MINEHAN. Is it part of your plan to discuss this with
major market participants outside of New York?
MR. FISHER. The community to talk to first and foremost is
the dealers, wherever they are located, since they are the ones who
have to do the bidding and put in the propositions.
MS. MINEHAN.

Right.

11/15/95

MR.
guidance for
we are going
doesn't jump

FISHER. Obviously, once we begin it we'll have to have
Peter Bakstansky in our press office and figure out what
to say more generally so that the Fed-watching community
on it and misinterpret it.

MS. MINEHAN.

It might be useful to talk to Fidelity among

others.
MR. FISHER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Peter, your description of the arrangements with
Japan and the very unfortunate press reports and confusing stories
relating to all that and now this discussion following Cathy's
question just emphasizes in my view how obsolete swap agreements are
in this environment. In the case where a country has very substantial
amounts of dollar-denominated assets that they want to convert into
dollar balances, frankly, this "ain't" the mechanism to use.
Swaps
were set up in a period when we needed to get access to some foreign
currencies that we did not have or when our foreign central bank
counterparts needed to get access to dollars that they did not have.
But in today's world we need a mechanism for them to be able to
convert dollar-denominated assets into dollar balances.
I looked down
your list of foreign central banks in our swap network and I see
fairly small swap lines:
Norway, $250 million; and Denmark, $250
million. What is the probability that we would draw on these swap
lines or that they would be in a situation where they needed to draw
on them to get dollars?
If I recall correctly,
So, if in keeping
with the original intent of the swap line network a central bank wants
access to dollars because they don't have any, we don't want to give
it to them. Therefore, when and how is there an appropriate use of
swap agreements today, holding the Mexico discussion for a later
meeting?
I think we have
MR. FISHER. You are raising a good point.
always thought of swaps as a bit of a hybrid. Given our focus on
having a short-term means of repayment, we have tried to think of the
swap lines, or I try to think of them, as merely a liquidity
arrangement with a central bank like the Bundesbank, notwithstanding
the fact that they hold a lot of U.S. government securities.
Conceptually, I think the swap line can still be used, but obviously
its use is problematic given our concern about the short-term means of
repayment if a borrower really runs through every asset in sight. In
the episode to which you refer, there certainly was a sense, and
related anxiety, on our part that they did not merely want to draw on
the swap line as they ran out of assets but that they already had gone
deeply into debt. We weren't going to be the first creditor in line.
Returning to the Bundesbank example, what has clearly eclipsed all
this is an increasing sophistication in the liquidity management of
the portfolio of the Bundesbank. As I have described to the Committee
in the past, they maintain a large amount of immediately available
liquidity in case they need dollars for intervention purposes and they
structure their portfolio accordingly. So, the likelihood that the
Bundesbank is going to look to the swap line for liquidity purposes is
quite low. As the Chairman said a year ago, we realize that the swap

11/15/95

lines are somewhat anachronistic, but getting rid of them could be
more painful than carrying them forward. I think we might all benefit
by rethinking the nature of our central bank cooperation. Maybe when
we are through with this exercise with the Japanese and have been
repaid on the Mexican swap line, it might be useful for the Committee
to review the purpose of these cooperative facilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, it strikes me that these swap
line renewals, for which there basically is no longer any financial or
economic purpose, have become exchanges of Christmas cards that serve
to maintain our relationships with various central banks. Even at a 3
percent inflation rate, these lines are gradually becoming de minimis.
If we wanted to get rid of them, there is a very simple way of doing
it: We would talk to the Germans and say "look, this makes no sense,
let's cancel it."
Once we cancel the Bundesbank arrangement, the rest
of them will just go away because it will be perceived that if we do
that to the Bundesbank then doing that to Norway, for example, will
not be considered a withdrawal of Christmas card privileges. So, I
think it may be appropriate to do something at some time. It's just
not credible under any reasonable circumstances that these swap lines
will be activated. It's probably best not to have something on our
books that has no operational significance.
I think we might consider
acting on your suggestion of looking at this after the Mexican swap
issue is settled. It's conceivable that we ought to review this then
and decide what we wish to do. We may just decide to leave the swap
line network alone and let it wither on the vine.
MR. TRUMAN. My assumption--it's a very safe assumption, Mr.
Chairman--is that in the case of the Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan
you would be giving a signal by cancelling the swap lines.
For the
reasons you cited, some people would not want to do that and we
therefore have a problem with respect to the Norwegians, which is a
particularly bad example. My perspective on this has been, as I may
have said before when we have had these discussions, that the time to
rationalize these arrangements is in the context of European monetary
union, if they get to the third stage of having a European central
bank. In that case most of these countries would have an arrangement
with the European central bank. Since Norway is outside the union,
you would have a slightly complicated situation, but a number of these
swap lines would be captured in that arrangement. Now, if we want to
do away with them completely, that is a different proposition. I
think it is also worthwhile to think about whether we could imagine
using swap arrangements in the context of payments system problems.
In that case, as President Jordan suggested, we obviously would need
more than $250 million. It would be a very different operation.
Because these arrangements always have the characteristics of lenderof-last-resort arrangements as well as helping through what could be
just glitches in the payments system, they are not easy to
orchestrate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I have the view that these
arrangements have long outlived their usefulness.
I have been in
Peter's position and largely have argued that we may as well renew
them because not doing so would be a newsworthy event. Each year
there usually was something happening so that we didn't want that
newsworthy event to occur. It would seem to me that, without

-8-

11/15/95

mandating that a year from now Peter and Ted come back with a proposal
not to renew the swap lines, we should become reasonably active in an
effort to work out a more meaningful alternative that probably would
Whether or not one needs to substitute
include ending the swap lines.
for them some notion of how we would cope at a time of some real
liquidity need, I think terminating the swap arrangements would be a
step very much in the right direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you suggesting some formal or
informal agreements--bilateral agreements in a sense?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I don't think that we would need
even an informal agreement, as our discussions with the Bank of Japan
have suggested. If a need comes along and we have the kinds of
relationships that we now enjoy with the other central banks, at that
time we can sit down and figure out what if anything has to be done.
If the approval of the FOMC were needed, we would ask for it.
I think
I would prefer that approach.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Peter, you mentioned that on Thursday and
Friday, some of the Treasury securities maturing on November 15
I was on an
started to sell at some discount. How much was it?
airplane at that time, and I didn't see the market quotations.
MR. FISHER. Those securities had already been selling off a
bit, and that's rather awkward for a security with a short remaining
maturity.
MR. BLINDER.

That's why I was asking.

MR. FISHER. The amount is small in absolute terms, but it is
noticeable that dealers are turning them down.
MR. BLINDER.

I meant the yield to maturity, not the prices.

MR. FISHER.
I don't know it off the top of my head, I'm
afraid. I think we discussed it in the document we submitted as a
special report.
Sandy--please go ahead.
MS. KRIEGER. Because those November 15th coupons are so
close to maturity, the smallest increment in price that you can see on
the screen is 70 basis points of yield. If I tell you that it traded
with a 1/256 change in price, I am telling you 70 basis points, which
is incredibly dramatic. But I can't observe anything that is smaller
than that on the screen.
MR. BLINDER.

I see.

MS. KRIEGER. A better comparison would be the bills that
mature on the 16th, which also were of somewhat uncertain value then,
but unfortunately I don't know the change in yield. That is an easier
comparison because it's a shorter instrument.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
announcement?

Did those come back after the

-9-

11/15/95

MS. KRIEGER. Yes.
the November 30 coupons.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.

There does not seem to be a distortion in
Any further questions for Peter on this?

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I just want to comment on the
background of the informal arrangement with the Japanese. The memo
In the phone calls that I received,
that we got was very helpful.
there were two issues that warranted some explanation. One was that
the arrrangement was a bailout, and I think that notion followed upon
the Mexican deal. The other was that the discount window was somehow
involved and that we would be lending at the basic discount rate to
subsidize the Japanese. Dispelling those distortions became the duty
of the day. I think these issues are still a matter of concern among
some individuals in the market or in the banking industry, or wherever
else the distortions persist.
I think it was good that we got the
memo and as much information as we did because we received a lot of
phone calls related to this fear of subsidizing the Japanese.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, the purpose of our discussion
with the Japanese was mainly to dispel any notion of subsidization.
If it were not for the fact that they are such a large presence in
this banking system, there really would not be an issue. But if they
were to run into trouble, we could be dealing with very large numbers.
MR. HOENIG.
I think the individuals I spoke to realized
that. That's why they were saying that if a problem were to occur, we
might get involved in a discount window loan; and lending at the basic
discount rate would mean a big subsidy. The issue was why would we
allow that, and on and on it went.
Because they had this piece of
misinformation, their concerns multiplied very quickly.
Peter?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Train wreck?

MR. FISHER.
operations.

I missed three out of three! [Laughter]

Move approval.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Further questions for

We need a vote to ratify the domestic

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

It happens.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
nothing to ratify in the next segment!

I hope there is

MR. FISHER. No, no, I'm not seeking another vote.
[Statement continued--see Appendix.]
Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to answer any questions from
the Committee on this final part of my report. But maybe you are all
tired of listening to my voice, and I wouldn't mind if you pass.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Never!

President Melzer.

-10-

11/15/95

MR. MELZER. Peter, I would just like to say that I endorse
the position you just expressed. I think there are a lot of risks
associated with that. We have to evaluate things as they develop, but
I wholeheartedly support what you are saying. Ultimately, I think it
runs to even broader issues like the independence of the central bank
and our commitment to long-term price stability and those sorts of
things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.
I agree very much with Tom and I certainly
endorse that position. I wonder if I may ask a related question, Mr.
Chairman. Is it possible that in some of our operations other than
Desk operations, things like Fedwire, we might wind up inadvertently
making loans to the Treasury? Has that kind of possibility been
considered?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

An inadvertent overdraft?

MR. BROADDUS. Yes. In our Fedwire rules, as I understand
it, we guarantee final payment at the end of the day. If on the day
the Treasury defaulted we guaranteed some of these payments, could we
be caught at the end of the day in an overdraft position?
It seems to
me it is the same kind of issue. I guess there is an array of
possibilities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's illegal for us to grant an
overdraft to the Treasury. The only condition under which it exists
is inadvertence. I assume I have that right.
MR. KOHN. Correct. Reserve Bank and Board staff have been
talking to Treasury people about procedures to follow to avoid the
concern that President Broaddus just expressed, so that wires wouldn't
be sent if funds were not going to be available. We want to ensure
that Treasury staff sending those wires understand that and simply
would not send them. Those are among the procedures that have been
under discussion between the technical staffs at the Treasury and the
Federal Reserve. The Treasury is fully aware of the position that
Chairman Greenspan just stated--that we cannot lend to them directly.
If they got into an overdraft position, it would have to be entirely
inadvertent. Therefore, in their financing operations, they have been
talking about keeping their cash balance fairly high to avoid the
possibility that funds would clear that would put them in overdraft
inadvertently.
MR. FISHER. In recent months and years, we collectively have
been targeting a balance of about $5 billion for them. But we all
recognize that forecasting the Treasury balance is in part an art, not
a science, and the risks exist. But it's in the nature of a forecast
that we are always forecasting tonight what the cash balance will be
when we wake up tomorrow morning and then tomorrow what it will be
when we make payments on the Treasury's behalf. We at the Desk were
very pleased that the Treasury made their announcement as early as
possible this week because of the various uncertainties we would face
in our forecasts of their balances if we waited until the 1lth hour to
worry about default and the market did the same, and given the
computer systems that release payments early in the morning. So, the

11/15/95

-11-

Monday morning announcement was very much what we had urged on them in
terms of the number of days that we needed for guidance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. This is admittedly a very airy-fairy
contingency if we don't think this default is going to happen. But
let me go back into the mindset that you were in a minute ago. How
many government securities issues are there, something like 300?
MR. FISHER.
MR. BLINDER.

260 something.
How many of those do we own a piece of?

Almost

all?
MR. FISHER.
MR. BLINDER.
MR. FISHER.

Virtually all.
How many of them do we actually buy and sell?
On any one day?

MR. BLINDER. No. If I watched you for a whole quarter, how
many issues might you have dealt in either doing repos or buying
outright or anything?
MR. FISHER.

Most of them.

MR. BLINDER. Right. Therefore, what kind of signal would
you send if you told the market that these 55 issues are being shunned
by the Federal Reserve, that we are not accepting them.
MR. FISHER.
MR. BLINDER.

It would send a very negative message.
Isn't that what you are suggesting?

MR. FISHER. No, I said nothing in my remarks that suggested
that.
I said the Desk was eager to find a way to demonstrate that
they would be accepted as collateral in temporary operations.
MR. BLINDER. But we wouldn't do open market operations?
thought that's what you said.
MR. FISHER.
MR. BLINDER.

Temporary operations are open market operations.
What were you suggesting?

I missed it.

MR. FISHER. My point was that I did not think that an
intentional preemptive strike to buy the particular defaulted
securities outright would be an appropriate action in the
circumstances that I mentioned.
MR. BLINDER.
the market.
MR. FISHER.
MR. BLINDER.

I

I thought we were talking about purchases in

Yes, we are.
I guess I am confused.

-12-

11/15/95

MR. FISHER. We do outright purchases relatively infrequently
--to wit my discussion about coupon passes--a handful of times a year.
I am suggesting that we raise that to three or four handfuls a year
for reasons of operational simplicity without changing the amount we
would buy over the course of the year relative to reserve demands.
The question is whether we take defaulted securities in temporary
operations.
In repo operations, we take whatever securities the
dealers offer. We are not going to announce in advance that we are
going to turn down any particular Treasury security in repo
operations.
The idea that I urge the Committee to put on the back
burner for much later consideration is the question of whether we
would buy outright preemptively those particular issues that the
Treasury had defaulted upon.
MR. KOHN. That is, a special open market operation and not
the normal course of business.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think the question has two
aspects, Mr. Chairman. One is the purely practical view of people
whose expertise is in markets, as mine used to be, as to what is the
best thing to do to maintain an orderly market in the event of a
default. I am in complete agreement with Peter's and Sandy's and
Don's view that the best thing to do is to take these in repo
operations because that would maintain their status as securities and
keep them alive. That's by far the best thing to do. Then you can
Is it in the best interest of
get into a question of high purpose.
the central bank to do it? That's the second question. I happen to
agree with Peter on that one, too. This is one case where pure
pragmatism says we should do what they suggest, and I think high
principle leads us to the same conclusion. But we don't even need to
Pure pragmatism is such an absolute noget into the high principle.
brainer that that's what we ought to do in any event.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I am going to follow up on what Governor
Blinder said. If you are taking whatever is offered on the open
market, might there not be a propensity for you to buy securities in
default or potential default that people might have questions about?
If you are willing to take whatever is offered and you are not willing
to discriminate against defaulted securities, won't you end up taking
a disproportionate number of them?
MR. FISHER. If they were presented to us as propositions for
temporary overnight or four-day System operations, and they were at
the better end of the prices, we would look at what are the best
prices and draw a line at an amount that meets our objective. My
desire would be for the Desk to be indifferent to what the CUSIPs are,
whether the CUSIP underneath is one that has missed a payment or not.
Now, maybe these securities will end up among the better prices;
that's a likely hypothesis if the dealers are on their toes. They
might be a large portion of what we did or they might be only a small
part of our overall operation given the uncertainties about the volume
we would be doing. So, yes, there is a certain likelihood that we
would take in some, or many, or all of them in temporary operations

-13-

11/15/95

where the legal risks of an extended duration of a Treasury default
remain with the dealer.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Implicit in your question is that when
we conduct our operations, a certain number of securities are offered
in the market and we choose to buy or not to buy. As a practical
matter, all securities are offered in the market at all times. There
are active prices on all of them. Thus, it's not as though there is a
limited block of securities out there that would disproportionately
include defaulted securities.
As a practical matter, all securities
in the market are offered in indeterminate amounts and that would
presumably include all of these defaulted securities. I think the
critical issue implied in your question is that, if these defaulted
securities are being priced at significant discounts and we buy them,
we get criticized for buying U.S. Treasuries at a discount. If we
don't buy them, we get criticized for not buying them at a discount.
It's an impossible situation. But I suspect that should this occur,
it's going to be very fuzzy as to what is in the market, at what
price, and who is selling what. The question we have always had on
the table implicitly is not whether or not we should do overnight RPs
or something of that nature. It is whether we should make direct
purchases and inventory the securities in the System portfolio.
The
implication of not doing it is that we would resell them in the
market, which raises even more interesting questions. It's a question
of whether we do a pass on defaulted securities.
I suspect that has a
lot of implications that raise some technical questions, as Peter is
suggesting. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Beyond the technical issues, aren't we dealing
with a moral hazard situation in the sense that if we show ourselves
ready to close all the gaps when these situations occur, the chance of
I think it's
their happening with greater frequency increases?
entirely appropriate to come at it from the point of view of financial
stability. The only question I have is whether being willing to use
matured securities as collateral and to do repo operations in matured
securities says that we are willing to accept the moral hazard up to a
certain point where we, arguably, need to do that for the sake of
stability in the markets and financial stability for the country as a
whole, but beyond that we will not go.
I think that's a perfectly
appropriate message to send and position to take, but I think that
it's not just on the outright operations that we run the risk of
running counter to a high principle. We run that risk doing anything
with these matured securities.
I think what Peter has proposed is
defensible, but I don't think we take ourselves out of the arena of
the problems that he mentioned simply by drawing a line and not doing
coupon passes in matured securities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter on this
issue? If not, let's move to Mike Prell and the staff report on the
economy.
MR. PRELL.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mike?

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, in Part II of the Greenbook, there is a
reference to the prospect that manufacturing capacity growth is going
to be revised up in light of some surveys in 1993 and 1994 and also

-14-

11/15/95

the new investment that has occurred in 1995.
I wonder how much of an
effect these pending revisions will have in terms of the staff's
assessment of price pressures in various product markets and also what
impact it might have on either the level or growth of potential?
MR. PRELL. At this point we don't see anything in the cards
that is going to change the picture materially. We have had
relatively rapid expansion of capacity in our forecast, and the
incoming data in the updated survey on investment have supported that.
We will be revising our numbers on production and capacity
utilization, but my sense from talking to people who are engaged in
that work is that this isn't going to change the picture materially.
Basically, we think we have something that's pretty much parallel to
our assessment of the labor market. We are a little on the tight side
of what would be "nonaccelerating" inflation over time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the CPI, what do the numbers look
like with an additional decimal point?
MR. PRELL. I don't know that. I just looked at the rounded
data here which show a core CPI increase last month of exactly .3
percent, but I don't have the data with the Board staff's estimate.
MR. BLINDER. They are short on staff up there; they can't
give you two decimal places!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Mike, I have a couple of largely unrelated
questions. I will take them one at a time. Your projections in the
Greenbook of nominal GDP for 1996 and 1997 have been revised up from
the previous Greenbook. Nevertheless, nominal spending growth, after
accelerating a bit to a little over 5 percent in the third quarter,
is on a downward trend to under 4 percent in the second half of 1997.
That was true before and it is still true in the latest Greenbook
where it is down to the 3.8 to 3.9 percent range for the second half
of 1997.
Your forecast now also assumes a 5-3/4 percent fed funds
rate--and I will make some remarks about that not appearing to be as
restrictive as previously envisaged--and the bond market has rallied
If you
because markets thought that we would lower the funds rate.
take that away, it says bond yields are now expected to go back up
from current levels while both nominal growth and real growth are
going down. I am trying to imagine how those work out, especially how
they would play out in the marketplace if people actually saw things
that were reported along the lines of the Greenbook projection. What
that means is that in the latter part of the projection period, you
would have nominal interest rates running 2-1/4, 2-1/2 percentage
points or more above nominal GDP growth. What kind of stories would
you tell about the anticipated inflation component of nominal interest
rates versus the reported inflation rates that you project, or the
anticipated or ex ante real rates as opposed to the real growth rates
in your GDP projections? I have trouble reconciling what you say
about financial markets, nominal interest rates, and your projections
for the economy.
MR. PRELL. We have discussed this in the past, and as I
said, we pondered this question of whether having nominal interest
rates running higher than nominal GDP growth over time is an unnatural

11/15/95

-15-

relationship. It strikes one as being something that is
unsustainable. We think of this, in terms of government budget
positions and so on, as a relationship that's unsustainable. But over
limited periods of time, this relationship clearly has varied
tremendously, and there isn't a very compelling short-run macro story
that pushes you toward equilibrating these things or having the
nominal GDP growth rate higher than the nominal interest rate.
Certainly, our view in formulating this revised forecast is that,
given real interest rates in the current environment--one in which we
are experiencing ample availability of credit, and we looked at all
the other parameters of financial conditions at this point--these real
interest rates are not creating quite the damping effect on aggregate
demand that we anticipated earlier. But we do expect that they will
create some drag on final demand and that we will have this tapering
off in the growth of consumer and business expenditures. We think
there is a coherent story here. But it does in essence have implicit
in it, if you like that model, a relatively high natural real rate of
interest for the forecast period.
MR. JORDAN. Right.
restrictive policy stance.

It implies de facto a progressively more

MR. PRELL. We have intermediate- and long-term rates rising
in nominal terms, but we see no reason to think that inflation
expectations for the intermediate to long run will change materially.
The 3 percent inflation that we are forecasting is very much in line
with what private forecasters are expecting. I think the survey
evidence suggests that expectations for inflation over the
intermediate run probably run in the 3 to 4 percent range. I don't
think that would change a great deal. You are correct in noting that
the uptick in real interest rates has a damping effect in the
forecast. It's one of the things that contributes to the deceleration
of fixed investment, residential and nonresidential, and gives us this
moderation in growth going forward.
MR. JORDAN. My other question relates to productivity. I
very much welcome the discussion of higher productivity growth that
was in the Greenbook--a sort of level effect and rate of change
effect, the way I read it--as far as it went. But it didn't go so far
as to change the perceived output capacity situation versus the
inflation rate. We have this 3 percent inflation rate; we just sort
of drove to it.
Once here, it seems we can't get away from it.
I
want to offer an alternative way of reading the numbers and get your
reaction to it.
I read a little of this in the Greenbook, but it just
didn't go as far as I thought it might. We not only have had a lot of
investment in business fixed investment, to which Bob Parry was
referring, but also a very substantial increase in business spending
on training, both internal and external. The response to the
perceived tightness of the labor market--the Chairman commented at an
earlier meeting about the insecurity of capital over the life of a
given technology--has led companies to increase markedly the amount
that they are spending to train their workers. Resorting for
efficiency reasons to economic jargon, that says to me that the
horizontal axis does not measure the supply and demand for labor in
homogeneous units because the quality of the labor force is changing,
perhaps especially at the entry level. That says to me that the
inflation potential that you would have thought associated with a
given physical capacity has to be different.
It's not a one-time

11/15/95

-16-

level effect to the extent that there is this persistent investment in
human capital going on coupled with the changes in technology.
Whatever you previously thought would be the inflation rate associated
with some output potential, it has got to be lower. I don't see, in
the Greenbook discussion or the projections, any allowance for those
kinds of dynamics to lead to a lower rate of inflation than historical
experience would suggest.
MR. PRELL. Let me make several comments. I probably won't
In a sense, we have
be able to achieve absolute coherence here.
introduced a supply shock into this forecast to the extent that we
have lowered our NAIRU and in essence have raised the potential output
ceiling. On the trend of potential output growth, the analysis that
we have offered is that when one looks at data--not on a 1987 fixedprice basis, but on a more recent base year or chain-weighted basis-recent evidence of surprises in productivity growth disappears. We
seem to be running on a trend that has been in place for well over a
decade, something on the order of a percentage point in these terms.
It doesn't suggest that we had a big surprise in the last couple of
quarters.
It doesn't suggest that there has been a radical revolution
over this decade relative to where we were running before. Now, that
may mean there was a mismeasurement, as Chairman Greenspan noted
earlier. There may be components that could be added in and so on,
but those add to both potential and actual measured GDP and don't
So that doesn't imply anything different about
alter the output gap.
the pressures on the inflation side.
Training is an interesting question. I would remind you that
training costs money. It's a cost, as you've characterized it, of
So it's
production. It would have to be made up on the price side.
not a free good. Second, I am not sure how clear the data are.
I
think there may be bits and pieces around about how much expenditures
on training have increased. I am not well versed in that, but I have
Some of the
certainly seen anecdotal reports of it here and there.
stories I have seen over the years have suggested that a lot of this
training goes to managers--upper level people. They are getting all
kinds of training that may not have particularly obvious payoffs in
production. I could cite the training here at the Federal Reserve.
[Laughter]
It will be five years before my colleagues in HRM hear
that and in the interim you are all sworn to secrecy!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

But they aren't the only ones who care!

MR. PRELL. Furthermore, a lot of this training is remedial.
Many of you have reported what directors and other contacts have told
you about how it's really hard to find workers who are literate or
numerate. A question might be raised as to whether they have to spend
more and more money just to maintain the quality of labor input that
they are accustomed to.
In a sense, one of the reasons for some of
this investment in computerization--I have speculated about this with
my colleagues, who would rather I not say this--may be to make up for
some of the deficiencies of the work force. A simple example is
something like fast food outlets where workers are able to tell you
what you owe them without having to enter in any numbers. They just
I
punch a button that has a picture of a "Whopper" or whatever it is.
think we need to be a little cautious here in thinking that there is a
revolution in progress leading to an improvement of the labor force.

-17-

11/15/95

We all recognize that achieving the gains in productivity that might
potentially result from the investment in high-tech information
processing equipment will only be achieved when people know how to use
the equipment, reorganize production processes accordingly, and the
whole infrastructure is developed. Maybe it's still ahead and maybe
we are not optimistic enough going forward. But from what we can see
to date, we feel pretty comfortable with our assessment of the trends
in potential output.
You remarked that
MR. JORDAN. Just one follow-up thought:
training is a cost that needs to be passed through to prices.
This is
not the case if it really is improving the value of what workers do.
Even if it is remedial, to the extent that the value of the marginal
product of the work--that's what I meant about the horizontal axis
units are not homogeneous--you are in effect shifting the labor supply
function. Then, for the same ECI, you would not expect to see the
same associated consumer price index that you previously would have
I don't know how big that is, just its direction.
associated with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Actually I have two questions about this path,
particularly of household durables spending. The fourth quarter of
Is
1995 number seems high. Is that a growth rate of 11.3 percent?
that a misprint?
MR. PARRY.

Isn't it mainly computers?

MR. PRELL. This is consumer durables spending excluding
motor vehicles in our forecast, As we have suggested, we think there
will probably be some improvement in sales of appliances and home
furnishings in connection with the surge in home sales that we saw
over the summer; reports seem reasonably favorable into early fall.
Second, we anticipate that there will be some considerable strength in
home electronics, computers, and other such items--hardware and
software.

MR. LINDSEY. Is it basically a Christmas phenomenon and then
it falls off next year?
MR. PRELL.
Obviously, the housing element flattens out. We
have a weaker motor vehicle contribution in the first quarter. Yes,
this is a big Christmas for computer buying in our thinking. I don't
want to get too fancy about this.
Obviously, whether the sales occur
in December or in January isn't of great moment for the GDP forecast-and certainly not for monetary policy--because the production might
occur anyway on this schedule.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
consumer durable good?

Incidentally, is computer software a

MR. PRELL. Yes, and I think it gets counted with books and
other things and in many cases probably is bought at the same outlets.
That's one of the real problems in gauging the actual level of
expenditures.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
something that is hard.

What actually is being sold is a disk or

-18-

11/15/95

MR. PRELL. The question is whether it lasts very long or
whether you have to go out and buy a new one next year when you buy
your replacement computer. That is where it's counted.
MR. LINDSEY.
growing fast.

Second part of the question.

You've got PCE

MR. PRELL. Let me just say this.
The incoming data have
been weaker and that would be a component of this downgrading of the
PCE that I suggested would be appropriate at this point.
MR. LINDSEY. I have been trying to eyeball it.
generally growing a little more quickly than income?

Is PCE

MR. PRELL. As you know, the personal saving rate is 4.4
percent in the forecast and it has been 4.4 percent.
So, nominal
expenditures are roughly keeping pace with nominal income.
MR. LINDSEY. Then why does the forecast go off the cliff in
the third quarter of 1997?
MR. PRELL. Probably inadvertence in the forecasting process.
Let's take a look again. The latter part of the year is weaker in
1997.
The saving rate is down because of the intra-yearly tax pattern
that we have and our assumptions about how people will spend their tax
cuts.
MR. LINDSEY. But you have consumption down and, in
particular, durable purchases are down in the third quarter of 1997.
MR. PRELL.
1997 in general.

We do have a deceleration going on at the end of

MR. LINDSEY.

I see.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Mike, what you are saying about productivity
If you feed
prompted a question that I didn't think of before.
through the investment burst, so to speak, of the last three years
into the capital stock and into a production function and it does
nothing to total factory productivity, what should it do to labor
productivity? How much of a fillip to labor productivity ought we to
have gotten from this?
MR. PRELL. As you may recall, it wasn't until quite recently
that levels of investment got to the point where we were really adding
rapidly to the capital stock. My sense is that those people who would
try to approach estimation of what labor productivity should be
through a production function find some pretty substantial rates of
increase in labor productivity in 1987 dollars. My recollection is
1-3/4 percent.
MR. BLINDER. I would take your previous criticism as being
valid. We probably ought to view those in 1994 dollars or chain
weighted. Otherwise, we could get excited about something that is not
there.

11/15/95

-19-

MR. PRELL. Indeed, how strong investment has been is
obviously important to the story.
MR. BLINDER. These numbers aren't in my head. But even
though some of the chain-weighted numbers have been low, it is still
the case that "K" has been growing significantly faster than "L."
Labor productivity is still growing at 1 percent a year, right?
MR. PRELL.

Yes.

MR. BLINDER.
"L" has been rising for three years, but I
don't have the number in my head. Do you know how much it has
increased?
MR. PRELL.
I don't have the number in my head for what you
would derive from a production function approach. But I know from
talking to people like Larry Meyer and from our own quarterly model
work that one could argue for a somewhat higher number than we have
embedded in our forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLINDER.

Net?

Yes, net.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That has been going up.

MR. PRELL. That's all a matter of model estimation. There
is still the question of what the actual experience has been. The
simplest way of looking at this is, if you believe in Okun's law and,
admittedly, it is not a precise relationship in every time period,
that there is nothing in the behavior of the unemployment rate that
would suggest that we have been grossly underestimating the growth
potential of output.
MR. BLINDER. I agree with that. Suppose you did this
calculation and it came out--I'll make up a number, because I don't
know what it is--that it should add .4 percent on first principle to
labor productivity. That means total factor productivity decelerated
because the evidence is as you said; I'm not disputing that at all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. For some time now, I have been asking people in
Boston if we can learn anything about the current situation or be
better informed about the current situation by looking at the late
1980s experience and seeing how long we were below our estimate of the
NAIRU at that point before inflation started to accelerate. They keep
telling me that we are nowhere near as far below the NAIRU now as we
were then, and we were that way for a longer period of time in that
period. Given the recent small uptick in hourly compensation and
where we are with the unemployment rate, I don't debate your choice of
a new NAIRU. I think it's closer to what we had been thinking it was.
But I just wonder whether prospectively we are starting to see
something like what we saw in the late '80s. Or are you really
thinking of this as just minor noise here?
MR. PRELL. I think some would argue that what we are seeing
that is reminiscent of the late 1980s is this undaunted optimism on my

-20-

11/15/95

part.
[Laughter]
There is a distinct chance that this will be
declared Prell's second folly and that we inched toward a somewhat
greater degree of optimism on how low the NAIRU might be just when
things were starting to turn.
MS. MINEHAN.

You have!

MR. PRELL. We were somewhat seduced at that time by the run
of good experience after we had hit what we thought was probable NAIRU
territory. As we saw the unemployment rate moving in the 5 to 5-1/2
percent zone, we got a little more optimistic than in retrospect we
should have and there is the risk that that is also the case at this
point. In terms of sheer econometric tests, you can't say that the
experience that we have had over the past year, a relatively brief
period, deviates in a statistically significant way from what model
predictions would have been based on a NAIRU as high as the roughly
5.9 percent that we had before we made this change, or even numbers in
the low sixes.
Compensation per hour numbers have begun to push the
envelope a bit. But if you look at reduced form models with prices,
there is certainly no inconsistency with a higher NAIRU. I think we
have cautioned, at least implicitly in what we've said, that we are
making an assessment of what we see going on now and what is likely to
be going on in the near term in light of all the factors affecting the
economic environment. It is not necessarily the case that we can
expect the NAIRU to be permanently lower than what we have previously
thought it to be. There may have been some short-run favorable supply
side effects, so to speak, that helped push the short-run NAIRU below
where we thought it was, and it may pop back up. We need to be very
cautious and continue to watch this. Some people point to the other
compensation-per-hour numbers that come out in the productivity cost
release, and conclude that that has turned up--Larry Meyer, for
example, and that's perhaps because it fits his model.
It is true
that there certainly has been no deceleration in core CPI this year.
The latest data are a little worse than they have been for the last
few months.
But given the average hourly earnings and the slight
uptick in the core CPI, I would rather have had the numbers go the
other way than have had my neck stuck out this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Blinder raised the question
before the meeting as to which week the unemployment rate survey will
be taking place. Since the 12th is on a Sunday, do they look at the
previous week or this week?
MR. STOCKTON. My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that if the
government shutdown extends beyond this week, they will not be in the
field next week with the household survey. This week is the reference
week and next week they will be out in the field actually doing the
survey.
MR. PRELL. There is also possible irreparable damage to the
November CPI estimate because they normally have people out in the
field all month getting quotes. Those people presumably are not out
in the field now. If they get back soon, this may not lead to any
major miscues in the estimates, but there is still a potential problem
for the estimates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions from anyone?
not, who would like to start the roundtable?
President Hoenig.

If

-21-

11/15/95

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth Federal Reserve District
continues to be relatively strong. Since the last meeting, for
example, payroll employment in our District continued to grow faster
than the national average. District manufacturers continue to operate
at or near full capacity. In recent surveys, many of them suggest
that their operations have pretty much rebounded from the summer
slowdowns.
In addition, retail sales have been solid throughout the
District and most of the retailers we have talked to expect a good
holiday season. Our directors are reporting that commercial
construction activity continues to be fairly brisk, offsetting a bit
of a slowdown in home building. Reflecting the generally healthy tone
of the economy in our District, growth in bank credit has picked up
recently, supported by gains in consumer and real estate lending.
While our economy is generally stronger, there are a couple of areas
that have shown some weakness: energy and agriculture. Low oil prices
continue to hold down activity in the District's energy industry, and
financial losses in the District's cattle industry are likely to limit
the improvement in farm incomes, which some of us were expecting.
Wage and price pressures remain relatively subdued despite the overall
strength of our regional economy and despite some spotty reports of
wage pressures at the lower end of the wage scale.
On the national level, the outlook in my opinion remains
favorable. By that I mean that, on the real side, I am looking for
growth to be about 2-1/4 percent over the next several quarters.
While I note the strength in the third quarter, I see economic
activity returning to this more moderate pace as we move through this
quarter into next year. But even with this slowing, the economy
remains fundamentally strong in my view, except for government
spending and inventory investment.
I expect most other sectors to
contribute to growth over the next several quarters. A growth rate in
a 2 to 2-1/4 percent range is entirely appropriate, I think. This is
especially true with the economy continuing to operate a bit beyond
capacity, by most measures at least. With regard to inflation, I
believe that we need to continue to be cautious.
I'm pleased with
some of the more favorable inflation numbers. But despite this
morning's report, I think it is important to acknowledge that core CPI
inflation is likely to rise this year over last, and with resource use
still at fairly high levels, wherever one believes the NAIRU is, we
are not likely to see a real easing in inflation below that 3 percent
mark as we go forward.
I think that has to be kept in mind as we
proceed from here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Conditions in the
Southeast, in the Sixth District, have not changed very much since the
last meeting. We continue to enjoy moderate economic growth in most
sectors and relatively low inflation. It is interesting to note that
the economy in the Southeast, and I think this is generally true of
the nation, has made a successful transition from the rapid growth in
the first three years of the current expansion to the more moderate
growth that we have experienced this year.
Looking at some particular sectors, we have seen a rebound in
household spending in early November after some special factors,
including Hurricane Opal, had depressed retail sales in October. In
spite of this rebound, extensive holiday sales promotions have already

11/15/95

-22-

begun that will extend the holiday shopping season by at least several
weeks.
I have seen some reports in the last few days indicating that
retailers in the Southeast are expecting sales to be 7 percent above
last year's, which I think is a little better than what is reported
generally in the nation. In the Atlanta area, they are expecting
about an 8 percent increase, which is really quite good. It remains
to be seen whether they will achieve those or not.
Sales of consumer
durables other than autos have strengthened recently along with the
second wave of home building. In the real estate area, activity in
residential markets has been stimulated by recent declines in mortgage
rates. Nashville and Atlanta remain the strongest markets, but other
Southeast metropolitan areas also have had quite good growth relative
to last year. In the multifamily sector, demand is really strong, and
it is not uncommon to see ninety percent occupancy rates in that
market. Commercial construction is also expanding throughout the
District and speculative office and retail developments are regularly
reported now. In manufacturing, our regional manufacturers' survey
indicates that the pace of growth in the Southeast has slowed somewhat
since July, and that survey includes housing-related manufacturing and
auto production, which had been strong previously. The same survey
continues to show quite modest pressures on prices at both the input
and final product levels, and the expectations are for little change
in such prices. The Southeast, and especially Atlanta, are
experiencing growth in tourism in both traffic and revenue.
The
Olympics are guaranteeing a draw of about 2 to 3 million visitors next
summer, which is expected to spill over into each of the District
states in one form or another. So, the outlook for the Southeast
continues to be quite good on both the output side and in terms of
prices.
I can
same.
third
2-1/4
2-1/2

With respect to the national economy, for the first time that
remember, our forecast and the Greenbook forecast are about the
Both forecasts agree that the 4.2 percent real growth of the
quarter is unsustainable. Our forecast shows real growth in the
to 3 percent range quarterly through 1997 and inflation in the
to 3 percent range quarterly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic growth in the Twelfth
Federal Reserve District has accelerated through September. Recent
California employment growth has been significantly faster than for
the United States as a whole. Very rapid growth has continued in Utah
and Oregon. Although Nevada and Arizona show signs of cooling, they
are growing very rapidly. Idaho and Washington also are growing more
rapidly than the United States as a whole, but with some areas of
weakness. The limited information that we have on activity in October
suggests less robust economic expansion. The official California
employment and unemployment figures for October suggest some slowing,
although other state data indicate that the recovery is still on
track. Boeing's 23,000 machinists located in the state of Washington
are continuing a strike that was begun in early October; the strike is
likely to pull down overall economic activity in that state in the
fourth quarter. I might note parenthetically, as you may have seen,
that Boeing received an incredibly large order from Singapore Airlines
for their new 777.
In California, there is an ongoing debate over
creation of higher paying jobs versus lower paying jobs during the
state's prolonged recession. During this period, the shift from

-23-

11/15/95

higher to lower wage industries has been more rapid in California than
in the nation as a whole due primarily to large reductions in defenserelated employment. More recently, we believe that this trend has
been reversed, due largely to job creation in high-tech-related
sectors since those sectors have been growing very rapidly in the last
year or so.
Turning to the national outlook, our forecast shows real GDP
growth averaging about 2-1/2 percent or somewhat more through the end
of next year. In our view this would leave the economy with some
resource constraints in labor and product markets even if the NAIRU
has fallen a bit. Recent inflation news, as we all know, has been
favorable. Although I hope it continues in this vein, it seems to me
there are some reasons to worry about whether that will happen.
First, there will be upward pressure on inflation to the extent that
the economy is pressing on full employment. Second, I believe there
are reasons to be skeptical of arguments that the moderation in
employment cost inflation over the past year will be a major factor
holding down price inflation for long. As was mentioned by Mike, most
of the slowdown in the employment cost index since 1993 has been in
benefits, especially health care costs. This has caused employment
However, in the long run this
costs to decelerate since mid-1994.
should affect only the level of benefit costs with presumably no
permanent effect on compensation inflation. Second, research at our
Bank and in the academic literature--and I would cite here work done
by Robert Gordon and also Yash Mehra from the Richmond Bank--questions
the direction of causation between wages and prices. We don't talk
about that very much. This work suggests that more often than not,
these two variables are brought into alignment by wages adjusting to
prices rather than the other way around. So, despite the favorable
CPI numbers in recent months, the unusual decline of labor cost
inflation relative to price inflation during the past year or more
could be resolved in large part by somewhat faster wage inflation in
the future.
In this regard, I found the Greenbook projection of
rising labor costs in 1996 and 1997 certainly plausible. Taking these
factors into account, I end up concluding, as did Tom Hoenig, that I
don't see us making any progress in 1996 and 1997 in reducing
inflation below this year's rate. Under the assumption of a roughly
constant funds rate, our forecast shows the CPI at around 3 percent in
1996 and 1997, a little above this year's 2-3/4 percent rate. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Sometimes the District reports make me think
about 12 pistons in a reciprocating engine, with some rising and some
falling. It's hard to cut through it and know whether the engine is
well tuned and humming along or not. The Fourth District is
definitely a piston that is coming down. I've been struck by how
consistently the reports from our Bank's business advisory council,
our directors, and the other people that we have talked to have been
in the negative direction since our meeting in September. People are
pulling down their expectations, not only to finish out this year but
also for the first half of next year. It may simply be because the
District is so heavily influenced by automobiles. Our manufacturing
employment as a share of total employment is running about twice the
national average so that when autos and trucks and even agricultural
equipment soften--and they are distinctly softening--everything else

-24-

11/15/95

and everyone's attitudes also downshift. That's pretty uniform
throughout the District with the exception of the area around
Lexington and the Georgetown automobile facility that is still
expanding. Everyone else is reporting that it is much easier to hire
than before. Their order books are softening; their backlogs are
down. There are almost no reports of the type we were hearing for a
while about commodity prices of various types being the source of new
inflation. Other than some pickup in residential construction around
the District--and people say they think that is related to lower
mortgage rates--we see people mostly pulling back on the previous
optimism.
I worry about these kinds of anecdotal reports adding up over
time to the mirror image of two years ago when we started to sense
that the head winds were dissipating. In terms of the things that we
are concerned about, that kind of information we have about real
economic activity translated for me into saying in the context of two
years ago that the real equilibrium interest rate was starting to
shift up. If we don't make some adjustment, we will wind up with a de
facto easing of policy relative to where we think it ought to be.
If I am right about things going in the opposite direction of
two years ago, we should start to see a pattern of people being
surprised that the economic indicators are coming in weaker than they
previously had expected. We are hearing it not only in consumer goods
but also in capital spending. I would call that a downward revision
in the equilibrium real rate. We would be in a posture of winding up
with a more restrictive policy relative to what is going on in the
economy than we may later consider to have been appropriate.
I don't
make forecasts anymore, but I do listen to the forecasts of my staff.
They tell me with a fair degree of confidence that real GDP growth
this quarter will come in somewhere between minus 1 and plus 5
percent.
[Laughter]
I'm not sure what to make of it, wherever it
falls in that range. But looking to next year, I am very troubled by
that persistent 3 percent inflation rate shown in the Greenbook.
If
that's the most likely outcome, in the sense of being consistent with
the forecast of economic activity and the assumed stance of policy,
then it's unacceptable. But I don't have any basis for saying that
it's wrong and that it's too high.
If I were still in the game of
making forecasts, I would tell people that it is more likely to come
in below those numbers than above those numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The regional economy in the Philadelphia
District is mixed. It is performing in the range of steady to
improving slightly. Manufacturing continues to grow, although the
pace appears to be waning. Retailers are disappointed with sales and
concerned about the outlook for holiday sales. Even discount stores
are now seeing smaller increases than earlier in the year. Auto sales
have eased with the end of incentive programs on '95 models and slow
deliveries of '96 models.
Real estate activity has been running at a
nearly level rate. Office vacancy rates are coming down only slowly
if at all, and residential sales are flat.
Commercial and industrial
lending is moving up some, with a slowing of credit card lending.
Employment gains are anemic but still better than earlier in the year,
and wage gains continue to be in the 3 to 4 percent range. Attitudes
appear to be more cautious than upbeat.

11/15/95

Turning to the national economy, it just does not have the
feel of a 4 to 5 percent growth rate. The statistics appear to be
telling us a relatively fast growth story, and the anecdotal
information indicates a more moderate growth story. I'm inclined to
give more weight to the anecdotal evidence. Consumer spending appears
more consistent with the more moderate growth path, as does
manufacturing. I would view the 4 to 5 percent growth that we seem to
have had as more of a statistical aberration than a basic underlying
trend. The outlook for inflation is probably in the 3 percent range
for next year. While I believe we are all committed over time to a
stable price environment, I think we have to be realistic about this.
We are in a very mature phase of the business cycle and it would be a
major accomplishment by historical standards just to keep inflation
from rising at this point in the cycle. I think there will be
opportunities to have further disinflation, but my expectation is that
we will have to wait for a more conducive phase of the business cycle
for that to be achieved.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, on balance, the Seventh District's
economy is performing at a very high level, generally stronger than
the national economy and with some sectors or industries at or near
capacity. The District's manufacturing sector expanded in October,
while manufacturing contracted nationally. The purchasing managers'
surveys from across the District in Chicago, Milwaukee, Detroit and
western Michigan all indicated expansion in October, while the
national figure dropped below 50.
However, there are some areas in
manufacturing where I think caution seems to be called for.
I say
this recognizing that our manufacturing firms are now operating at
In my view our situation is not the same as the one
very high levels.
Jerry Jordan described for the Cleveland District, where he said that
growth actually is starting to decline, but there are areas in our
District that we have to watch carefully.
One area is light motor vehicles.
October sales of such
vehicles were below September's, and our contacts indicate that sales
in early November have not shown any significant improvement so far.
Of course, this is the early part of the month, but without a pickup
from the recent sales pace, it's highly likely that production plans
will be trimmed further this quarter. Medium- and heavy-duty trucks
is another area where caution seems appropriate. Net orders have
declined substantially, but manufacturers do not plan to cut
production this quarter as much as might be expected. Although
inventories will be increasing, several manufacturers indicate they
will wait for the new year before reassessing their production plans.
Finally, the steel industry needs careful monitoring. Steel
production in our District has been at very high levels, but spot
prices for steel have been dropping sharply.
District retailers generally were pleasantly surprised with
the early November sales gains, particularly after October's
lackluster performance. However, retailers are still in a gloomy
mood, in part because of weak catalogue sales, and they are boosting
sales promotions. Retailers with a national presence noted that sales
at stores located in our District generally were stronger than
nationally. A note of caution, however:
A large national trucking
firm reported that large discounters were significantly slower in

11/15/95

-26-

taking holiday shipments this year as compared with previous years.
The housing sector in our District is very strong. New and used home
sales in the Midwest led the United States in September and October.
Builders in Chicago and western Michigan are struggling to keep up
with demand.
Labor markets remain tight. Unemployment rates in our
District range between 3.3 and 4.8 percent. We are now receiving more
reports of rising wage pressures, especially for low skill entry-level
jobs. But these increases do not yet appear in the data, as a thirdquarter employment cost index for the Midwest was roughly in line with
the nation. We have received an advanced copy of Manpower
Incorporated's first-quarter 1996 hiring plans survey results, which
will not be publicly available until early December. The national
results indicate that business hiring plans for the first quarter of
1996 will remain at the high levels reported for both the third
quarter and the fourth quarter of this year. Hiring plans for Midwest
firms continue to be stronger than the national survey results. Our
contacts at
that they feel the first-quarter results
generally tend to be a good indicator for the full year. They also
indicated that wage pressures were very low, but firms they service
are expecting increases to become larger next year.
One of the major developments in the agricultural area, of
course, has been the sharp increase in grain prices:
Wheat prices are
the highest in twenty-one years and corn prices are the highest in
eleven years; a year ago, corn prices hit a seven-year low. While it
is not entirely clear how much food prices will be affected, the farm
price increases this year have been bullish for suppliers of farm
equipment. More generally, price patterns in our District do not seem
to have changed much since our last meeting. Nonagricultural
commodity prices continue to be soft.
Paper board, gypsum, and steel
scrap prices have all edged down.
Turning to the national picture, our outlook is broadly in
line with the Greenbook. We generally agree with the Greenbook's
assessment for fourth-quarter GDP growth in inventories, although the
anecdotal information we are receiving points to further inventory
correction early next year. Our overall forecast is for a bit more
economic growth next year than the Greenbook, and we are slightly more
optimistic on inflation, but the differences are not really large.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you. We recently have had meetings with
our directors and our advisory council, and several themes emerged
from those discussions. Many of them are not new, but I think they
are worth emphasizing because they were universal. The first of these
themes was that labor markets are very, very tight across the District
and across skill and experience levels--everything from unskilled,
inexperienced workers to college graduates, MBAs, and so on. While
that was reported by virtually everybody who commented on it, they
also commented that despite the fact that those labor markets have
been tight for quite some time, there is no real sign of any
acceleration in wage increases or price increases across the District.
Also, credit is readily available. There has been a striking lack of
reports of difficulty in finding credit. Real estate construction
markets have strengthened and are continuing to strengthen. The

-27-

11/15/95

manufacturing sector, in contrast, is pretty sluggish outside of the
paper industry. If there is one group that is concerned about current
industry conditions and where the economy is likely to be going, I
would have to say it is the manufacturers. Those we have talked to
who do business internationally say that outside of Japan they are
seeing improved business. Japan appears to be, as we know, largely a
case unto itself at the moment. Finally, those who commented on this
issue indicated that capital spending today is being driven by
technological change rather than interest rates. They would not argue
that interest rates are altogether inconsequential, but they seem to
feel that they really have to continue to introduce new technology in
order to remain competitive.
With regard to the outlook for the national economy, I share
the view evidenced in the Greenbook that we will see a continuation of
respectable real growth from here.
It will not be at the pace of the
third quarter, but I don't see any reason to doubt that the economy
will continue to grow at a pace in the neighborhood of 2 or 3 percent
on average over the next several quarters. With regard to the
inflation outlook, I must admit to a fair amount of uncertainty. If I
had to write down a number, I would probably write down something like
the 3 percent in the Greenbook. But if there is one thing that really
has surprised me in the past year or maybe two, it has been the fact
that despite tight labor markets, rapid growth in demand, and tight
product markets we have not seen any acceleration of inflation. I
have a tinge of optimism regarding the inflation outlook, and if I
were to err I would guess that we might do a bit better on the
inflation side than that number I would write down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, New England continues its gradual
expansion from the trough of the recession, but recent data suggest
that even the moderate growth pace of earlier this year has slowed a
bit. As usual there is good news and bad news--or at least downbeat
news. Let me cover the downbeat first and finish on a more hopeful
note.
During the first eight months of 1995, New England added jobs
at only about a third the pace of the prior two years. National job
growth has slowed in recent months, but New England's decline has been
sharper. The region had been adding jobs at about two-thirds the
national pace since the recession ended, but recent data show that our
job growth has slowed to about half the pace for the nation as a
whole. Among the states, Rhode Island maintains its ranking as the
basket case, with employment continuing to be below that of the year
before. Connecticut is barely growing at all, while the remaining
states have had, at least in New England terms, relatively healthy job
growth. Manufacturing employment continues to shrink, but the pace of
contraction has slowed a bit.
The cause of the recent regional
employment slowdown therefore lies outside manufacturing; employment
growth in finance, government, and transportation has come to a
relative standstill.
I should note that despite the trend to smaller
government, the share of government in the employment pie in New
England is expected to grow. This is because the Bureau of Labor
Statistics now classifies Indian-run casinos as "other local
government."
[Laughter]
One wonders about this!
Without casinorelated job growth, Connecticut clearly would have continued to be our

11/15/95

-28-

basket case, because that is where most of Connecticut's job growth
has come from. Despite this, unemployment remains relatively low in
New England at least in part because of weak labor force growth and
outmigration. Recent estimates show that the labor force actually has
shrunk by about 200,000 since the recession ended while the number of
establishment jobs has expanded by about 325,000. We maintain a
decent unemployment rate but largely because the labor force is
shrinking. Adding to the downbeat news from local labor markets is
considerable softness in retail sales.
This undoubtedly reflects weak
consumer confidence, which is below year-earlier levels.
Now to turn to a little hope:
There are bright spots in New
England. High-tech businesses are booming, at least certain kinds of
high-tech businesses. So much so that one contact said his company
was constrained not by demand but by a relative shortage of silicon
wafers and glass yarn. Software designers are in short supply, and
the industry itself is beginning to regard 25 to 30 percent growth
rates as disappointing. A contact at a major software company located
both in California and New England said he will be moving some jobs to
Massachusetts because shortages are even worse in California. Wages
for these workers have risen only a modest 4 to 5 percent, however,
due in large part to the value of stock incentive programs that are
being used increasingly to reward highly paid workers. Tourism has
been another bright spot, with significant gains over even last year's
strong performance.
Finally, I don't know if this is hopeful or not, but loan
growth at large District banks has slowed considerably from its
earlier pace. It had been slower than for the nation as a whole
throughout the recovery. Most of this weakness lies in commercial and
industrial loans, and some of this is due to uneasiness about large
bank mergers, which we think have redirected some business to smaller
banks in the District.
Turning to the national scene, we had a rather healthy
internal debate among the economists on my staff. It's a serious
debate because I gather money has been wagered on what the direction
of the Committee's next move ought to be, up or down. The fact that
we can make good arguments for both positions, I think, underscores
the Bank's general agreement with the Greenbook forecast. As I see
it, that forecast shows a fairly good outcome with relatively balanced
risks. Actually, it was a bit more upbeat than I had expected,
possibly because the third-quarter numbers have been such a surprise.
In that regard, I think that the foreign growth numbers projected by
the staff may be overly optimistic, and I really don't know what to
believe about the numbers associated with the federal budget crisis.
Your crystal ball is probably as good as any on that one.
On the
other hand, I really do think that the impetus provided by low
interest rates and booming financial markets, combined with where we
are in terms of the unemployment rate, does play out in the direction
of an upside risk, and I would buy into a few of the concerns that
President Parry mentioned in his comments.
I am concerned that we may
not continue to be successful in keeping inflation at the projected 3
percent rate.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, may I interrupt a second?
Secretary
Rubin announced a little less than a half hour ago that he is
disinvesting trust funds, in particular the Civil Service Retirement

-29-

11/15/95

Fund as well as the G-fund, by enough to permit the Treasury to raise
some $60 billion in the market. This now gets them up to the last
business day of December.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Did he say that or is it our estimate?

MR. KOHN. I believe he said the $60 billion would get the
He did it by using the $21-1/2 billion
Treasury through December 30.
in the G-fund as everybody expected. But apparently he must have made
a finding that this crisis, or this debt limitation problem, could go
on long enough to enable him to disinvest about $39 billion of the
Civil Service retirement fund. This suggests that he found it might
go for about a year or so.
MR. PARRY. Couldn't that announcement in itself have the
impact of slowing down progress in resolving the budget problem?
MR. KOHN. In the last few days, attention appears to have
shifted to the appropriations process and the debt ceiling issue has
come off the table. There was some presumption that the Secretary had
enough tricks in his bag to keep it off the table for a while.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, Part II of the Greenbook starts
out with the statement that the recent news on the national economy is
unusually "conflictive."
I wasn't sure that was a word, so I looked
it up and as always the staff was right. It is a word and it is a
good word!
[Laughter]
It is a good word to describe conditions in
our District as well as in the country as a whole. I will cite a
couple of examples.
Furniture, as most of you probably know, is a
major industry in our region, and each fall there is a so-called
"furniture market" in High Point, North Carolina where all the major
manufacturers and a number of major retailers come together. That
market was held a few weeks ago, and it was said to be the weakest in
five years. In sharp contrast, the CEO of a sizable chain of retail
furniture stores said that his business had picked up significantly in
recent weeks. Elsewhere, textile and apparel manufacturers tell us
that conditions in their industries have softened a great deal lately.
At the same time, there are pockets of substantial strength throughout
the District in such diverse activities as chemical manufacturing in
West Virginia, the expansion of high-tech facilities in Virginia and
North Carolina, and tourism in South Carolina. Commercial
construction is said to be quite strong throughout the District. Auto
sales have softened in some places but are much stronger in other
places.
So again, "conflictive" seems to be a good word to describe
the kind of reports and information we have been getting recently.
Boiling it all down, my sense is that in the aggregate
conditions in our District have not really changed a great deal since
the last FOMC meeting. I think steady growth at a moderate pace
continues to characterize our regional economy. However, as Larry
Lindsey reminded me at breakfast this morning, our District is more at
risk than other parts of the country to any near-term shock stemming
from the current fiscal situation; our region would bear a
disproportionate share of such a shock. One other point that might be
worth mentioning about our region--it might extend beyond the region-was brought up at a joint meeting of all three of our boards last

-30-

11/15/95

week. Chairman Greenspan was there. At that meeting, several bankers
expressed the view that loan quality was deteriorating in our region
and around the country and that loan margins generally had narrowed
and competitive pressures had intensified. Six or seven bankers made
that sort of comment and only one took exception to it.
With respect to the national economy, I have to admit that I
was a bit surprised by the magnitude of the upward revision in the
forecast. I have been reading these Greenbooks for a long time, and
this was a significant upward revision, especially if a comparison is
made with the previous forecast in some of the out-quarters.
I think
the level of real GDP at the end of 1996 is about a percent higher
than it was in the September Greenbook. I recognize that with the
more recent retail sales figures you may revise your forecast down a
bit, Mike, but I take it that on net it is going to be generally the
same picture. The Greenbook makes a good case for that revision.
Aggregate demand does appear to be significantly stronger than we
thought it was not too many weeks ago. Business investment,
especially in computing equipment but in a lot of other things as
well, is still quite robust. There is still a lot of thrust in
housing, and we certainly see that in much of our District. The
latest labor market reports, as the Greenbook mentions, suggest that
income will be growing rapidly enough to sustain at least moderate
growth in consumer spending in the period ahead. Clearly, none of
this negates the downside risks that are still there, and I think the
retail sales report yesterday was a good reminder of that.
But it
does suggest that the risks on the up side are also there and they
should not be ignored.
This brings me to what seems to be the main implication of
the revision. It moves the projected path of the economy away from
one that might have seemed to be a bit below the economy's potential
to a path that may be very close to potential and conceivably even a
little above it.
This obviously has implications for the inflation
They are not
outlook, and I think they show up in the projections.
dramatic, but they are there if you look at the numbers closely. In
particular, as I recall, the September Greenbook showed the core CPI
inflation rate gradually declining over the course of the projection
period. In this Greenbook, it stays almost exactly constant at 3
percent. Some people might look on that as an optimistic forecast,
but I think it is a move in a direction that we don't want to see.
Tom Hoenig and Bob Parry have made this point before.
I think we
should be concerned if we see no further progress toward price
stability until 1998 at the earliest. And, obviously, with the
revision in the projection, there is some risk that we could get into
a situation where the inflation rate begins to drift slowly upward.
That prospect should be a concern and it is what struck me most in the
projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mike, I was interested in your comment that the
current situation reminded you most of developments in the late 1980s.
I wasn't here then. What I remember about 1988-89 is the cover of
Business Week that asked "Have we repealed the business cycle?"
If I
were to put a cover on this Greenbook, I too would say "Have we
repealed the business cycle?" At the least, your forecast puts off
any perceptible slowing for another six quarters--until mid-1997.
I'm

11/15/95

-31-

suspicious of that. I hope I'm wrong, but I have a number of
quibbles, particularly on the international side, and one major
concern that has to do with the consumer debt situation. We continue
to have a robust forecast and robust debt growth. The Greenbook
In the last
rightly notes that consumer debt levels have moved up.
2-1/2 years, consumer debt as a percent of disposable personal income
has risen 2-1/2 percentage points from about 16 percent to about
18-1/2 percent. One way of looking at that is that 40 percent of
growth in PCE in the last 2-1/2 years has been financed by higher nonhousing consumer debt. The reason I am more concerned about that than
the Greenbook and the reason that we are going to have some problems
is two-fold: first, I think that the quality of income that consumers
are receiving makes that debt level worse than what it is perceived to
be; and, second, there is the view that the stock market can be a
panacea for the deterioration on the liability side. I don't believe
that is accurate.
Let me start with the income situation. Although personal
income has been rising at a respectable rate, not all personal income
flows through to spendable income for the consumer. Although that is
true for wages, that is not true for substantial portions of interest
and dividends. One check on that is simply to look at income tax
data. Now, if you receive more than ten dollars a year in either
interest or dividend payments, that income is reported to the IRS.
So, it is not a question of evasion; any received interest or dividend
income by a taxable entity is going to show up in the income tax data.
Yet, only 30 percent of personal interest income is reported on income
tax returns.
That includes nontaxed interest. The same thing is true
for 50 percent of dividends and 65 percent of business income. If you
define spendable income, you can either include transfers or not
include transfers. The numbers I have don't include transfers, but
that doesn't change the story. What you get is a picture of the
income situation that suggests there is a lot less spendable income
out there than what we have perceived. By itself that is not a
disturbing fact. What is disturbing is that over time the
relationship between spendable income and disposable personal income
has been deteriorating. For example, spendable income in 1988, as I
just defined it adjusting for what actually flows through to household
checking accounts, amounted to about 61 percent of disposable personal
income.
In 1995, that fell to 57.4 percent. So we have had roughly a
6 percent decline in the base, what I would call the denominator,
which we should be using to measure debt service burdens. That means
that the 18-1/2 percent that we scored in the second quarter of this
year has a ratio of debt to disposable personal income that, after
adjusting for the deterioration in the composition of income, would
really be a number like 19.7 percent. That would be a record high
substantially above anything that we have seen. Obviously, with the
average of spendable income to disposable personal income falling, it
is even worse at the margin, and the last year has been the worst year
to date.
The second issue is whether the very substantial stock market
gains could in fact offset this deterioration on the household
liability side. It is an obvious statement to say that people who own
stocks are the same people with credit card debt.
But if you take a
careful look at the distribution of stock market wealth, it becomes
increasingly implausible to believe that a rise in stock market wealth
could actually be the cause of any kind of sustained expansion in

11/15/95

consumer spending. For example, 31 percent of dividends go to the .8
percent of households at the top of the income distribution and half
of all dividends go to people over 65.
Actually, among the non rich,
substantially more than half of all dividends go to people over 65.
I
don't know if we have any detailed studies of the marginal propensity
to consume, but if you are counting on stock market wealth, which I'm
using dividends to apportion, dividends would be a rough signal that a
lot of that increase in stock market wealth is--I'm going to use the
word--"wasted" on people who are unlikely to spend a large portion of
it and certainly unlikely to be the people who are running up this
consumer debt. To try and probe that a little further, if in fact
stock market wealth is going to be the leading cause of consumption
expansion, we would expect it to permeate down at least into the
$75,000 to $100,000 income class. There are about 4 million households in this income range; there are about 4 million households that
are richer than that. We are talking here about the 92nd to 96th
percentiles of household income.
If we are expecting a wealth-led
increase in consumption, they clearly should benefit. Yet half of all
households in this income class receive no dividends at all,
suggesting that they have no stock market wealth. And 71 percent of
households in this category under age 65 receive no dividends at all,
suggesting that they have no stock market wealth. Of the remaining 29
percent in this category--about 1 million households that received
dividends--the average dividend is about $3,000. The median dividend
is about $600.
If you figure that there was a 40:1 price to dividend
ratio, that would mean that even among the 30 percent of this
relatively wealthy class that got dividends and owned stock, their
portfolio is only about $25,000. The gain in their portfolio was on
the order of $6,000.
To expect that small a group and that small a
gain to somehow sustain consumption spending seems implausible to me.
So, I have to believe that the problems that we all acknowledge on the
liability side of the household balance sheet are real and can't be
offset by improvements on the asset side of the household balance
sheet.
I think this is going to show up, for example, in continuing
declines in auto sales.
I don't know that we are going to have a
recession, but

I do know that this

type of

increased risk in household

balance sheets will mean that whenever there is a misstep--a shock if
you will--in some other portion of the economy, it is going to spill
I think that
over into the consumer sector with magnified effects.
means we have substantially heightened risks on the down side. That
is my quarrel with the Greenbook.
I would like to say one other thing about the economy and
that has to do with the current budget negotiations. We have 800,000
federal employees who are furloughed and close to 1-1/2 million who
are not receiving paychecks. Now, that is a lot on the spending side.
If these people are actually liquidity constrained, it is in effect a
sudden 1-1/2 percent rise in the unemployment rate, which would amend
forecasts about what is going to happen to consumer spending,
particularly in the fourth quarter. Staff has estimated that each
week that we continue to have an impasse takes .3 point off the
fourth-quarter growth rate. Well, it looks as if we have one week for
sure according to this morning's papers and, as I read the rhetoric, I
don't see where this is going to end any time soon. As we start
adding up the weeks people are not getting paychecks, we begin to get
a little nervous about how this might spill over. Secondly, if it is
resolved, the direction in which it most likely will be resolved would
be a compromise on the Medicare side. I think that would be

-33-

11/15/95

unfortunate and I believe the bond markets particularly would view it
as unfortunate. It would mean that we would get the short-run cuts on
the discretionary side, that is, the layoffs in the government sector.
But it also would signal to the bond markets that we are not going to
be getting our arms around government consumption over the long haul.
The effect of that would be that yields on intermediate- and long-term
securities would tend to rise. The big rally in securities markets
has not come from proposed cuts in funding for the National Endowment
for the Arts but from proposed cuts in Medicare and long-term
government consumption on the order of a trillion dollars. So, I am
afraid that the kind of compromise that we most likely are headed for
will give us the worst of both worlds--short-run contraction in 1996
due to layoffs plus a run-up in intermediate- and long-term rates that
I am
will adversely affect the auto industry and housing starts.
substantially more pessimistic than I was, and I am much more
pessimistic than the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The good news is that this year's
CPI inflation likely will be less than the members of the FOMC
forecast in July. The acceleration that was widely expected at the
beginning of the year has not materialized. Although the staff
analysis cites temporary decreases in energy prices and a deceleration
in medical care costs, it says little about the contribution of
monetary factors.
Last year's slow growth of the narrow and broad
monetary aggregates likely moderated this year's inflation. On the
other hand, I don't consider the current stance of monetary policy as
being unduly restrictive. Growth of both the broad monetary
aggregates and bank credit has accelerated this year. If we adjust
for sweep accounts, there has been some growth in M1 as well.
In
addition, firms have turned to the capital markets for financing as
long-term market yields have fallen and stock prices have risen.
The bad news is that neither the staff nor the public
apparently sees any deceleration of inflation in sight. Respondents
to the Philadelphia Fed survey expect CPI inflation to accelerate to
3-1/2 percent in the first half of 1996, roughly comparable to the
staff's projection of 3.3 percent. Households in the Michigan survey
on average expect inflation to accelerate to about a 4 percent pace
next year. We should be concerned, I think, when the public expects
inflation to accelerate and not to fall further after it has been held
below 3 percent for several years in a row. It is true that
expectations have inched down a bit; we can see that in long rates and
in some of the surveys. But no one expects inflation to fall to 2
percent or below anytime soon. We simply do not have the credibility
that at least I think we would like. It is important to protect
recent gains and to make further progress toward price stability. At
some point, a statement in that regard with respect to our intentions
would help.
It is a topic we have talked about before.
The Eighth District economy, like the nation's, continues to
operate at a high level, as growth slows to a sustainable rate.
Transportation equipment has been exceptionally strong. Orders for
both military and civilian aircraft have increased. District auto
production was up 34 percent year-over-year during the third quarter,
and it is expected to be up 45 percent during the fourth quarter. The
exceptional strength in St. Louis auto production, as I have mentioned

11/15/95

-34-

before, is due to the particular models built there, mainly light
trucks and sports utility vehicles. In Arkansas, Tennessee, and
Kentucky, the poultry industry continues to expand aggressively.
Throughout the District, residential construction is picking up and
office vacancy rates continue to decline. There are some signs of
cyclical weakness, however. District unemployment rates, although
still low by historical standards and below national averages, have
risen about 1/2 percentage point on average over the last year.
Layoffs at large corporations, such as General Electric, are
attributed to weak domestic demand for appliances.
On the other hand,
announcements of plant closings by Brown Shoe and Fruit of the Loom,
for example, more likely represent structural adjustments than signs
of an impending downturn. In the banking area, "unchanged" is the key
word in an Eighth District survey of senior loan officers. Loan
demand has leveled off after rising sharply all year. In fact, at
large reporting banks, loans have risen about 11 percent over the last
year. Although there has been some increase in the consumer loan
delinquency rate, it remains well below the level attained before the
last recession. The poor weather conditions this year have reduced
crops and have led to low agricultural stocks, a comment that Mike in
particular made, which may well result in markedly higher food prices
next year.
Nationally, the economy continues to operate at a high level,
It is important not
with growth slowing to its 10-year average rate.
It now seems likely that we will
to repeat the mistakes of the past.
get through this business cycle with a peak of inflation well below
the 6 percent rate that occurred in 1990.
But, frankly, that is a
pretty low standard to set for ourselves. The mistake made in
previous business cycles was to inflate the money supply in a
misguided attempt to stimulate growth.
In every case, fighting the
subsequent inflation contributed to recession. The outlook for the
real economy is optimistic today because inflation has not
accelerated. The worst thing we could do is to repeat the mistakes of
history, most recently in 1986.
That is, we should not allow an
acceleration of inflation that would require a sharp reversal in
policy later on. What we should be doing is looking to move the
inflation trend lower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Not very much has changed in the Eleventh
District since the last FOMC meeting. Employment growth remains
strong; it is weaker than it was in 1994, but it is stronger than that
of the nation. At the margin, the expansion of high-tech industries
is accounting for a large portion of our employment growth. To give
you some longer-term statistics, over the last six years high-tech
employment has grown four times as fast as total non-agricultural
employment in Texas and more than twice as fast as high-tech
employment in the nation. The growth of high-tech industries has been
tightening the market for office space and other nonresidential real
estate in our major cities. This is primarily in the outer edges of
the cities, though, rather than the inner cities. Single-family home
construction has picked up. Single-family permits rose at a 10
percent annual rate in the third quarter, and many homebuilders are
raising their forecasts for 1995.
This strength has been driven at
least as much by business relocations as it has by lower mortgage
rates. Many Austin and Dallas firms are recruiting heavily from out-

-35-

11/15/95

of-state because of tight labor markets for certain skilled workers,
engineers and programmers primarily. The Mexican border area remains
a weak spot. At our board of directors meeting last Thursday, all of
our directors' reports were up except for El Paso and Brownsville.
Earlier in the year, we kept hearing reports that businesses have been
through and have survived other peso crises. But there seems to be a
lot less bravado these days than there was in the early months of that
crisis. Retail merchants continue to shut down. The limit on how
much Mexican citizens can buy in the United States without paying a
duty when they cross the bridge back into Mexico has been raised back
But given the cut of about 50
up from $50 to $400 on November 1st.
percent in the purchasing power of the peso on the other side of the
border, it is probably going to be irrelevant at this point.
On the national economy, I am pleased to see the less binding
view of supply-side constraints in the potential rate of growth
contained in the staff forecast. This accords well with my own views
and recent economic results. The broad outlines of the Greenbook
forecast seem to me to be about right and reflect the fact that growth
momentum has been stronger than we suspected and inflationary
pressures a touch weaker than we had thought earlier. I differ from
the Greenbook in that I think the rates of real growth forecast for
1996 and 1997 do not appear to call for an upward revision to the
inflation forecast in those years. Mike started off his briefing by
talking about retail sales.
I might just mention that although
had a terrible October, they report that nationally the first
two weeks of November have been very strong.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
private sector economy of the Second District grew moderately in
recent weeks.
In September, private payroll employment rose at an
annual rate of 1.2 percent in New York and 0.9 percent in New Jersey.
In October, the unemployment rate fell from 6.8 to 6.3 percent in New
York State and was unchanged at 5.8 percent in New Jersey. Loan
officers are reporting that demand for most types of consumer and
nonresidential loans at small and medium-sized banks was higher than
Consumer confidence also improved in October,
it was two months ago.
rising 12 points in the mid-Atlantic states. That still leaves the
index at the lowest level of the nine regions reported by the
Conference Board. Consistent with that low level of confidence, the
levels of retail sales and existing home sales have fallen sharply
over the last four to six weeks. The major problem in the District
continues to be the lack of business confidence in the economic
climate, which stems especially from the attitude of government in the
city and state of New York. The problem, I think, is actually getting
more severe. We had a seminar last week co-sponsored with the Academy
of Sciences on regional economic development in the tri-state area:
New York, Connecticut, and New Jersey. It provided an opportunity for
the private and public sectors to talk to each other, which they don't
do as often as one might like. Rather dramatic were the two senior
businessmen who spoke, the CEOs of American International Group and
Pfizer, both of whom are board members of the Reserve Bank. They
talked about why it would make sense to reduce substantially the
number of employees in New York City. The following morning the Mayor
was talking about how he was trying to improve the business climate in
New York City, and I suggested to him that he better increase his

-36-

11/15/95

pace. We actually put him together with the two business executives
at a meeting yesterday.
On the national level, we have been concerned, as all of you
have, about the explanation for the rather benign performance of
inflation in the last couple of years.
Rick Mishkin and the staff
have been pulling apart everything that they can think of that would
be normal causes both on the demand-pull and cost-push sides of
inflation. Essentially, the only thing we can find that is not
performing pretty much as it has over the last 10 years or so is labor
compensation, which is considerably lower than any model results based
on performance before the last couple of years. I think the only
problem is that nobody, including us, is very certain of exactly why
that benign inflation has been happening. There are various bits of
psychology, sociology, and political science that people are
attributing to it.
But I think the real fact is that nobody knows or
is absolutely sure why it is happening. Therefore, it is rather risky
to predict that it will continue to happen. On the other hand, we
don't know whether that is certain, either. It makes us rather
concerned about our forecast in general.
The reason we have been so
anxious to try to figure this out is that the Bank has been very good
in its growth forecast over the last couple of years and until very
recently was overestimating CPI growth. Now we know why we were
overestimating it, but that does not give a pure sign of where to go
in the future.
We do, however, find ourselves unusually at variance with the
Greenbook, not on the CPI forecast where we were bickering with them a
year ago but rather on real growth.
For example, in looking at real
GDP based on current policy, whereas the Greenbook has 2-1/2 percent
growth in 1996, we have 2.1 percent. For 1997 the Greenbook has 2.3
percent; we have 1.9 percent. There are three major sources of this
difference. We find the expansion rather long-in-the-tooth, and
therefore we are less confident about the growth of business fixed
investment than the Greenbook is.
We are somewhat weaker on net
exports, and we are a fair bit weaker on housing. For example, the
Greenbook has 1.45 million housing starts for next year; we have 1.4
million. Actually, that makes both the Greenbook and the New York
Reserve Bank higher than the consensus. We are about equal with the
Greenbook on the forecast of the CPI.
Therefore, we are looking at a
situation in which a maintenance of current policy may in fact not be
appropriate. So, we have been doing some modeling based on what would
happen if the funds rate were to drop by 1/4 percentage point sometime
late this quarter and by another 1/4 percentage point early next year.
That gives us a somewhat better mix.
It does very little to the CPI
forecast even though we are not assuming that the current wage
restraint will necessarily continue. But it does crank up GDP growth
by .2 percent from 2.1 to 2.3 percent in 1996 and from 1.9 to 2.2
percent in 1997, not highly robust growth because we do continue to
have the view that monetary policy should be somewhat restrictive to
continue to work for stable prices.
What we are concerned about is
whether it is somewhat too restrictive at the present time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that I
welcome the more optimistic projection in the Greenbook this time.
For what it is worth, my judgment would be right with the staff.

-37-

11/15/95

Despite the long-in-the-tooth expansion that we have had, I have
believed and continue to believe that there is more potential for
upside surprise than downside. I am sure it is not an immutable law
of economics, but it seems to me that the U.S. economy has a natural
tendency to rise unless something pushes it down. On balance, I don't
see anything right now that looks to be sufficiently strong to produce
If you look down the list of the different elements of
that result.
GDP, and Al Broaddus ran through that list to some extent a while ago,
on balance it looks moderately positive with some components being
stronger than others, as one would expect. That is what the Greenbook
says; that is where they are.
That said on the optimistic side, I must say that I do want
to identify with Governor Lindsey on his remarks about consumer debt.
He has done a lot more serious work on it than I. But I have been,
and I think Larry has been, crying "wolf" on this subject for some
months now. Obviously, we have been premature so far, but I think
some day we are going to have a reckoning on this.
I don't know when
that might be or how it might play out when it comes. Perhaps because
I feel a little bit bruised about having been Chicken Little so far,
my best guess is that it is probably going to be out beyond our
present forecast period. If we are going to get a shock, I think that
could be where it will come from. It does seem to me that it is going
to take a shock to push this economy into unacceptable economic
sluggishness. We live in a dangerous world, of course, and the
potential shocks are out there. Consumer debt is one of them. We can
easily identify others. One is what is going on politically right
now, and what impact that might have. One can envision a shock from
fiscal drag, although I certainly cannot see that happening in 1996 at
this point. Net exports could be disappointing; I hope not.
At any
rate, if we get a shock, it is difficult to anticipate where or when
it might come.
If we get a shock, we will just have to deal with
that. Other than that I have to say I am pretty optimistic.
On the inflation side, with the very high utilization rates
of our human and physical resources, I think we have been getting
remarkably good results.
It is a little difficult for me to see how
the inflation picture is going to improve, although I guess in recent
months it has had a slight tendency to improve. Maybe today's news
will be a straw in the wind in the other direction. But so far, it is
very difficult to see much by way of upside push there.
I do think
that given our high utilization level, an upside risk potential could
become apparent as time goes on, and we will have to be very careful
about that going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At our last meeting
we said that we would know more at this meeting, and now we are all
scratching our heads. We do know more, but now we are trying to
figure out what it means. We may well be in another fourth-down
situation. I agree with Mike Prell that forecasting is a truly
humbling profession. We have all had the opportunity to reevaluate
some things since the last meeting. As Mike chronicled for us, a
number of the statistics have come in stronger than were anticipated
at that meeting:
GDP, industrial production, and consumer spending.
The export situation seems to be improving as the economies of our
trading partners appear to be on the mend or strengthening. At 5.5

11/15/95

-38-

percent unemployment, the labor market appears to be a bit better than
expected. Except for today's CPI news, the recent inflation news has
been better than expected. Evidence appears to be gathering that the
NAIRU may be lower than 6 percent. Business fixed investment
projections look a bit better than we had earlier thought.
The recent
productivity numbers are above trend, unless one has made the mental
conversion already to chain weights.
What are the implications of this reevaluation? Taken
together, all this information may indicate that labor and product
market constraints are not quite as tight as historical precedents
would suggest. Monetary policy may not be as restrictive as we had
earlier thought.
I think that the financial markets are consistent
with that observation. Stock prices are up; bond prices are up; the
yield curve has flattened during the intermeeting period; the dollar
has been steadier. The cost of capital still favors business spending
on investment. Credit market demands have flattened a bit in the most
recent data, but they are still indicative of a propensity to spend.
Perhaps the folks who have suggested that the risks are on the up side
are right; maybe we have missed the soft landing and are ready for
another takeoff. Alternatively, it may be time to adjust our thinking
to chain-weighted statistics.
The data seem a bit more consistent, or
at least more explainable, using these statistics.
In spite of the "conflictive" evidence, I continue to
believe, similar to Mike Prell, that the best outlook is for moderate
growth. In coming to this somewhat unexciting conclusion, I continue
to look at the labor markets as a key. People, except for Federal
government people, are working. Employment growth has slowed, though,
to the point where we are just dealing with demographic increases.
People are still mobile. I think the reengineering that we have gone
through continues to create some uncertainty. All of this is, I
think, showing up in the wage situation. We are not seeing increased
wage pressures, though perhaps we will. Perhaps at some point workers
will be able to exert enough influence to move wages and real income
to higher levels, but we don't appear to be at that point yet. That
indicates to me that spending is going to be cautious. We also have
to consider the fiscal budget situation. The longer this debate drags
on, I think the more uncertain the effects are going to be.
Otherwise, and aside from the budget situation, there do not appear to
be major imbalances in the real economy or the financial markets.
In sum, I am sticking to the story of moderate growth, and I
will go even a bit further in view of the strong third-quarter data
and the financial market signals.
It is possible that the probability
distribution around a mean of potential growth has narrowed a bit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I am not going to say anything about my
My one
District economy because you do not want to hear about it!
anecdote would be that the traffic was unusually light driving in this
morning.
I will leave it at that.
I was very comfortable with the September Greenbook forecast.
Like Al Broaddus, I was struck by the large size of the revision in
the latest Greenbook. It was a considerably larger revision than I
made mentally based on the third-quarter GDP report.
Specifically,

-39-

11/15/95

the shock to the staff, and I guess to me, of about 1/2 percentage
point on the level of GDP--that is 2 percentage points on the growth
rate for a single quarter--led the staff as Al noted to raise the
level of GDP in the middle of 1997 by about 2-1/2 times that much, by
about 1-1/4 percentage point. We discussed this yesterday at the
Board meeting. I personally would have been inclined, and still am,
to be suspicious about the third-quarter GDP report--in two
dimensions. One is that there were certain flukish aspects, which is
not atypical. The other involves the deflator.
I keep staring at the
translation of the nominal GDP into real GDP by using a 0.6 percent
deflator. Fortunately, we are behind closed doors here. I never
predict data revisions in public because it is a stupid thing to do.
But in the quiet of my own study, I expect that to be revised.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLINDER.

In 1987 dollars?

In 1987 dollars, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
years from now.

The transcript will be visible five

MR. BLINDER. Yes.
[Laughter]
I know it is on the
transcript, but fortunately no one will know I said that for five
years. I don't have to say it publicly.
MR. PRELL.
In fact, we may not publish another number in
1987 dollars!
[Laughter]
MS. PHILLIPS.

You are saved!

I would have been
MR. BLINDER. That is a very good point.
inclined to boost the forecast between September and now by less.
Now, I don't want to overstate that point. Adding .7 percentage point
to GDP in a two-year period is well below the ability of anybody to
forecast, but one does have to make a point estimate somewhere. So,
I'm not saying that the staff's judgment is wild. It just seemed a
bit sporty to me.
[Laughter]
MR. PRELL.

I'm a sporty kind of guy!

MR. BLINDER. Yes, that's right. They are prone to things
like that.
That is what happens if you work at the Federal Reserve a
long time!
[Laughter]
I had two things on my desk that I could
easily pick up to compare. The Blue Chip forecasters--now, that is a
consensus, of course, so their forecast is going to move less-changed their 1996 and 1997 cumulated growth rate by zero between a
month ago and now. Larry Meyer changed his forecast by .1 percentage
point in each year; so he moved up 1997 by .2 point. Those are
samples that happened to be on my desk and that I looked at this
morning before I walked in. A notable feature of the new forecast, to
which Al Broaddus and Jerry Jordan made reference, is that the
implicit equilibrium real funds rate in the forecast now is 2.75
percent, which it was not the last time. You can just see that by the
behavior of the economy with a constant unemployment rate and a
constant inflation rate. That happens despite a budget deficit, which
is now down to about 2 percent of GDP and falling and, more
importantly I believe, is projected to fall.
It ought to be expected
that government budget deficits move ex ante real interest rates.

-40-

11/15/95

That seems rather high to me based on past experience when we have had
deficits of that size in this economy. Again, it's not wildly high,
just a bit on the high side.
One reason, though not the only reason,
for the staff's upgrading of the GDP forecast is that long rates are
30 basis points lower now, give or take a little, than they were at
I pointed out the following
the time of the September FOMC meeting.
to Mike Prell yesterday, and I will just point it out to everybody
here today. The reasons given in the market for the further notch
down of long rates are the following four--I think this is the whole
list:
increased expectations of Fed easing, lower reported actual
inflation and implicitly expected inflation, more optimism about
deficit reduction, and perceptions of a weakening expansion of
economic activity. The changes in the staff forecast between the last
Greenbook and the current Greenbook, which no longer assumes any Fed
easing, include a little more pessimism about inflation, less deficit
reduction, and stronger GDP growth. Now, I don't mean to imply that I
think the staff is wrong. The bond market is a lousy forecaster. I
believe our staff can probably educe evidence that they forecast GDP
better than does the bond market; I am sure they can. But I bring
that up because I do worry about the internal consistency of the
forecast.
If the strength in the forecast is largely predicated on
lower real interest rates, but the reasons in the market for the lower
real interest rates contradict those in the staff forecast, it will
not come true. More specifically, it suggests to me that if the staff
forecast starts coming true, bond rates will rise substantially and I
would suppose more than is built into the forecast.
One final point:
At the last meeting many of us
characterized the Greenbook as too good to be true.
I believe I was
That was the last
one, but I didn't go back and check the transcript.
Greenbook. This one is better. The risk to me in this Greenbook
forecast looks disproportionately on the down side.
Some of you may
remember that for a long time the biggest risk to me in the staff
forecast has been the so-called train wreck. Nine months ago it was
well into the future; two months ago it was getting close; and now we
are in it. The government lockout is a vastly greater event than the
Boeing strike by a factor of 40 or something like that.
In the first
place, this is going to have, as Governor Lindsey and someone else
said, a sort of standard Keynesian effect on aggregate demand. There
are fewer people working; they don't have as much money to spend.
It
also has the potential to scare people and shatter confidence just at
a time when the economy is teetering as to where it should be.
Further, it has the potential--knock on wood that it won't happen--to
rattle financial markets, as we are all well aware. I think that is a
danger.
The second downside risk to me is the weakening economic
outlook in all the G-7 countries.
I don't want to exaggerate that
risk. I don't think this is a huge difference, and developments in
Mexico may be a bigger deal for us potentially than the G-7.
Finally,
with about 1/8 the weight that Governor Lindsey put on it and 1/4 the
weight that Governor Kelley put on it, I would list consumer debt
problems as the third set of downside risks.
I have a hard time
thinking of upside risks that are of comparable likelihood. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

11/15/95

-41-

MS. YELLEN. I will just conclude the roundtable by echoing
my agreement with a number of the points that already have surfaced in
this discussion. Certainly, from my perspective the incoming data
flow since our last meeting has contained surprises and the surprises
do necessitate some rethinking of the underlying momentum in aggregate
demand and also the inflation risk. The staff's view is that the news
points to significantly greater underlying strength in aggregate
demand and a modest reduction in inflation risk. I certainly agree
with both of those assessments in a qualitative sense, but like
Governor Blinder and a number of other members I guess I question
whether or not the new forecast does represent something of an
overreaction to one month of really rather perplexing economic news.
In the September Greenbook, the staff forecast an unemployment rate of
6.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 1997 accompanied by a real
federal funds rate of 2.8 percent. The current forecast envisions an
unemployment rate of 5.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 1997, namely
1/2 point lower or as Governor Blinder put it 1-1/4 points higher on
real GDP, along with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 2.8
percent in real terms.
The staff, I would guess, has concluded that
the recent news has not just a transitory effect--it's not just a
statistical aberration as Ed Boehne put it--but has permanent
significance.
A look at a method that I thought was useful for summarizing
how much the staff's forecast has changed would be to measure this in
terms of the equilibrium real federal funds rate. One can infer from
the alternative simulations presented in the Greenbook that the
equilibrium real federal funds rate, which I am now defining as the
real federal funds rate in 1997 that would be consistent with a given
fixed unemployment rate, has been revised upward by about 130 basis
points since our last meeting.
In other words, the IS curve has
shifted up by about 130 basis points over the last month according to
the staff.
I think the staff procedure for generating the current
forecast is easily defended on statistical grounds because surprises
in demand do appear to have persistence. Nevertheless, I hesitate to
accept the conclusion at this point that one month's confusing data
should occasion such a large revision in our assessment of the
economic outlook, especially when there is a variety of indicators
pointing to greater softness in the economy. These would include--and
all of these have been mentioned--anecdotal reports from industry
contacts, yesterday's weak retail sales reading, sluggish auto demand,
evidence of rising consumer debt problems that Governors Lindsey and
Kelley have emphasized, today's IP number, softness in the purchasing
managers' survey, a rising moving average of initial claims for
unemployment insurance, and signs of softer growth in European
economies. All this is coupled with impressive commitments to fiscal
consolidation. And finally, of course, we have the current train
wreck, which could impair household finances and spirits going into
the Christmas season. Rather than quibble with the details of the
staff's point forecast, I would prefer to reserve judgment for a while
and await further clarification from incoming data, assuming that the
government shutdown doesn't actually end up eliminating the continuing
data flow.
On the inflation front the news since
seems to me, has been on balance favorable.
I
impressed by the reading on the core PPI which
and the fact that intermediate goods inflation

our
was
has
has

last meeting, it
particularly
remained unchanged
registered its

-42-

11/15/95

second monthly negative. But most important, as a number of you have
emphasized, is that total hourly compensation grew at a mere 2.3
percent in the third quarter, and I guess it is that continuing
restraint in the employment cost index that justifies the downward
revision of the NAIRU and the improvement in the inflation forecast.
I think the revisions in the staff's natural rate assumption and in
aggregate demand reflect a response to data surprises that we don't
fully understand. But in this instance I would emphasize that the
reaction is based on a lot more than a single month's data.
I
certainly would agree with Bill McDonough's assessment of the evidence
here. We now have had about six quarters in which the rate of growth
in nonfarm compensation, as measured by the ECI, has been falling in
spite of continued low measured levels of labor market slack. It does
seem from my standpoint, and I assume from the staff's and Bill's as
well, that most of the models we monitor have been consistently
surprised. The surprise has persisted; it is substantial. Our models
are overforecasting, if I understand the evidence properly, on the
order of .7 percent in the annual growth rate per quarter, and
cumulatively this certainly is a statistically significant surprise.
Of course, I also agree that we need to be careful here and not
overreact to the information. I think the staff has been cautious.
They have not yet concluded that we are witnessing a permanent
structural shift.
I agree this may end up being a transitory supply
shock. I do remain perplexed that the moderation in compensation and
unit labor costs has not yet translated into a reduction in core
inflation. I would also agree that price-price Phillips curve
predictions, while slightly off the mark, remain essentially on track.
At our last meeting I argued that the economy suffers from
what I called a "termites in the basement" problem. It is a bias
toward below trend growth the further out one goes in the forecast.
It stems from insufficient momentum in private spending to compensate
for growing fiscal drag and the real federal funds rate remaining at
its current level. As I try to move away from the data and simply
focus on economic fundamentals, I find it difficult to understand what
components of demand can be expected to replace lost government

spending on a persisting basis over the longer term unless there is
continuing impetus from interest and exchange rates.
I think that
financial markets share this view. Indeed, the Greenbook acknowledges
that the present level of real long-term interest rates is conditioned
on both the expectation that there will be deficit reduction and the
expectation that short-term rates eventually will fall gradually. I
think the expectation of a cut in the funds rate in the not too
distant future, as Peter Fisher emphasized, is built into the current
structure of fed funds futures so that a failure to validate that
expectation is most likely to lead to a backup in long rates. While
the current Greenbook forecast calls the markets' views as well as my
own into question and indeed the Greenbook may turn out to be right--I
have an open mind on this--from my perspective the level of
uncertainty has increased. I would like to wait and see what the
Christmas season and the budget negotiations hold in store, but I
consider the preponderance of risks at this point to be on the down
side of the Greenbook scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you very much.

there.
[Coffee break]

I hope coffee is

-43-

11/15/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Kohn.

I will be referencing,
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If
by the way, the last chart in the Financial Indicators package.
I
you don't have that with you, I think Carol Low has some extras.
would like to begin by discussing a new chart that appears at the end
of that package and use that as a transition into a discussion of the
[Statement--see Appendix.]
current stance of policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
extend it back before 1987?

What happens to your Taylor chart if you

MR. KOHN. It doesn't look very good, but I don't know what
"very good" means. That is, the Taylor rule does not track what
actually happened, particularly over the previous seven or eight years
in the Volcker era.
Real funds rates were considerably higher than
the Taylor chart would have suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

How does it look before the 1980s?

MR. KOHN. Perhaps Governor Yellen or Governor Blinder will
remember better than I, but it seems to me that the federal funds
rates were too low. That would confirm the notion that policy was
easier than it should have been to achieve price stability. Do you
remember?
MS. YELLEN.
that's right.

For the late 1960s and early 1970s I think

MR. BLINDER.
that period.
MR. KOHN.

It clearly doesn't fit the ups and downs in

No, it doesn't do a very good job.

MR. BLINDER. It was developed for you, Mr. Chairman, not for
Paul Volcker!
[Laughter]
MR. KELLEY.

It looks the way it should!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. John used to work for me in the private
sector and maybe he read my mind better than I do. Questions for Don?
MR. PARRY. John's choice of .5 for each coefficient is
convenient pedagogically. Have you ever looked at estimating it? The
two coefficients are quite different if you use estimates. As you can
see, they produce much higher federal funds rates.
I think in the
most recent period the coefficient on the income variable is closer to
.8 and the coefficient on the price variable is about .3.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
I think it matters a lot over what period
one is estimating it.
Of course, I think John picked those in part
out of some experience with large-scale modeling exercises, such as
were carried out under the aegis of the Brookings Conference a couple
of years ago.
I think they also were picked because they looked
reasonable. The bottom panel is a statistical exercise and that does
show pretty high weights on the unemployment gap, the resource gap-MR. PARRY.

Yes.

-44-

11/15/95

MR. KOHN. Some of these estimates don't show the FOMC paying
much attention to inflation.
MR. PARRY. It's a closer representation of what the Fed
actually did than just the selection of the .5 and .5.
MR. KOHN.

It's fitted to be a close representation of what

we did.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

MR. BLINDER. I just want to make the point with regard to
the last argument that you mentioned, Don, in your prepared remarks.
Since the gap is a forecast of inflation, you could read that as the
expected change in inflation.
MR. KOHN.

Sure.

MR. BLINDER. I would not quite translate getting a zero on
the second coefficient as an indication that the Committee did not
care about inflation. One can reinterpret this as indicating that the
only thing the Committee cares about is the level and rate of change
of inflation.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. BLINDER.

It admits of that interpretation.

MR. KOHN. Yes, although I would have to think about that a
little. The fact that everything goes to the output gap suggests that
you are not particularly sensitive to what the inflation rate is when
you close the gap.
MR. BLINDER.

That's right.

MR. KOHN. You need something on that inflation target to
provide you with a nominal anchor it seems to me.
MR. BLINDER.

That's correct.

MR. PARRY. The other thing that's interesting is that the
constant is about 2.7 as opposed to 2.0 and, of course, that's the
real rate.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
I am not sure what John Judd did at the San
Francisco Bank, but when we fit this the constant actually embodies
both the equilibrium real rate and the Committee's inflation target.
So, you have to make an assumption about one to separate out the
other.
If not, let
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don?
me start off.
Frankly, I didn't find the roundtable particularly
surprising. It had pretty much the mixed flavor of what is going on
In retrospect, the strength in
in the country District by District.
the third quarter was not all that surprising considering that the
economy was coming off a very weak set of developments after the early
weeks of this year. As you will recall, we had particularly serious
concerns about the adjustments that were going on in inventories that

11/15/95

-45-

Indeed,
we felt could-conceivably tilt the economy into a decline.
there was one meeting which I found somewhat distressing back in July
where the general tone of our discussion was that all the risks were
on the down side even though virtually everyone was projecting
moderate growth. One got the impression that if we had a choice of a
second opinion on the economy, it clearly would have been down. That
was a time when, as I recall, we were getting very severe contractions
in steel markets, industrial prices were weakening, inventories were
backing up in a number of areas of the economy, and it was only as we
worked our way through the probabilities that we concluded that we
were moving beyond the point of the maximum risk of a recession.
Under those conditions, I think we would expect to get a "pop" in the
economy when the downside pressures begin to ease. This occurs in the
markets generally, and I think it occurs in the economy. I don't
think that surge should be viewed as a change in trend, and indeed the
more recent indications, as a number of members have noted, are that
the economy at this stage can best be described, at least temporarily,
in terms of its sogginess. The economy is not deteriorating, but it
clearly has lost a good deal of the momentum that it had during the
summer. It is, however, difficult to make very much of that because
as best I can see the evidence does suggest that the economy is still
undergoing some inventory correction. It is still coming off a fairly
weak motor vehicles sales pattern. A crucial issue at this stage
relates to what is going to be happening to Christmas sales in terms
of setting the tone, if I may put it that way, for the trend in retail
markets. We need to remember that sales in November and especially in
December have a disproportionate effect on fourth-quarter consumption
expenditures.
Such expenditures in the fourth quarter are not a
simple average of seasonally adjusted October, November, and December
because the monthly seasonals for those months differ so dramatically.
Certain items obviously will account for a very substantial part of
the quarterly total in a several-week period just before Christmas.
I
don't want to overemphasize that, but I think the point that is
implicit in the Greenbook--that there is a likelihood of a significant
recovery in November and December--is still on the table. Indeed, the
early data are at least suggesting that Christmas sales are doing a
little better.
The major problem that we have so far as policy is concerned
is that while the economy seems to be as close to middle ground as one
ever sees it, it's not clear which way it is going.
In that regard,
no change today strikes me as the most appropriate response, and I
will get to the "train wreck" issue in a minute. What I think is
unclear at this stage is what we will be wishing to do at the December
meeting if this economy continues to be as soft as it is.
As I
indicated previously, I think that at some point we should be looking
toward a somewhat lower real funds rate in 1996.
Whether we will get
there in part in December or wait until later, I don't have any
particular notion. But I do agree with the Greenbook that, if the
economy is coming back and we are getting anywhere near the numbers in
the Greenbook forecast, at that level of activity we probably ought to
be quite cautious in how we move.
There is one important issue with respect to the budget
negotiations that I think we have to keep in mind.
If we lock
ourselves into a "no change" position pending what happens in those
negotiations, we could find ourselves sitting and doing nothing as the
economy is changing and the markets are changing while the Congress

11/15/95

-46-

and the President continue to diddle on this issue. We have argued in
the past, and I think quite correctly, that it has never been
appropriate for the Federal Reserve to "make a deal" with the Congress
or the Administration to take some action if a budget is produced and
irrespective of whether it is credible or not credible.
I think we
all have agreed, as best I can judge, that the response that we make
is to the markets.
If the markets believe that the budget deal is
credible, long-term rates will come down and we will get an
abnormality in the term structure of rates if short-term rates remain
unchanged. So the pressures on us to ease policy would come from the
markets and the term structure, not from the budget deal. The market
is what would induce us to move. Conversely, if the economy is
softening, or indeed strengthening, the mere fact that the
negotiations are under way should not be all that relevant other than
what conceivably could happen should be part of our outlook. The mere
fact of negotiations should not induce us to take action because I
think that could turn out to be very unfortunate monetary policy.
I would therefore suggest that while it is terribly important
to have the members' judgments about what the negotiations are going
to produce, I don't think that should be an overriding issue with
respect to what we do or what we do not do. Incidently, with the
outlook as mixed as it is, I would not rule out a surprising
acceleration in this expansion. There is nothing in this outlook that
is undermining the structure of the economy. So it would not be
surprising, as Governor Kelley indicated, that if no adverse events
occur this expansion could suddenly take off. Profit margins still
seem to be reasonably stable. The order pattern and some of the hightech industries are really quite impressive. We do not yet know how
long this malaise, if you will excuse the expression, in the
industrial area is going to continue.
In the steel industry, despite
the significant declines in steel sheet prices, the order patterns are
looking better. Fairly recently, U.S. Steel has been reporting a much
better outlook. So, I think this is a two-sided issue. We really are
not going to get a good fix on the industrial sector for a while. And
I am not certain that it matters all that much because the economy
does not appear to be threatened at this stage, and the urgency of
moving quickly one way or the other is not there. I suspect that the
latest CPI is probably an aberration. We don't know that for sure,
but the evidence of restrained unit costs and the existing high profit
margins do not suggest a weakening economy. This is despite, as the
Vice Chairman says, the fact that the expansion is "long in the tooth"
and what we ordinarily would expect of an aging expansion.
This
economy does not have the geriatric characteristics that one would
expect of an economy that is six or seven months beyond the average
length of the post-World War II expansions.
It doesn't look that way
and it doesn't feel that way. Nonetheless, I think what we have to be
aware of is that if this economy fails to pick up and continues to be
soggy into the next meeting, the evidence in favor of a move at that
time would probably become more compelling than it is today.
At this point, I would recommend that we do nothing and hope
that an unchanged policy turns out to be where we can be for quite a
while, as the Greenbook assumes.
I am agnostic, frankly, on whether
we should have a symmetric or an asymmetric directive, and I would
very much appreciate that those of you who agree with "B" also
stipulate where you think the intermeeting symmetry ought to be.
Those who lean toward a change at some point would, of course, favor

-47-

11/15/95

asymmetry in one direction or the other. So, that is my
recommendation for this meeting. Who would like to comment?
President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to
associate myself with the remarks that Governors Yellen and Blinder
made with respect to the risks to the economy. Secondly, as I argued
last time, it seems to me that interest rates are on the high side
relative to inflation and to history. No matter how we think about
the Greenbook or the revisions there, I think that we are in a period
where economic activity is best characterized as moderate, and in both
the Greenbook forecast and our own forecast, moderation is the key
word throughout the forecast horizon. At the same time, we have
relatively low inflation and, given the federal funds rate of 5-3/4
percent, we have a real interest rate of around 3 percent. Over time
in my view such a rate is going to inhibit investment, job creation,
and economic growth. That is not going to happen now, to be sure, and
I don't think it's critical that we move today, but there are a lot of
long-term and short-term arguments that, on balance, lead me to the
conclusion that the level of the federal funds rate is too high, that
it will have to be reduced eventually, and that any reduction will not
have much of an impact on inflation.
I would therefore be inclined to
move right now. So, if you were to give me those three or four votes,
Mr. Chairman, I would cast all of them in that direction.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.
MR. STERN.

I said "five."

Okay, five.

That's almost enough!

MR. FORRESTAL. But, again I would like to emphasize that I
don't think it is critical in any sense that we move today. It
certainly will not hurt to wait, but I believe we really need to think
about the implications of maintaining the current policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, for the reasons that you outlined
I agree with your analysis and I support your recommendation of "no
change."
Because I don't think we should be trying to guess which way
the economy is going at this stage, I feel that a symmetric directive
is quite appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree with your
recommendation for "no change."
I am not agnostic on the symmetry; I
think we should have a symmetric directive. The staff forecast and
the revision in that forecast have made me more aware of and more
sensitive to the upside risks in the outlook than perhaps I was
before.
I think it's premature to take a position even through the
symmetry of the directive as to what our next move might be. I think
we gained a huge amount of credibility in 1994 by preventing the
strength in the economy that emerged really quite quickly in late 1993
and early 1994 from becoming a boom, and I would hate to do something
now that might diminish that credibility or put it at risk.

-48-

11/15/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I, too, agree with your overall policy
position, Mr. Chairman.
I also agree with the concept of keeping the
directive symmetric. I do see the risks as being reasonably balanced,
not so tilted to the down side as some believe. I agree that we
should not have our hands tied by the current and prospective debt
impasse on the part of the federal government, although I wonder how
this will play out going into the future. If even by the next meeting
we were to see--and that may be unlikely--an unexpected acceleration
of growth, something that might make us want to change interest rates
by raising them rather than lowering them, I wonder how an asymmetric
directive toward ease would play out in that environment. Whether or
not that scenario turns out to be the case, I wonder if we will find
that monetary policy will be somewhat hampered if the budget
negotiations drag on for a period of time. I hope they won't.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
some point.
MS. MINEHAN.

Something is going to have to give at

One would think so.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What may happen is that we may begin to
get a piecemeal deal. Instead of a full blown agreement it may come
piece-by-piece-by-piece.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Mr. Chairman, I find myself very much of a mind
If the third quarter had come in weak, say under
with Bob Forrestal.
2 percent, I am sure I would be arguing strongly for a cut today based
on four arguments: (1) the weakness in the economy; (2) the very good
inflation performance; (3) the high, by almost any standard, real
federal funds rate--all of those are familiar reasons; and, (4) is
something that you alluded to and Cathy Minehan just alluded to in a
different way. I am becoming increasingly uneasy about the Federal
Reserve being cast in a role that we don't want as the rewarding or
punishing father who looks at the President and Congress and says "You
did well so I am cutting interest rates," or "You did poorly so I am
We really do not want to be in that
raising interest rates."
position, which is another virtue of making a small rate cut
disassociated from a budget agreement. I think this is a factor that
we should think about because we are very much in danger of being
pigeonholed into that posture. But, of course, the third quarter of
1995 did not come in weak; it came in quite strong. I already said
that I don't buy the staff's extrapolation of that upward revision
into 1996 and 1997.
Nonetheless, the third quarter is what it was and
it brings us into 1996 at a higher base level of resource utilization,
and that certainly seems to be reality or a reasonable guess about
reality. And as noted, the staff also claims that the equilibrium
real funds rate is about 2-3/4 percent despite the heavy deficit
reduction. Again, I was skeptical about that. I want to point out,
though, that if the staff's forecast and estimate of the equilibrium
real funds rate are correct, I definitely agree, as Don said, that we
If I bought into that entirely,
should not be cutting interest rates.
these arguments would evaporate. It's possible that the staff is

-49-

11/15/95

right, but I don't think so. And it still leaves intact two of the
four reasons. The reason I said I was very much of a mind with Bob is
that the strength of the economy in the third quarter really destroys
any argument that there is an urgency to this, that we can't wait five
weeks.
I couldn't possibly argue for that proposition. Thus, while I
could support a small cut now if the Committee were going in that
direction, I could also support waiting until the 19th of December,
but I would very much favor an asymmetric directive toward ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I support the "no change" in "B."
I think there
is enough uncertainty in the economy, and it is on a moderate growth,
low inflation kind of track. My sense, and it's entirely judgmental,
is that the federal funds rate is on the high side of where we will
want it going forward and that we will need to adjust it downward
However, at this point, given the
within the next several months.
uncertainties about the outlook, I would be inclined not to prejudge
policy in any way and, therefore, I would go for a symmetrical
directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation
and I also would prefer symmetry. It seems to me that we have had a
modest temporary increase in the real funds rate, but I think we ought
to be willing to accept that. Our forecast and that in the Greenbook
expect some pickup in inflation. That suggests that the increase in
real rates is temporary, and until we see that that is an incorrect
forecast, I can't see a good reason to move today. So, my preference
clearly would be to leave the nominal federal funds rate constant at
this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I favor "B" symmetric at this meeting. I might
say a word or two about what we might consider going forward from
It seems to me that the degree of sogginess in the economy in
here.
the meeting five weeks from now will be one issue, but I think an
equally important issue will be the path we want to put inflation on.
One way of looking at the work on the Taylor rule is, of course, that
policy is overly restrictive. Another way of looking at it is that
it's appropriately restrictive because we want to bend inflation down
further from here. Where that leads me is that we need to have a
discussion and try to get agreement at some point on whether we want
to try to move toward lower inflation deliberately as opposed to
opportunistically. I think that's a key issue and I don't have a way
of judging what we ought to do in December without coming to some
understanding about that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, our inflation forecast remains
encouraging. We expect inflation over the period to be a little lower
than that forecast in the Greenbook. But despite appearing benign at
this point, I think the inflation picture requires careful and
continuing monitoring. I certainly don't want the Committee to give
up the gains that we have made against inflation in previous years.

-50-

11/15/95

However, if there are further improvements in inflation that exceed
our expectations, I think a modest reduction in the federal funds rate
would be called for. But given the rapid growth of GDP in the third
quarter, it would be very premature to reduce the funds rate at this
meeting; I don't think there is any urgency. Thus, it seems
appropriate for the Committee to take no policy action at this time,
and I agree with your recommendation of "no change" in the funds rate.
With respect to the directive, although I personally agree the risks
on the outlook are on the down side at this point, I would still
support a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I can see the argument that the
real fed funds rate may be a tad on the high side, but I have to say
that so far it's hard to see where it has put much of damper on credit
extensions or the stock market or the housing market. I can easily
envision the possibility that events may unfold, conceivably fairly
quickly, that will make a policy change desirable, but I certainly
favor "no change" for now. There are two broad reasons in my mind for
having an asymmetric directive, the second building on the first. The
first is to send a signal about some imminent perceived risk. The
second is to facilitate an imminent policy move. I just don't see
either of those as germane right now, and consequently I would
strongly prefer a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On the Taylor rule, I
think that even if we were to take it at face value, it implies
downward pressure on inflation. It has an implied inflation target of
2 percent. Current monetary policy appears to be tight on that rule,
but even if it were on the money it would be putting downward pressure
on inflation. So, on the basis of the Taylor rule, current monetary
policy is tighter than simply putting downward pressure on inflation.
My second thought is on the yield curve. Governor Blinder mentioned
the four reasons why we had a bond market rally. One is not only a
decline in inflation, but the perception that inflation will continue
to drop.
I suppose Jerry would agree that either the staff is right
or the bond market is right. The bond market also sees an increased
chance of federal deficit reduction.
It sees a weakening expansion.
And here I suppose the length of the tooth becomes important.
Although there are not the excesses in the economy that suggest
extreme risks to the expansion, what happens as the tooth lengthens-is that the way to say it? Help me out.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

It lengthens.

MR. LINDSEY. It lengthens! My teeth are going the other
way!
[Laughter]
Well, as the tooth lengthens, increased risks begin
to appear and we may already have detected some.
I think the consumer
is one of those risks. The international picture is another, be it
instability in Japan and Europe, which I don't see as growing, or in
Mexico. The risk of a fiscal misstep is still another that could tip
the economy over. So, I see the yield curve as signalling that in
fact we should be reducing rates today. I also want to associate
myself with Governor Blinder in the "let's not get caught flatfooted"
waiting for the Congress and the President to act.
It is conceivable

-51-

11/15/95

that they will not produce a fiscal agreement for fiscal 1996. The
government could be operating on a continuing resolution forever. So,
we certainly don't want to wait that long.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Less than forever is better.

I think
MR. LINDSEY. Less than forever is better, yes.
today actually would be a very opportune time to move for exactly that
reason. The public disenchantment with the budget process is high and
going to get higher. That in itself is a shock. But I think the Fed
would be sending a very appropriate signal that we are above the
So I would support a
process in all meanings of the word "above."
reduction in the funds rate today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I favor alternative B. I believe
it maintains a stance of policy that is somewhat restrictive. It is
very difficult to define exactly how restrictive, but I think that's
quite appropriate given the inflation outlook. I would say that
looking forward we need to be particularly vigilant with respect to
the possibility of rising inflation expectations and inflation. For
that reason, I strongly prefer a symmetric directive. As Al Broaddus
and some others have mentioned, asymmetry at this point would signal
that we are quite happy with 3 percent inflation and we implicitly
define that as our view of price stability. I also agree with what
Gary Stern said about the importance of how we make decisions going
forward and having that discussion with respect to whether we want to
reduce inflation systematically or simply act opportunistically.
Finally, I think that trying to coordinate our actions with
different possibilities on the fiscal front based on how an action
might be perceived later is the wrong way to think about the issue.
We have to make the best call we can today based on the fundamentals
as we see them. If the fundamentals argue that we should act later,
we should worry about managing perceptions at that time.
I don't hear
anybody making that case, but we have to be very careful that we don't
justify an action that is not supported by the fundamentals and is
based instead on the view that the perception of what we did was
better than if we did act on the fundamentals.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

Governor Phillips.

President McTeer.

Ditto.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The loquaciousness of this group is
truly remarkable! Vice Chairman.
MR. KELLEY.

We are now averaging down!

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I will reverse the trend toward the
lack of loquaciousness, whatever that is.
I am somewhat surprised by
the commentary today because I thought one of the things that we
managed to do at the February 1994 meeting was to move away from fine-

-52-

11/15/95

tuning the economy from one quarter to the next and toward an
anticipatory monetary policy. If that's so, we ought to be more
worried about what happens a year from now or two years from now than
we are about what happens next week, about which we can do nothing.
Based on my own Bank's view of the economy in late 1996 and 1997, I
think the appropriate thing to do today would be to ease. At the same
time, the confusion created by the very strong third quarter and what
it may tell us about the economy going forward is sufficient to move
me to the point of being comfortable with doing nothing at this
meeting. But I am sufficiently convinced of the likelihood that
monetary policy is too tight and therefore has to be adjusted that I
would prefer an asymmetric directive toward easing. It's always
difficult for me to get overly excited about symmetry or lack of
symmetry, but I think the latter would make more sense in terms of
being consistent with an anticipatory monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. We moved to the 6 percent level on the funds
rate at the beginning of this year in the context of coming off a year
of over 4 percent real growth. The final quarter of last year saw 5
percent real growth. Not only the central tendency of the inflation
forecasts of this group for 1995 but also the forecasts of a large
majority of business economists, the Blue Chip list, The Wall Street
Journal list, and so on had inflation accelerating considerably in
1995. Now, if 6 percent was the correct level in retrospect to have
prevented the overshooting and spillover of excess demand and rise in
prices that some people were worried about and we have now downshifted
into a period of slower real growth and maybe less adverse inflation
consequences, then clearly the nominal 6 percent federal funds rate
was too high or too high to be sustained. It was the right level to
foster the downshift, but it has become increasingly restrictive as
the economy has decelerated toward growth in the area of 2 percent.
So, I thought the fed funds rate decline of 1/4 percentage point in
July and the reason given for it were exactly right, namely that we
were less concerned about future inflation.
When I look at the Greenbook forecast and the assumption of a
5-3/4 percent funds rate for the next two years, I say these don't
compute. Either the nominal GDP forecast in the Greenbook--and some
split between output and prices--is wrong, or that 5-3/4 percent funds
rate is too high.
So, I would like to be able to decide when the
right time to lower the funds rate may be--not to ease policy, not to
make it more stimulative, but when to avoid having it become
inadvertently more restrictive than it should be to get to our
objective. My problem is that the Greenbook's projection of inflation
at a 3 percent rate forever doesn't give us a good basis for lowering
the funds rate. For us to lower the funds rate when the Greenbook
projection is at 3 percent inflation--and it seems that a majority of
this group thinks that's about right--would be to send the wrong
message even if we are trying to maintain the same thrust of policy by
lowering the funds rate. So, either I have to argue that I am
convinced that inflation is going to be lower than the Greenbook
projection and try to be persuasive--which I am not prepared to do--or
else I have to acquiesce and say that a 3 percent inflation rate is
acceptable--and I am not prepared to do that either.
So, while I
would like to be arguing in favor of lowering the funds rate I don't

-53-

11/15/95

have a criterion for doing so and I am stuck with saying leave it
alone until we come up with a good rationale for lowering it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. I would associate myself with the analysis
presented by Presidents Forrestal and McDonough and Governor Blinder,
although, Mr. Chairman, at the end of the day I support your policy
suggestion for "no change" at today's meeting. I continue to think,
for reasons I have given before, that the real funds rate remains on
the high side, especially from the longer-term perspective of
supporting growth toward the end of the forecast period. I certainly
would admit that the staff analysis this time around has created some
doubts in my mind and I would value having additional information to
resolve some of those doubts. At the end of the day, therefore, I can
certainly support your suggestion of "B."
On the symmetry issue,
because I see the risk as being on the down side from that longer-term
perspective, I would prefer an asymmetric directive although I do not
think that we will need to move during the intermeeting period in the
absence of a significant shock. So, symmetry could certainly be an
acceptable outcome. I am worried about becoming frozen by the budget
negotiations and also appearing at the end of the day to be ratifying
some Congressional actions.
I think that concern does tend to support
Governor Lindsey's suggestion of a move today. However, in the end
there are enough uncertainties in my mind about the forecast that on
those grounds I would not favor a move today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I read it, the modal value of this
group's preferences is marginally "B" symmetric. That's where I sense
it to be and I will propose that sort of directive for a vote.
MR. BERNARD. The draft of the operational paragraph is on
page 16 of the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

11/15/95

-54-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is December 19th and
for those of you who can make it, we adjourn for lunch to honor our
departing colleague.
END OF MEETING

