Prefatory Note
This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
January 13, 1995
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
LaWare (in Georgia)
Lindsey (in Virginia)
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Oltman, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Forrestal, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, Slifman, Stockton, and
Vander Wilt, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account,
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Wiles, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Conrad and Guynn, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Atlanta,
respectively

-2-

Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Cleveland,
respectively
Ms. Rosenbaum, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Mr. Evans, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Telephone Conference
January 13, 1995
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The purpose of this meeting is to bring
everyone up to date on the rather rapidly moving affairs relevant to
Mexico.
I thought I would start off with Ted Truman who can give you
a rundown of hour-by-hour or day-by-day developments--whatever he
deems useful at this moment.
MR. TRUMAN. I don't think anybody would sit still for an
hour-by-hour report! The useful thing may be to start two weeks ago
when you had your conference call and added 50 percent--$1-1/2
billion--to the Federal Reserve's swap line in complementarity with
increases in the Treasury and Canadian swap lines and consistent with
the BIS agreeing to try to put together their $5 billion short-term
financing facility and the commercial banks their $3 billion facility.
That added up to the $18 billion total that was announced on Monday,
January 2. That financing was put together in the context of
President Zedillo's speech and was intended to reinforce his economic
program. As you are probably aware, that speech was delayed several
times; it didn't occur until about midday on Tuesday, January 3.
It
was not greeted with a great deal of enthusiasm in the financial
markets, and the situation continued to be quite soggy.
Over the last weekend, there was a growing concern that it
was necessary or desirable to try to stabilize this situation by
demonstrating a bit more financial resolve. That led to some
intervention on Monday by the Bank of Mexico, which previously had
refrained from engaging in any open foreign exchange market
intervention, and the Mexicans took the unusual step of asking the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to operate for their account in New
York. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York issued a statement saying
that it was acting for the Bank of Mexico's account in operations
consistent with the general support we have been giving to Mexico.
The Mexicans also announced that they had drawn on the swap line. The
purpose was to indicate that there was some real money involved.
Since then, an additional drawing has brought the total up to $500
million on us, $500 million on the Treasury, and a corresponding
amount of Can$166 million on the Bank of Canada. They also announced
the size of their reserves and promised to continue to announce their
reserves on a regular basis. This was designed to show that they had
some reserves and to lock in a general policy of announcing their
Lastly, they agreed to undertake a
reserves on a regular basis.
significant tightening of monetary policy, pushing up short-term rates
8 or so percentage points to 20 percent in terms of dollar-denominated
assets and raising rates somewhat more--by 10 or 12 percentage points
--on peso-denominated assets. I think it's fair to say that these
actions did not meet with a great deal of success and the auction of
tesobonos on Tuesday was decidedly weak despite the increased interest
rates that were offered on those assets. They received bids for only
$163 million, as I remember, and only accepted roughly $60 million at
their rate of 20 percent.

1/13/95

There was also growing evidence that the problems in Mexico
were spreading to other emerging markets in Latin America and
elsewhere in the world. That led to an intensification of
consultations with the Treasury Department on Tuesday afternoon
involving the then still Secretary-designate Mr. Rubin, who actually
became the Secretary of the Treasury by the end of the day. Mr. Rubin
spent his last hours as a free man worrying about Mexico and almost
all his hours since then worrying about Mexico. After meeting with
the Chairman for three hours, he had a meeting lasting several hours
with his colleagues in the White House and with the President. The
President endorsed the Treasury's idea of investigating whether a
program of loan guarantees for Mexico would be saleable on Capitol
Hill on an expedited basis.
The President made personal calls to the
leadership of the Congress on Tuesday evening saying that the
Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board would follow up the next day with consultations with each of the
leaders and, as it happened, a subset of some of the key committee
chairmen and other interested parties.
Those consultations culminated
in a meeting yesterday afternoon--and I think I'll leave the reporting
on that to the Chairman--between the President and the leadership of
the Congress at which the President said that he remained convinced
that it was important to go forward with this, and that he understood
from Chairman Greenspan and Secretary Rubin that that was the sense of
the leadership of Congress. He proposed that they make a joint
announcement to that effect. That proposal won the endorsement--1
don't want to say the enthusiastic endorsement but I don't think it
was a contentious endorsement--of the leadership. Early yesterday
evening it was announced that they had agreed that a program of loan
guarantees would be proposed to the Congress on the joint
recommendation of the President and the four leaders. At that point,
the figure for the total amount of loan guarantees or instruments that
would be guaranteed had been left open. As a result of these rather
extensive consultations on the Hill, it was fairly widely known that
the figure being suggested was in the range of $25 to $40 billion.
Indeed, a number of individuals on the Hill suggested that they
thought it was wiser to go for a larger amount rather than a smaller
amount, and that is currently the position as I understand it.
MR. BOEHNE.

Is that all new money?

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, it would be new money in one sense. Let me
make two points about that before I turn this issue back to the
Chairman. There would be up to $40 billion in loan guarantees. What
is involved in this program would be that Mexico would be borrowing
dollars, I assume on the international capital markets or our capital
markets, up to that amount with the guarantee of the United States
government. At least in the first instance, that guarantee would
cover interest and principal, but in the later phases it might cover
only principal. That would be new money in the sense that they would
be raising new money. However, the purpose of that new money,
granting that money is fungible, would be primarily to fund the fairly
large stock of short-term obligations that the government of Mexico

-3-

1/13/95

and some of the Mexican banks currently have outstanding. It would be
used to replace short-term debt with 5- to 10-year debt, and to the
extent that that was done it would be essentially a funding operation.
The particular mechanism that was used in 1992, and more recently in
an ongoing program with Israel, has the feature that it essentially
has no budgetary impact. The reason for that is that the country,
Mexico in this case, would pay a fee for the loan guarantee and that
fee in turn is based upon the risk element associated with Mexican
borrowing, as judged by a generally accepted, robust set of procedures
that have been in place for several years and are overseen by OMB on
the one hand and CBO on the other. So Mexico would pay a fee
essentially covering the risk, and that fee would be revenue which
would offset the expenditure charge associated with the risk of the
obligation. In this particular proposal, the Administration would
suggest that there be an extra charge not only to cover Treasury
expenses, but to provide an extra cushion as well as an incentive to
Mexico to move quickly back into the market on an unguaranteed basis.
In that sense the proposal would be budget neutral.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

-4-

1/13/95

SPEAKER(?).
MR. TRUMAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

SPEAKER(?).
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

1/13/95

I don't think we are going to know
that until pretty far on. Are there any questions with respect to the
presentations of either Ted or myself, or does anyone want to throw
anything new into the pot that has not been discussed?
MR. BLINDER. I have two small technical questions. The
first relates to hearings. Which committees have jurisdiction?
MR. TRUMAN. It is not yet decided which committees would
have jurisdiction. I have been informed on the one hand that this is
a matter for the parliamentarians to decide, and on the other hand a
matter for the leadership to decide. The most likely committees at
this point would be the foreign affairs committees of the two bodies.
That is what I was just told.
MR. BLINDER.
MR. TRUMAN.

Helms in the Senate and McConnell in the House?
No, it's Gilman in the House.

MR. BLINDER. The other question has to do with budget
scoring. You said the proposal was that the fee the Mexicans would
pay should exceed what I'll call the actuarial cost or something like
that.
MR. TRUMAN.

The risk.

MR. BLINDER. And then you said it should be budget neutral.
It sounds like it should be a budget gainer.
MR. TRUMAN. That's why I said "approximately" budget
neutral! I was also leaving aside recognizing that this is just a
matter of scoring as opposed to-MR. BLINDER.
MR. TRUMAN.

Scoring--I'm only talking about scoring.
Yes.

MR. BLINDER. It's either going to be a gainer or a loser
depending upon what happens.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The scoring is neutral because there is
a calculated loss that will be occurring as a consequence of the
guarantees and that loss is offset by a comparable fee coming from the
Mexicans.
MR. BLINDER.

Right.

MR. TRUMAN. But there is going to be a supplemental fee that
would be higher than what the normal charge would be, and that would
be a gainer.

1/13/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So that the federal budget deficit will

decline!
MR. BLINDER.

It's a major selling point!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Right!

MR. LINDSEY. Could I ask Peter Fisher a question? There has
been a lot of talk that the dollar is going to be weak for a number of
reasons. In the case of a leveraged takeover, which is how some
people view this, should you short the acquirer, which is us? In
addition, this is kind of un-Bundesbank-like of us isn't it?
MR. FISHER. The dollar's big decline against the mark last
week really occurred independently of Mexico, but I think the last few
days have to be viewed slightly differently. The first stepdown
several days ago was really the result of large speculative positions
in dollar/mark that speculators had put on at the end of the year in
the hope those positions would be profitable with a rise in the
dollar/mark to around 1.58 to 1.60, and that did not happen. The
speculative holdings were sold off rather abruptly as the mark
strengthened within Europe after the pressures emerged in Italy and
Spain. The dollar has weakened in the last few days.
In this case I
think the reason is still a rush of money from emerging markets and
peripheral European countries into the mark and the yen. The dollar
has benefited relatively less than have the mark and the yen. So
there has been a slight effect in the last few days, but the initial
weakness was not related to developments in the emerging markets. I
would say also that underpinning this whole 10- to 15-day period has
been a much greater nervousness in the foreign exchange market, given
the large speculative positions that were based on expectations that
the dollar would go higher because of the prospect that the Committee
would tighten at the end of this month. That is, the foreign exchange
market has been somewhat more anxious than our domestic debt markets
that the Fed might not be tightening by 75 or by 50 basis points at
the end of the month. I really do think that has been the dominant
effect. There has been a lot of talk in the last few days concerning
the impact on the exchange market of the announcements about the loan
guarantees, but frankly that has been so positive for the Mexican
market in the last two days that I don't see a direct play-through of
the loan guarantees into the dollar market yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions or comments?

MR. FORRESTAL. Alan, this is Bob Forrestal. Perhaps you
don't even want to think about this, but what happens if the Congress
doesn't buy this program?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was about to get to that next because
it is a separate subject that I think we have to focus on. So let's
hold that for just a second, Bob.

1/13/95

MR. FORRESTAL.

Okay.

MR. MELZER. Alan, in that context will you be talking about
the prospects for additional drawings on the swap line and how they
might be secured?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, exactly, that's precisely the next

topic.
Bill McDonough. Let me
Latin American
successful. We had the
in New York for three
the
that they are being
very badly contaminated by the spillover from Mexico. They are very
anxious that this U.S. government effort to help Mexico be successful.
There had been some question as to whether some of the other countries
might feel that separating out Mexico and making it special could be
adverse to them. That certainly is not the view of the two most
obviously vulnerable countries in the hemisphere.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, this is
add for the Committee's benefit that the other
countries are very anxious that this effort be
finance minister of
days this last week, and he is convinced as is

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say that the most likely
scenario at this stage--I don't know what the probability is, but I
suspect it's a shade better than 50/50--is that we will have
testimony, the bill will go to the floors of both houses, there will
be a considerable amount of posturing, and it will pass. At that
point the issue of our swaps and everything else obviously will become
moot.
In the event that this legislation crumbles and there is a high
minority probability that it might, then the situation will get
extremely unstable. I think we would be unwise to make any more swap
extensions in that type of environment, because it truly would be
money down the drain. The crucial question we are going to have,
which is going to be a very tough one, is that if this legislation is
progressing and appears to have a reasonable possibility of passage
but the markets get a little nervous and funds are flowing out of the
Bank of Mexico, it probably is going to be desirable and necessary for
us to allow the Mexicans to make some additional drawings on the swap
line. I think the Congress would be thoroughly supportive of such
drawings at that particular stage, but if the situation arises I don't
So, I would
think that we are going to have much time to discuss it.
merely like to say that I would intend, unless I hear very strong
objections, to authorize some modest additional drawings in
conjunction with the Treasury in the event that there appears to be
some need to do this prior to final passage of legislation. I suspect
that the probability of this happening is low because either we are
going to learn very quickly that this legislation is going to pass, in
which case further drawings will be unnecessary, or it is going to go
south pretty quickly in which case further drawings will be
inappropriate. The only scenario involving further drawings is a
wiggle scenario where the probability of legislation goes up and down

-8-

1/13/95

and we can't quite trace it.
That is what I would like to do unless
somebody offers some objections.
MS. PHILLIPS.

How will you know how far to extend the swap

line?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are not going to increase the swap
line itself; at the moment we have allowed a $500 million drawing on
our $4-1/2 billion swap line. The Treasury also has extended $500
million on its $4-1/2 billion swap line with Mexico. What I am
raising is the issue of whether to allow some additional amount to be
drawn as may be required on the existing line, not to increase the
line.

SPEAKER(?).
What additional amount of drawings are you
thinking about?
Is it at most on the order of what we have already
committed?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I really don't know that.
If there is
anything very special going on and we have time to discuss it, I think
it would be wise for us to have a telephone conference where I would
outline what is going on. But I would guess that the amount we have
authorized so far is probably what would be involved--maybe a shade
more, maybe a shade less.
MR. MELZER. Alan, how is the first $500 million secured and
would you anticipate similar security on any additional drawings?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Has the legal documentation on the
$500 million been written up at this stage?
MR. TRUMAN. I'm not going to say what I was going to say-the security aside from the pesos we get--because I'll get laughed at.
The security is in terms of oil receivables, a stream of oil
receivables. The staff, in conjunction with the Treasury, the
Canadians, and the Mexicans has reached agreement on the framework to
put that security mechanism in place. It is anticipated that it will
be fully in place by early next week. So, although the drawings are
not technically secured by oil receivables at this point, the staff is
making rapid progress in that direction, and there is a commitment to
put that in place. Actually, the commitment is only to put it in
place by the end of February, but it probably will be completed
shortly after the middle of January.
MR. MELZER. I was going to suggest that maybe it would be
appropriate before any more is drawn to get that in place, but it
doesn't appear that that would necessarily be feasible.
MR. TRUMAN. Monday is a holiday, so they can't draw between
now and Tuesday. The target would be to get it in place essentially
by the time of or within a day of any further drawings.

1/13/95

MR. MCDONOUGH. We are looking at probably Tuesday or
Wednesday to get the documentation.
MR. MELZER.
if possible.

I guess I'd be inclined to try to insist on that

MR. HOENIG. I thought there was some collateral, for part of
the drawings at least, at the New York Bank; is that not correct?
MR. TRUMAN. No. I don't know where they put the proceeds of
the drawings that were made, but they were not required to put the
proceeds at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is an agreement to pledge oil
receivables, and the lawyers are working on the documents to lock that
in. At the moment, our security is the word of the Mexican government
that they will back them with oil revenues, and that legal
documentation should be locked up reasonably soon.
MS. MINEHAN. Are we talking about the $500 million or
essentially the whole $4-1/2 billion?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, certainly not the whole $4-1/2

billion.
MS. MINEHAN.

Okay.

MR. TRUMAN.

The security mechanism would apply to whatever

MR. KELLEY.

Open ended.

is drawn.

MR. TRUMAN. But so far the mechanism is not in place in a
formal sense, as the Chairman said; only the promise is in place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions or
issues involved here?
In any event we probably will want another
telephone conference to update everybody prior to the January 31
meeting. Everything is moving fast. Hopefully, the press is not
going to get everything that's going on, so I'll try to schedule an
updating.
MR. TRUMAN. There is a lot in the press, but don't believe
all of it--I think that is probably the right way to put it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct, because I already have
had converstions relating to what allegedly occurred in the meeting
with the senators this morning. As I said to somebody, I was there, I
was listening, and what was reported didn't happen. That is going to
occur quite often in the next several weeks.

-10-

1/13/95

MR. BLINDER. Apropos of that, what has been officially
announced and by whom?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only thing that has been officially
announced is the statement by the President and the leadership of the
Congress with respect to the commitment.
MR. BLINDER.

Last night?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLINDER.

Yes, last night.

Nothing has been announced today?

MR. TRUMAN. Right. I should add that the $40 billion
number--which the Administration now has put forward as their
preferred number and I expect to see it on the screen if it isn't
there already--is a matter that is being negotiated with the Congress.
Even that number has not been announced in any official sense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have been justifying that number on
the grounds that the larger the nominal guaranteed total, the safer
the American taxpayer will be against any potential loss.
Okay. Let's leave it at this, and we will be back in touch
in a week or so. Good night.
MS. MINEHAN.

Good night; have a nice weekend.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you and the same to everybody.
END OF SESSION

