Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
April 28, 1995
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley (in Houston)
Lindsey
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips (Boston Reserve Bank)
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, Oltman, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Atlanta,

Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
and San Francisco
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, Hunter,
Lindsey, Siegman, Slifman, Stockton, and
Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account,
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Carson, Staff Assistant, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Sniderman, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Minneapolis
Dallas, Cleveland, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Croushore and Ms. Kreiger, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
New York, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
April 28, 1995
At the start of the meeting, Chairman Greenspan
Secretary's note:
called on Mr. Fisher for a report on developments in domestic and
foreign exchange markets. The tape was not turned on in time to
capture the first few words of Mr. Fisher's report.
MR. FISHER.

.... The long end of the yield curve is not much

changed from where it was before the last meeting. But there has been
a change over the intermeeting period at the short end of the curve.
We had a slight backup in the two-to-five-year area around the time of
the March meeting on data that were not quite to the market's liking.
That was followed by a long, slow ride down in yields during the month
of April, until around April 20, as the market began to see weaker
data that seemed to conform to the view of a soft landing in sight.
By the middle of April, however, the market began to get a sense that
it was-a little stretched. At that point the spread between the fed
funds rate and the two-year rate ranged around 45 basis points. There
was a lot of chatter in the market about how the market was relying on
foreign central bank purchases amid unfavorable supply conditions and
a lot of explanations as to why people should be interested at these
levels. At that point, even as the market saw some rather weak data,
we saw no further gains in prices, reflecting this sense that the
market was a little stretched. In the last several days, the market
has seen some data that were a little stronger than it was comfortable
with. This is modest stuff; no one was shocked. But durables, homes
sales, and today's Chicago Purchasing Managers' Index were all a
little on the stronger side than the market was counting on. As a
result, the short end began to come back up. Now the yield curve, in
the two-to-thirty year range, is about where it was just before the
Committee's last meeting.
Looking forward, I think the market is going to be gearing
itself for the week beginning a week from today. Next Friday, we will
have the employment data. The following Tuesday and Wednesday will be
the quarterly refunding, which will change the supply outlook of the
market. Then, on the heels of that, retail sales and inflation data
will come out on Thursday and Friday. Over the few weeks between now
and the next Committee meeting in Washington, I think that's the
pivotal week that the bond market is going to be positioning itself
for.
The dollar obviously has been under a fair amount of pressure
over the period. It is interesting that for the last couple of weeks
the dollar has traded in a rather narrow range. After the last
meeting through the middle of April, we again had pronounced weakness
against the yen. But that coincided with the yen's tremendous
strength against the mark as well, and that may have contributed to
the dollar stabilizing against the mark and ultimately trading in the
ranges of the last couple of weeks. Right after the Committee's last
meeting, we had the surprise rate cut by the Bundesbank, which did
give the dollar quite a bounce from the 1.38 level up to the 1.41
level. This unwound rather quickly, in part on the fact that it was
just a short covering rally but
announcement by the Bank of Japan of the adjustment in their call
money rate. This adjustment was viewed as a weak substitute for a
change in the official discount rate that the market had been looking

4/28/95

for. The dollar then began to trade off. We intervened on Monday,
April 3rd, along with the Bank of Japan, and then on the 5th with the
Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank. There was no tremendous rally in
the dollar following those operations. But I think, following the
three-way intervention on Wednesday, April 5, the dollar did develop a
sense of firmness against the mark even as it began to accelerate down
against the yen. The pressure against the yen continued and reached
its crescendo in mid-April following the second attempt of the
Japanese authorities to put out a fiscal package and to cut the
official discount rate on April 14.
When the announcements finally
came out, the market viewed the mix of policy actions as a
rehashing of prior efforts of the Japanese authorities, which in
particular was lacking in any specifics whatsoever. The market came
to the view that the specifics had been taken out because they were so
small and lacking in meaning. That brought the dollar down briefly to
the low of 79.85 on April 17.
It then traded up against the yen. As
I said, for the last two weeks, the dollar traded in ranges of
dollar/mark 1.35 to 1.39 and dollar/yen 81 to 84.
The positive note of the period has been in Mexico City and
the peso. Since the last meeting, the peso has firmed from a level of
6.80 to a high of 5.80 just two days ago. It has given up some of
that gain and come back to around 6 in the last two days. There have
been similar positive movements in the pricing of Mexican stocks and
Brady bonds. To a great extent, this has been a reduction in the
uncertainty premium--the risk that chaos could develop at any time in
Mexico City--as the markets became more comfortable with themselves.
While there were plenty of risks to the Mexican program going forward,
it didn't appear to market participants that they would be caught by
surprise on one day's notice. The downward adjustments from the high
the peso reached a couple days ago seem to reflect a combination of a
market that began to thin out at those higher levels--a sense that
such a level is a little frothy--and the growing awareness that Monday
will be May Day in Mexico, the traditional day of labor marches. Even
though the officials of mainstream unions have agreed to call off
their annual marches, the more left-leaning unions have not. There is
considerable anxiety about protests in the streets that have helped
take some of the punch out of the peso.
Let me note that on April 19, the Treasury extended an
additional $3 billion to Mexico from its medium-term facility,
bringing the total extended on that facility to $6 billion. One adds
to that the $1 billion from the ESF in short-term money and $1 billion
that has been provided from the System Account in short-term money,
for a total of $8 billion outstanding at present. Next week we will
be rolling over the two short-term outstandings of $1 billion each.
This is the first of the three possible rollovers that were
contemplated when the package was put together. You will recall that
the Treasury agreed that any amount still outstanding at the end of
three rollovers would have a Treasury takeout.
That's the extent of my report;
questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.
Mexico?

I'd be happy to answer any

Any questions for Peter?

Peter, this is Tom.

What are the reserves of

4/28/95

MR. FISHER. I believe they currently are a tad over $6
billion. The amount may be $6-1/2 billion or approaching $7 billion.
Is Charlie there? I'm sorry, I forgot.
MR. SIEGMAN.
perhaps a bit higher.
MR. HOENIG.

Yes.

I think that's close to the number, but

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Has there been any evidence of
intervention by the Bank of Mexico during this period?
MR. FISHER. Early after our last meeting, I think they did a
very modest intervention; it was a token amount. Their principal form
of intervention in support of the peso, as you know, would be the
direct provision of dollars through the window to the Mexican banks in
conjunction with maturing tesobonos. There is some sense that
NAFINSA, the government holding company group, may have been
purchasing dollars in the last week or so. But the Bank of Mexico
itself has not yet been seen purchasing dollars.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
not, Don Kohn.

Any further questions for Peter?

If

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of money and credit flows,
very briefly, things are turning out about as we expected. There has
been some pickup in M1 and M2 growth. This is partly a tax story-higher payments and late refunds adding to transaction and other
liquid deposits; and it's partly a story of narrowing opportunity
costs as market rates have come down and deposit rates have edged up
or have been about flat in recent months. We are looking at M1 growth
rising from about 3/4 percent in March to 2-1/4 percent in April, and
M2 growth increasing from about 2 percent in March to 2-3/4 percent in
April. M3 growth has remained much stronger--6 percent in March and 5
percent in April. There we are looking at strength in bank credit.
We had 8 percent growth in bank credit in March, and we have a very
preliminary estimate based on about half of the month of 14 percent in
April. Some of that has to do with accounting--marking-to-market and
what not--but loan growth overall remains pretty strong. We had 10
percent loan growth at banks in March, and we are looking at 12
percent in April. There was a pickup in C&I loans from about 6
percent in March to approximately 13 percent, partly projected, in
April. This is much less than the 22 and 24 percent growth rates we
had in January and February, but it does look like C&I loan growth
picked up--in the first half of April, anyhow. We have had strength
in consumer loans. We are looking at about 15 percent growth in such
loans in April, with or without adjustments for securitizations. We
think consumer loans have been distorted by the lack of lending
against refunds this year so that they were held down in February and
perhaps boosted in March and April. If I look through this and go
from December to April, I am looking at about 11 percent consumer loan
growth at banks over that period. That's down 2 or 3 percentage
points from late last year but still pretty strong. Adjusted for
securitizations, I have 14 percent consumer loan growth December-toApril, and that is hardly down at all from last year. So, it looks
like underlying consumer loan growth remains pretty strong.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

4/28/95

MR. LINDSEY.
Overall consumer loan growth was
that came in spite of a reduction in car loans?

14 percent and

MR. KOHN. Yes.
This is just at banks, Governor Lindsey.
The 14 percent referred to December-to-April data to smooth through
the distortions from the lack of refund loans and to include
securitization effects.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

Further questions?

If not, Mike Prell.

We had the advance reading on first-quarter GDP

today and, as you know, the 2.8 percent estimated growth in the first

quarter is right in the middle of what we had projected in the January
and March Greenbooks. It was very close to what we were anticipating
in light of the data that had come in subsequently. Final sales were
not particularly strong at 1.8 percent and, taking these numbers at
face value, it would appear that the level of inventories at the end
of the quarter was higher than we thought it would be.
I think that
reinforces our belief that in all likelihood there will be a
significant drag from the inventory sector in the second quarter. We
anticipate that that will be particularly evident in the auto sector,
but we don't see any signs of a collapse in economic activity.
Very recent indicators, such as initial claims and the
Chicago Purchasing Managers' Report that was published this morning,
are consistent with a picture of moderate economic growth. We think
that consumer demand will pick up substantially in the second quarter.
There was only a 1-1/2 percent increase in real PCE in today's advance
estimate for the first quarter, and we think we shall see a
substantial acceleration. The growth of spending has been very weak
relative to income over the last several months, and in light of the
readings from consumer sentiment surveys, the strength of the stock
market, and the distinct possibility that the pattern and timing of
tax refunds could have had an effect, we are looking for good numbers
in coming months from the consumer sector. The housing indicators are
mixed and we expect housing starts to firm a bit from what to us was a
surprisingly low March level. In the business capital spending area,
the figures for the first quarter were very robust. We don't think
that pace is going to be maintained, but the new orders figures and
the data coming from the construction sector suggest to us that there
will be a further substantial increase in capital outlays. Net
exports were a significant negative in the first quarter. We don't
see that persisting, given our assumptions about how the Mexico
effects will play out in these data. On the whole, we are still
inclined to think that growth in real GDP in the second quarter will
be around 2 percent, or perhaps a shade less, as we had projected in
the last Greenbook. Those numbers seem reasonable at this juncture.
On the price side, the CPI in March included an increase in
the core component that was right in line with our expectations. We
did see the kind of acceleration in that measure in the first quarter
that we had predicted. However, in line with what we noted in the
last Greenbook, when one begins to dig into the details, the pattern
still is not one that clearly evidences broad inflation coming about
because of pressures on resources or the pass-through of rising
materials costs. I think that is a potentially interesting
development. Adding to that the fact that the employment cost index
figures released earlier this week were so favorable, I think one

-5-

4/28/95

would have to say that on balance the incoming news on the inflation
side is a basis for some optimism that perhaps we might have a little
lower inflation in coming months than one might otherwise have
expected based on a similar output path. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, do you have any sense of the
implicit March-to-June real PCE changes versus December-to-March on a
monthly basis?
MR. PRELL. To get the kind of growth we are anticipating,
which in the last Greenbook was in the area of 3-1/2 percent and which
still seems reasonable to us, we will have to see a very considerable
acceleration. The numbers have been quite flat in recent months, but
I can't give you the specifics.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, it is not as though the pickup in
the second quarter is already signaled in the March level.
MR. PRELL. Definitely not.
strength coming out of the quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We did not have arithmetic

Further questions for Mike?

MR. BLINDER. I have one.
in Q1 do we attribute to Mexico?

How much of the export performance

MR. SIEGMAN. Mexico's trade adjustment appears to have been
front-loaded to quite an extent. Mexico's trade data provide evidence
that they turned around from a sizable deficit to a small surplus for
the first two months, and we are the main trading partner.
MR. BLINDER. Right. The previous two quarters had real
export growth in the range of 15-20 percent or something like that,
and I believe this one had a very small minus.
MR. PRELL.

Yes, exports were about unchanged--minus .6

percent.
MR. BLINDER. I am trying to get a feeling for whether all of
that or half of that or a quarter of that could have been due to
Mexico.

MR. SIEGMAN.
number on that.

Most of it was, but I can't give you an exact

MR. PRELL. Our sense is that the further decline in net
exports is essentially a Mexico story. That would be the right order
of magnitude. Net exports were down $12 billion; that's in the
ballpark.
MR. BLINDER. That takes it from 15 percent to 0 or something
like that? Okay, thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike? If not, let
me give you a general review of the recent G-7 meeting and a comment
on the Interim Committee discussion, which as usual did not do very
much for anybody. As you may recall from the press reports prior to
the G-7 meeting, there was a considerably negative tone toward the

4/28/95

-6-

United States. There was the possibility as we got into the meeting
that there could be a little stiffness, especially considering that
this was the second meeting that Secretary Rubin was involved in and
the first where he was the host and the chairman.
One of the topics on which I thought he
was most successful in doing that was the issue of when there would be
intervention. The Japanese or the French would say that we must do
something to solve this problem because the results are intolerable.
Rubin would basically ask what specifically they had in mind. It is
remarkable how when somebody gets very specific and starts talking
about intervention, nobody believes it will work for reasons that I
will get into in a minute.
The discussion about interest rates, in which no one was
terribly much interested as far as United States rates are concerned,
and the presumption on the deficits that Bob Rubin and I had worked
out I thought turned out reasonably well, so that by the end of the
meeting, there was a far more collegial atmosphere. As you may have
noticed, the actual communique was relatively bland and the end result
was that,
Very specifically, however, we had to confront the question
who had argued that we should be moving interest
rates. I argued that this really would be quite inappropriate for a
number of reasons, and then I discussed the role that we perceive for
interest rates in exchange markets. I pointed out that, by their very
nature, all that interest rates can do is to restructure the balancing
of effects that would occur as a consequence of structural problems in
the various markets. I pointed out that if, for example, our problem
is that of our becoming a debtor nation after being a significant
creditor nation, interest rates can temporarily adjust the balance but
they do not come to grips with the overall problem. I said that an
extreme case of this problem is what occurred in post-World War I
Britain when they had a much higher interest rate than one ordinarily
would have expected because they wanted to sustain the exchange rate
that they set at the end of the war at the pre-war level. This was
after the exchange rate had depreciated substantially during the war.
The process of trying to maintain rates as a substitute for coming to
grips with the fundamentals clearly has not worked very well.
I then raised the issue
he wasn't
thinking of a large increase but a very small one. I said that all of
our experience with interest rates in the recent period indicates that
small changes do not accomplish very much. Basically one must deal
with the potential, for example, of .1 percent change over a week's
period being the equivalent of more than 500 basis points annually.
If
that we do something to show our interest
in the dollar, it wasn't clear to me what he had in mind unless he
wanted us to raise interest rates continuously until the dollar
stabilized. I said that I did not deny that were we to go 50 basis
points higher, the dollar would jump a couple of pfennings but it
would then start to depreciate. What would we do for an encore?

4/28/95

-7-

I then went on to repeat my increasing optimism that the
budget deficit will be addressed. I went through the argument that we
have been debating here, namely that if we thought it was very clear
that the budget deficit was creating a current account deficit and
that in turn was creating significant weakness in the dollar, we
presumably would have seen it in higher long-term interest rates,
which we have not. But the forced assumption--that's what is involved
here--is that the only way to reconcile the weakening long-term
forward exchange rate for the dollar with lower nominal rates, which
can only be a purchasing power issue if one goes out far enough in
time, is that real long-term rates must have been going down. I then
argued that that was not inconsistent with the weakness in the economy
that we were observing. I went into the issue of how inventories may
effect some softening in the economy. I went on further, however, to
say that we have to be careful about being very sure about any of
these explanations. Indeed, our inability to forecast exchange rates
suggests that the complexity of the adjustment process in the exchange
markets is far greater than anything we can get our hands around.
Probably, we won't fully understand this phenomenon until we look at
it retrospectively. It is conceivable that it may be a bubble
comparable to that in the latter part of 1984 and early 1985, but we
have no good way of coming at this.
I said that I thought that there was growing optimism on our
coming to grips with the budget deficit. While I could not be sure, I
thought things were changing in a way that I had not seen for a long
while. As best I could judge, it appeared that both the President and
the Congress believed that further budget deficit reduction was
significantly important. Rubin then basically said that he thought I
might not be all wrong on this issue; he's locked in obviously as to
how much he can say publicly. He said, however, that he was not
terribly sure that we are going to be able to get to a balanced budget
by the year 2002 as I was indicating, and I said that that objective
may be a case of hope over experience.
That defused a lot of the
discussion.

We had the Russians in who gave a somewhat upbeat view of
where they were. We had technical discussions on GATT and potential
sales of gold by the IMF for the purpose of using the interest on the
sale proceeds to finance various programs in the IMF. But in general,
it was a relatively shorter meeting than usual and far less difficult
than I think any of us from the U.S. delegation was expecting when we

4/28/95

went in. That's all I have to report.
questions?

Does anybody have any

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, just by coincidence
is visiting Chicago now and will be in our Bank this afternoon; I'll
be meeting with him later. I was just wondering if he had any views
that would be helpful for us to be aware of.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember that the sale of gold for
purposes of financing certain IMF programs

Anything else?
next meeting.

If not, we look forward to seeing you at the
END OF SESSION

