Meeting of the Federal Open Market
May 23,

Committee

1995

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held

in

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, May 23,
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

1995,

at 9:00

a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
Lindsey
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter, Mishkin, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager,

System Open Market Account

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum,
and Mses. Tschinkel and White, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia,
Dallas, Atlanta, and New York, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Mr. Altig, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
May 23, 1995
Secretary's note:
In keeping with the Committee's decision at its
meeting on January 31-February 1, 1995 that discussions not related to
monetary policy need not be recorded, no recording was made of the
first item discussed by the Committee at this meeting. The topic
related to organizational matters that included rules on attendance at
FOMC meetings and access to confidential FOMC materials at Federal
Reserve Banks. A summary of the discussion is contained in the
minutes published for this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the approval
of the minutes for the March 28 meeting?
MS. MINEHAN.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now turn to Peter
Fisher who will report on the operations of both the foreign Desk and
the domestic Desk.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will first discuss
current conditions in interest rate markets and then some of the
factors contributing to recent exchange rate movements before
reviewing foreign and then domestic operations.
[Statement--see
Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Peter?

MS. PHILLIPS. In the domestic report, you indicated that a
group of traders was "priced out of the market."
What does "priced
out of the market" mean, and how do you know they were priced out?
MR. FISHER. If you are taking a short position on the
expectation that the data will lean the other way or the market will
not continue to rally, you begin to lose a lot of money and you have
to cover your shorts. There are people who believe that there will be
a rebound in activity by the end of the year, but it is too expensive
for them to try to express that position in the market.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Do you take a survey or--

MR. FISHER. We talk to people, and there are some well known
losses that are now reported. We certainly talk to the dealers about
major positions that go against them. So, yes, there are informal
surveys and some more formal surveys.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the Governor is asking the
question, "What in the world does it mean to say you are priced out of
the market?"
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. KOHN.

That's right.

[Laughter]

You lose a lot of money!

[Laughter]

MR. FISHER. I think, as Don said, you lose a lot of money.
There were people who were priced out of the market in December. They
thought that the fed funds rate might not be raised 200 basis points

5/23/95

in 1995 and that the yield curve had moved well beyond where it would
go. But they chose not to express that view in the market in
December.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor, what he is saying is a
euphemism for indicating that they were wrong and that the price they
are looking at now is too high to buy.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Forrestal.

Did I get it right, Peter?
[Laughter]
Any other questions?

President

MR. FORRESTAL. Peter, what effect, if any, would you expect
the threatened trade sanctions with Japan to have on the foreign
exchange markets?
MR. FISHER. There were various stages in their announcement
process. One of the earlier, more definitive, announcements actually
had a positive effect on dollar/yen--modestly positive.
I think I
have described my views to the Committee before on this.
When the
markets perceive trade policy statements to be just saber rattling and
no action is anticipated--just a lot of angry words--that tends to be
negative for the exchange markets because they don't perceive that
anything concrete will be done.
But on the few occasions when our
trade representative has announced concrete trade policy steps,
whether sanctions or invocations of statutory authority, the exchange
market for dollar/yen generally has responded positively on the theory
that at least the sign is right for the impact on our short-run trade
position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions for Peter?

MR. BLINDER. Peter, you talked about a coupon purchase
operation in the last maintenance period and about the possibility of
two such operations in the intermeeting period coming up. This raises
a question I have wondered about for a long time, which is how you
decide what to buy. There is a whole variety of securities out there.
I was just looking at the table in your report which shows that about
50 percent of our portfolio is now invested in Treasury bills, with
various percentages in other maturities.
It is not obvious what the
criteria are nor what the long-run goal is--if there is a goal for the
maturity structure--nor how individual purchases and runoffs of
securities contribute to or detract from that goal. What do you have
to say about that? Do you feel that you know what the criteria are?
MR. FISHER. No, I don't, and I would like to look into and
clarify some of the criteria that we use to approach this task. The
presumption for several years has been that we are really replicating
the portfolio as it exists.
So, there is simply an effort to maintain
roughly the current maturity mix. That is the policy that I inherited
and it can be seen in effect in the new tables that we provide at the
back of our report. It is a policy that I have been trying to
understand better and to think through some of its implications. It

5/23/95

is something that we have begun to work on. We contemplate having a
few staff people devote a fair amount of time over coming months to
thinking through the criteria that we use as we approach each auction.
The tradition has been to assume that we wanted a relatively high
component of bills to permit the portfolio to run off rather easily
without the need to sell a lot of securities into the market and
disturb the structure of the yield curve, if such an occasion were to
arise. So, that is the nature of the received wisdom and how I intend
to proceed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. As a follow up, would that review also include
the absolute size of passes and their impact on the composition of the
permanent portfolio?
MR. FISHER. Yes.
The presumption as to the size of each
pass is sort of built into the assumptions about how we operate. We
have to look at the two together.
MR. KELLEY.

Right.

MR. FISHER. We will be looking at that. There are arguments
for smaller passes with more frequent operations; there are arguments
for larger ones. I have had some very interesting discussions with
other central bankers in my position about the nature of a central
bank portfolio and how to think about it. There is not much
divergence in practices, but there is a wide range of views about how
One central banker feels very strongly that a
to think about this.
central bank's portfolio should never contain on-the-run securities.
A central bank, after all, makes its own liquidity. Why does the
central bank need to hold on-the-run issues? The central bank should
exclusively be buying everything that is off the run. But in
practice, of course, that would involve the Herculean effort of being
the vacuum cleaner of the securities market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

And to whom.

And to who.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FISHER.

Especially if you have to sell.

And to whom.

[Laughter]

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry Peter, I just thought I would
pick on you this morning. I took a pill that says, "Pick on Peter."
MR. FISHER.
MS. MINEHAN.

That's fine.
He can take it.

MR. FISHER. So, there is a wide range of views. A number of
central banks that apply very sophisticated approaches to their
foreign currency portfolios--really as profit centers--have been

5/23/95

-4-

backfitting some of that financial technology into thinking about
their domestic portfolios.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest that we consider this
issue periodically? The issue raised by Governor Blinder is something
that is very important for us to look at.
The way you phrased your
answer, Peter, I think underscores that.
To maintain the status quo
really makes no sense whatever. The crucial question is:
What
liquidity needs do we have and what are the implications?
I hope that
you and Don can get together and come up with a report that gives the
Committee some insight into what the principles should be.
Let me just state my own view of what I would like to see in
that report:
What would have been the consequences, for example, if a
few of the major money center banks had gone belly-up in 1990, which
was not an altogether bizarre possibility, and of the possible
discount window lending that could have required huge liquidations
from our portfolio? Secondly, there is the interesting question of
whether in fact we could get both that scenario and the need for a
major accumulation of foreign currencies. My suspicion is that the
two contingencies probably would involve disparate economic events and
it is very unlikely that they would come together. But we could face
the need to acquire very large amounts of foreign currencies over a
short period of time.
Finally, I think it would be useful to get a notion of the
effect of changing the maturity composition of our portfolio on the
portfolio held by the public. That ultimately affects the sensitivity
of interest payments in the budget, taking into account Federal
Reserve earnings, to changes in market interest rates.
Clearly, we
have been very much inclined over the years to try to stay away from a
position where the short-term interest rate actions of the Federal
Reserve could have pronounced federal budget effects.
To the extent
that we lengthen the average maturity of our portfolio and the
Treasury does not offset what we are doing, that creates a portfolio
with an increasingly shorter average maturity in the hands of the
public. Therefore, the consolidated interest costs including Federal
Reserve earnings tend to be more sensitive to changes in interest
rates--obviously in the direction of higher rates being associated
with higher federal outlays.
I don't know how sensitive that
relationship is, but I do think that the argument should be to get as
much liquidity as we mught conceivably need in the context of whatever
we view as a potential amount of resources that might be drained from
our balance sheet and then multiply it by some number like they do at
the BIS--I think it is three.
[Laughter]
I don't know whether three
is the magic number, but there should be some criteria.
I think Governor Blinder raises an important issue. We have
this huge portfolio, and we don't really have a set of principles that
this Committee determines and I think we should. So, I would
appreciate it if, sooner rather than later, you could come up with a
set of principles that we can then debate at some meeting. Any
further comments on this?
MR. MCTEER. I wonder if Peter would comment on whether he is
holding the fed funds rate up to 6 percent or down to 6 percent.

5/23/95

MR. FISHER. By normally leaving the market a little short,
we continue to push the rate in that direction. The rate expectations
can be seen in the fed funds futures contracts. Both my report and
Don's report indicate that the market is looking for the funds rate to
be edging down, or skewed slightly in that direction, over coming
months. We do not feel a great deal of pressure in the reserve market
itself. I wouldn't relate this to the substance behind your question,
but there have been some occasions where demand for excess reserves
seemed a little on the soft side in the last few weeks. I think that
is more of an anomaly, but it is something that I am intrigued with.
There was one period in which the demand for excess reserves was
really extraordinarily soft; we still have not gotten our hands on the
reason for that excess level below $1/2 billion. I don't see that as
a profound change but more as a fluctuation in the reserve market
itself. But the market's forecast certainly is leaning in that easing
direction.
I don't think we have quite felt that in our reserve
management yet.
If not, we need to
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
take three votes. The first is to ratify the foreign currency
transactions since the last meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.

Move approval.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Second, we will need
to ratify the domestic operations during the intermeeting period.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Move approval.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Finally, Peter has
requested an increase in the intermeeting leeway from $8 to $10
billion. May I have a motion on that?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Move approval of the $10 billion

limit.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Now let's go on to

[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike? Mike, I meant to
look up something before we came in. I don't know if you have the
data with you, but what is the gap between new orders of durable goods
and shipments in the last report?
MR. PRELL. It will take me a minute or so to find that.
think we are still seeing rising backlogs.

I

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My recollection is that we have a spread
of several percentage points. The reason I raise the question is to

5/23/95

gauge how much of a drop in new orders can occur in the near term
without unfilled orders also turning down.
MR. PRELL.

I can't give you that answer immediately.

I'm

sorry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mike, the forecast that you gave has the core
CPI running at roughly 3 percent throughout the last half of 1995 and
all of 1996, and you have built in, of course, the assumption of a
flat fed funds rate at 6 percent. Just looking at those two numbers
would mean that the real fed funds rate would be roughly 3 percent
during this period. We have often talked about the concept of a
neutral monetary policy. I am wondering how you would relate that
real fed funds rate to the idea of a neutral monetary policy--whether
you see this as a neutral monetary policy.
I don't have in mind a particular number that
MR. PRELL.
goes with neutrality in the sense that over time one would expect the
economy to grow at potential--or to sit at potential output. We have
interpreted monetary policy per se as probably modestly restrictive at
this point. That is, the real rate of interest is perhaps somewhat
above the natural rate. But, in the total financial picture, we also
recognize that credit availability if anything has been improving; the
terms and standards of bank loans have been moving in an easing
direction; and we also have had an impulse through the exchange
market, which you might take as part of the broader financial context,
that is tending to be stimulative over this period. So, on balance,
we don't have a picture of very marked financial impetus or restraint.
MR. MOSKOW. But is there a zone or number that you think of
as a neutral monetary policy?
MR. PRELL. We would anticipate, particularly in an
environment of ongoing fiscal restraint, that the equilibrium as we
look ahead to 1996, 1997, 1998 would be one in which the real shortterm interest rate would move closer to its historical average; that
rate would be on the order of 2 percent or maybe a bit less.
This
would suggest that the rate probably is higher now than would be
expected over the longer term. So, we have some restraint there. Don
points out to me that we have had a very big run-up in the stock
market that is providing another financial impulse.
Mr. Chairman, in answer to your question about nondefense
capital goods, orders were about 4-1/2 percent above shipments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

In March?

In March.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Ted, your forecast for Japan indicates a fairly
respectable pickup in 1995 and 1996, and I saw that the consensus of
about 15 international forecasters is very close to your forecast.
I
was wondering how important fiscal stimulus was in that forecast. We
have had instances in the last couple of years where the degree of

5/23/95

fiscal stimulus in Japan has been a disappointment.
I wondered if you
would comment in general about that projected pickup.
MR. TRUMAN. Just one technical point:
The pickup as far as
this year is concerned is quite modest.
I think the fundamental
pickup may be seen by focusing on the fourth quarter-over-fourth
quarter number.
Because there was a big negative number last year,
the pickup looks a little better as a percent than we would think,
though we are looking for an annual rate of growth in the 2 to 2-1/2
percent range for the balance of this year. But, as Mike mentioned,
we have tended to mark things down over the last several forecasts.
I
think we would have marked things down even more in the absence of
this fiscal package, which came in a bit on the high side of people's
expectations. I find it extremely difficult to judge Japanese fiscal
policy because we don't have a very good baseline, if I may put it
that way. They have two or three supplemental budgets a year. The
fundamental budget may be good from the standpoint of fiscal
rectitude.
It may be a great way of running things because they can
always drop back to a more restrictive policy in the absence of
special supplemental budgets. On the other hand, in terms of judging
the ongoing thrust of policy in the context of unusually large output
gaps and, as Peter mentioned, the threat of deflation, that probably
is not the right assumption to make.
I believe the Japanese situation
clearly involves some downside risk on balance.
It is not an
unreasonable forecast, but it probably has an uncertainty band around
it that is a bit wider than the forecasts for the other industrial
countries.
MR. PARRY. Does your forecast have an explicit assumption
about trade relations with the United States?
MR. TRUMAN. We have essentially ignored the trade relations
question in the forecast. So, I guess implicitly we are assuming that
some time between now and the end of June this particular matter will
be settled. There are then two questions. One would be what happens
if Congress does go through with the sanctions. The trade and the
price implications of that are likely to be pretty secondary; we are
talking about $6 billion worth of consumer demand. I guess the
simplest calculation would imply a shift to that much more nominal
spending, but that is only 0.1 percent of total consumer spending over
some period. We have to worry about secondary effects, but we also
have to worry about other adjustments if we assume a full passthrough. So, it is not a big number. Also, the overall trade
implications are not likely to be very large because most of the
presumed shift in demand for luxury cars will go to Germany and other
countries. So, in terms of the aggregate effect on trade, not much
would be different. That's the easy part of the story. The more
difficult part would be to gauge what would happen if we got involved
in a so-called trade war. That is a phrase we throw around, but I
don't think we really know what it means, or I don't know what I mean
when I say it.
Probably the most important aspect of that would be
the impact on financial markets on the one hand and some broad
perception of where economies were going, which I think is likely to
be negative.
It is hard to imagine that a trade war would not be a
negative factor on the whole, but how bad it would be is difficult to
judge. So, in that context, we have assumed it is not going to
happen!

5/23/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Mike, my questions are really along the same
lines as those that Mike Moskow asked you earlier. Your response to
him frankly is not the response I would have expected from my reading
of the Greenbook. A year ago at this meeting we were talking about
this issue of neutrality. There was a fair amount of discussion then
and at the next couple of meetings about what it means to be at a
neutral level in some sense on nominal short-term interest rates and
where neutral is.
So, when I read this Greenbook, I was led to
believe that a neutral nominal rate for fed funds was 6 percent or
slightly below 6 percent but that it could be a little higher. There
was a phrase in the Greenbook about the core rate of inflation moving
up through 1995 and 1996 because that was consistent with an excess of
aggregate demand over potential supply. There was also a statement to
the effect that the recent bond market rally had pushed long-term
interest rates below a sustainable level and that from this point you
thought rates would go up. As I read the two alternatives of a
higher/lower federal funds rate at the end of the year, the language
used to describe each of those also left me feeling that 6 percent was
about neutral or maybe a little below neutral. So, your response that
neutral was below 6 percent was not what I would have guessed. To
come at it from a slightly different perspective, let us assume that
the rate got stuck at 6 percent--that we just pegged the rate at that
level. To help condition us a little to what we might expect in the
midyear review when we come back in July, would you describe what you
would expect to be the most likely set of numbers in terms of real
output growth, the unemployment rate, and the inflation rate over the
next five years that might be associated with a fed funds rate stuck
at 6 percent.
MR. PRELL. I don't know that the concept of neutrality was
ever particularly well defined, and I think the kind of economic
outcome that would ensue from a given short-term real rate of interest
is going to vary considerably over time, depending on fiscal policy
and other impulses. So, I have problems putting myself in that
particular context. But to respond directly to your question about
the longer-term outlook, we have shown in previous longer-term
scenarios in the Bluebook and elsewhere a declining path for the real
funds rate over time because, looking at history, we felt that this
was a relatively high real short-term interest rate and one that would
not be consistent with stability in the economy. It would be exerting
some ongoing contractionary force and overshooting what would be
required to stabilize the inflation level ultimately. So, if we redo
this projection, we would anticipate, particularly in a context of
ongoing fiscal restraint, let alone any balanced budget program that
is credible, that over the next several years there would be a decline
in the real short-term rate of interest as we moved either toward a
condition of stability at potential GDP or even maintained some minor
gap so as to bring the inflation rate down gradually.
It strikes me that the concept probably
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
does not have useful meaning unless we stipulate that we are in an
environment in which the budget is balanced, prices are stable, and
the exchange rate is stable. The latter, of course, is a function of
what other nations are doing as well. To have a concept of neutrality
when any of those three is moving, I think is quite ambiguous. But
the presumption of a stable economy, maximum sustainable growth at

5/23/95

stable prices, and stable exchange rates does raise a question as to
what real interest rate structure is consistent with that.
Once we
move away from that framework, then I think we are dealing with an
indeterminate concept.
Is there any way, Mike, in which you can
define neutrality apart from making certain rigid prespecifications?
MR. PRELL. I don't think so. As I said, I think that a
number of environmental factors would alter the implications of a
given real interest rate level.
Thus, I don't think there is a number
for all time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The question would be--I'm sorry.

MR. KOHN. I was just going to say, building on what you
said, Mr. Chairman, that in the long-run scenario in the last
Bluebook, as Mike pointed out, the real funds rate was coming down to
stabilize not prices but the inflation rate. One of the factors
making rate declines necessary was that the impulse from the decline
in the exchange rate was wearing off over time. So you are absolutely
correct. I think one has to define neutrality relative to what one
expects to happen to exchange rates as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Absent supply shocks, Mike, and absent a real
contractionary effect from fiscal policy, I would like to talk a
little about your inflation forecast and the idea that you believe the
risks are fairly evenly balanced around the forecast--at least that is
my understanding of what you said. In particular, I was drawn to the
fact that the ECI is on a slight upward trend relative to the
moderation of the core CPI and that the forecast stays at the low end
of most people's assessment of the NAIRU range. Where do you see this
in 1996? Do you still see the risks as pretty well balanced around
this inflation forecast by the end of 1996?
I know that is looking
further out and we could perhaps be reaching some cyclical downturn or
whatever that would have other effects on inflation. I would like an
assessment of what you think the risks are in 1996.
MR. PRELL. Two comments may be useful in responding to that.
One is that you characterized the range of possible NAIRU levels as
being one that was sort of biased to the up side of where our forecast
has been recently. As we are interpreting it, I think we would say
that might be a little too pessimistic. Perhaps one of the risks is
that the very good news we saw on the ECI through the first quarter of
the year is an indication that the NAIRU was lower than is built into
our forecast.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. Basically, our forecast is one in which the
economy is operating, at worst, just a shade below the full employment
level, or the NAIRU, as we move through 1996.
In that kind of
environment, one would not anticipate a great deal of pressure toward
higher inflation. So, given the recent experience and the factors
that suggest what growth rate may be sustainable in this economy
without a buildup of inflationary pressures, I think there is a
reasonable balance of risks as we look out through next year. Now, we
are in a period in which there are some vulnerabilities. The economy

5/23/95

-10-

is still operating at a quite high level. It is being hit by a shock
through the exchange rate channel. As I noted, that shock is not as
great perhaps as one would surmise looking at the yen alone, but we
think there is an impulse there that is going to tend to bring higher
import prices and provide an umbrella for domestic producers of autos
and other goods. We quite possibly still have in front of us a
significant pass-through of materials cost increases. We can already
see that showing up in some industries.
It is clearest in industries
like paper, but there are hints elsewhere.
It is conceivable that
this hump that we are looking at in our forecast could be greater and
could stretch out more if it generates some broader inflationary
expectations than seem to be present now or than we have anticipated
in the forecast. So, I think that certainly does pose some short-run
upside risk at a minimum.
MS. MINEHAN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I have a question that is related to a couple
you have already fielded about looking out over a little longer time
horizon. But mine may be a bit more specific and pointed. As I look
at the last four quarters of this forecast, it gives off the aura of a
steady state in all aspects except one. Real GDP is growing at a rate
of about 2.4 percent; nominal GDP is growing at a rate of about 4.8
percent; the profits share is constant; the savings share is constant;
the unemployment rate is constant; the funds rate, real and nominal,
is constant; and inflation is constant. The one exception to that is
capacity utilization, which keeps going down; and that raises a couple
of questions. Where is it going? What do you think is the natural
rate of capacity utilization? What is it that breaks what I think of
as not quite an ironclad but a reasonable 3:1 ratio between changes in
unemployment and changes in capacity utilization?
In the last four
quarters of the forecast, the change in the unemployment rate is zero
but the capacity utilization rate goes down by 1.1 percentage points.
MR. PRELL.
I think that relationship has varied considerably
over decent spans of time historically. So, they have not moved in
precise lockstep.
MR. BLINDER.

Pretty close, though.

MR. PRELL. We are certainly mindful of there being a
relationship over time. By the end of the period, we are moving into
the vicinity, if not below, what one might judge to be a natural rate
of capacity utilization in manufacturing. This reflects in part the
slower growth of goods output in the economy, but it also reflects the
fact that we have built into this forecast very sizable increases in
manufacturing capacity, largely in response to what has been a very
large increase in investment in manufacturing to date and what seems
likely to be strong investment going forward. So, that is a
significant ingredient in the diminution of capacity utilization in
manufacturing. It is one of the factors that provides considerable
hope that we are going to see a damping of inflationary pressures and
a flattening out of materials prices--that such prices will not be a
concern when we get to the latter part of this year and certainly as
we move through 1996.

5/23/95

-11-

MR. BLINDER. So, if
demand for goods and services
the capacity in manufacturing
you would get ever decreasing
Maybe not forever but--

If the
I can interpret your answer:
is growing at a fairly steady pace and
to produce goods is growing faster, then
capacity utilization in manufacturing.

MR. PRELL. Yes. Obviously, as we move out into 1996 and
capacity utilization drops, corporate profits will not be growing the
way they have been, cash flow won't be as favorable, and all of these
factors will work to damp further increments to growth of the capital
stock in manufacturing. We are not going to have an ongoing decline
in capacity utilization forever, but this is our short-run forecast.
A lot of this is given by the natural lags in the process of adding to
capacity so that we think there is a good deal of momentum in this
process going out several quarters.
MR. STOCKTON. Just econometrically, Governor Blinder, the
relationship between the unemployment rate and capacity utilization
that we have in this forecast is well within the historical range that
we have had in the past 20 or 30 years. Indeed, capacity utilization
is on the low side relative to the unemployment rate.

percent?

MR. BLINDER. Is capacity utilization converging to 81
That's what I'm driving at. Where is it going?

MR. PRELL. I'm not sure.
I have a concept of a convergence
process here, but over time the average and what we estimate as being
a natural rate in terms of price behavior is at 82 percent or maybe a
bit less. One would anticipate that if we stretch this out, there
would be some processes that would probably move us in that direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
who would like to start our round table?
President Broaddus.

If not,

MR. BROADDUS. Current economic conditions and near-term
prospects in our District remain mixed, as they have been for the last
couple of months. Most of our business contacts confirm an ongoing
moderation in economic activity. In our region as elsewhere the
softening in activity is most pronounced in consumer spending and in
housing activity. For example, with respect to housing in the
Raleigh-Durham area, multiple listings have been running about 25
percent below their rate at this time last year and prices of
residential lots have fallen a good bit recently. This is a really
striking change in a local area that has been booming for the last
couple of years. At the same time, we are seeing continuing growth
and strength in at least some sectors and industries.
In particular,
producers of chemical and paper products tell us that things are still
going reasonably well, and they are optimistic about prospects for the
remainder of the year--especially, interestingly enough, for exports.
Also, tourism, which is an increasingly important industry in our part
of the country, is stronger now than it was at this time last year.
So, again, activity in our District is mixed. I usually try to avoid
using the word "mixed" in describing the economy since it is so vague,
but I think that's essentially what it is in our region right now.
Turning to the national economy, the Greenbook forecast is
broadly in line with other forecasts that I have seen and it is
certainly plausible. But it is calling for an almost perfect landing,

5/23/95

-12-

a super soft landing, so one naturally has to wonder what might go
wrong. I see two distinct and somewhat sequential risks, if I can use
that phrase, for the period ahead. First, it seems to me that there
is a clear, near-term downside risk. The Greenbook, as everyone
knows, is projecting a sharp reduction in GDP growth in the second and
third quarters as producers work inventories down. The risk, of
course, is that the slow growth in jobs and incomes that presumably
will accompany this inventory correction may frighten consumers and
possibly precipitate a further reduction in spending. In turn, that
could induce producers to cut output further. So, we could get a kind
of snowballing effect such as we have had in the past, often in part
because of the Fed's reluctance to allow interest rates to decline
promptly enough when these kinds of conditions have arisen.
Historically, that has tended in at least some circumstances to short
circuit the natural stabilizing properties of the price system.
In any case, we all know this kind of cumulative downturn has
happened before and conceivably it could happen this time and turn the
inventory correction into something worse. Clearly, we need to be
sensitive to that risk. If, however, we get through the next couple
of quarters okay, including this quarter, and the expansion continues
as the Greenbook projects--and frankly I think that is the more likely
outcome--then as we move into the final quarter of this year and into
1996, we will face a quite different set of risks. I think most
people agree that the level of real GDP currently is above its longerterm potential level. That might be a factor in the recent
acceleration in the core inflation rate and in the continuing sharp
increases in the prices of many key industrial materials.
The
Greenbook is projecting, if I have calculated it right, that real GDP
growth will average about 2-1/4 percent from now through the end of
the projection horizon.
If that happens, actual real GDP will move
down closer to its potential path. As I see it, the risk is that if
the average growth of GDP turns out to be higher than this projection,
even moderately higher--say, because the inventory correction is
milder or aggregate demand is somewhat stronger than we expect--actual
GDP will approach its potential path more slowly and remain above it
longer. In that event we could see some considerable buildup in
inflationary momentum. Once that happens, it could be very difficult
to break. In my view, the latter scenario is still a very real
possibility and it is important for us not to let the current
moderation in activity and all the talk in the press and elsewhere
about soft landings make us forget that risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity
in the Southeast has been slowing recently to a more sustainable rate
of growth. Notwithstanding that slower growth, job expansion in the
District continues to outpace that for the nation as a whole, although
by a somewhat smaller margin than earlier, and the unemployment rate
remains below that in the rest of the country. Looking at some of the
sectors of the economy, retailers are reporting increasing inventories
and slowing sales for both April and early May. Auto purchases in
particular were weaker than a year ago, but they seem to be
stabilizing now rather than continuing to decline. Tourism is
starting to rebound with the return of European visitors to Florida
and business travel has continued strong throughout the region.

-13-

5/23/95

The reports we are getting on manufacturing are mixed.
Production and shipments slowed in April, but new orders and
production are expected to rise. As Al Broaddus just reported, paper
products and chemicals remain quite strong. In particular, exports of
chemicals are responding rather strongly to the dollar's weakness
against the deutschemark, and we are now seeing South American
customers ordering from U.S. plants as opposed to their German
competitors. Building-related materials industries have weakened with
the national slowdown in single-family housing, and residential
activity continues to slow in our region. Home sales have fallen
below last year's levels, but realtors are encouraged by the recent
declines in mortgage rates. Multifamily markets, on the other hand,
continue to experience rising occupancy and rental rates along with
accelerating construction. Nonresidential real estate is pretty much
in the same situation. Loan demand is steady in the region, with
commercial demand stronger than consumer demand, and banks continue to
compete pretty aggressively for business loans. Wage increases remain
stable in most areas of the District, and the extreme shortages of
unskilled workers that I was reporting, particularly in Tennessee, are
now beginning to abate. Skilled construction workers and contractors
remain in very short supply generally around the District but
particularly in the Atlanta area. Finally, manufacturers are
reporting fewer price hikes for both materials and finished products.
With respect to the national outlook, our forecast has a
pattern similar to the one presented in the Greenbook, but we have
real growth somewhat higher over the forecast horizon. In line with
that higher growth, unemployment moves a little lower by the end of
1996 and inflation ends up a little higher--rising to 3-1/2 percent.
I think both of these forecasts, the Greenbook and our staff forecast,
are within the range of reasonable outcomes. And while growth is
probably going to remain sluggish, as we hope it will in the immediate
future, there is a possibility of an acceleration later in the year.
With respect to inflation, our view continues to be that the rise that
we are seeing is largely a cyclical phenomenon as opposed to the
continuation of a trend. I continue to be persuaded that since we
have not accommodated inflationary impulses in recent years, there is
no reason for sustained deterioration in prices to emerge past 1996.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, on balance economic activity in
the Seventh District in the last two months seems to have continued
the slowing pace of growth in the first quarter--led, of course, by
developments in the automobile sector. Confidentially, we have the
Chicago Purchasing Managers' Index for May, which I caution will not
be public until next Wednesday, May 31.
It indicates a resumption in
the slowing of the expansion which had been interrupted briefly by a
slight uptick in April.
In the last few days, our contacts in the automobile industry
reported new cutbacks in production schedules, including three more
plants that will be down this week and additional cuts to overtime and
I note that for
line speed at a handful of other facilities.
automakers these are very expensive actions to take at this time
because the materials and supplies for the 1995 models have already
One of the Big Three firms indicated
been purchased under contract.

5/23/95

-14-

to me that they expected a slower start-up of the 1996 models in
September and further cutbacks at that time because of large expected
inventories of the 1995 models. Auto and light truck sales appear to
be coming in at about the 14-1/2 million units level so far in May,
which is approximately 3/4 million units above the April pace but
still well below the expectations earlier this year.
Housing activity in the region has been trending down for the
last few quarters, but District realtors report some improvement in
existing home sales in the past two months.
Midwest home builders
generally continue to report a relatively higher level of activity in
our District than in the rest of the country.
A long delayed spring in the Midwest has damped consumer
spending growth, but retailers' optimism seems to have improved with
the weather. Retail sales reports have been mixed, with some contacts
reporting weak sales in April and the first part of May and others
indicating some improvement in sales growth. In the capital goods
industries, contacts continue to report strong orders for products
such as machine tools, agricultural equipment, and heavy-duty trucks.
Steel output in the District has strengthened slightly since the
beginning of the year, but growth has been at a substantially slower
rate than in the fourth quarter of last year. Some of our steel
industry contacts report that orders from the automakers are only now
being scaled back. Softening in the domestic demand for steel may be
offset by an expected rise in steel exports this year.
In the agricultural sector, corn planting is proceeding at
the second slowest pace in 11 years.
If the weather improves over the
next week or so, there is still a reasonable chance for achieving
average yields this year. But even with average yields, production
would fall short of current consumption, implying above-average prices
in the months ahead. I should add that the weather forecast for the
next 5 to 10 days is for more rain. Farmland values and farm
equipment sales continued to rise in the first quarter despite
widespread talk of trimming farm income and price support programs.
On the employment front, labor markets remain tight, with the
District's unemployment rate at its lowest level in over 15 years.
But recent weakness in key District industries, especially autos, has
reduced overtime and other labor market pressures somewhat.
Nevertheless, the surveys continue to reflect relative strength in
hiring plans in the second quarter. Pockets of labor shortages in
western Michigan, Wisconsin, and Indiana have curtailed expansion
plans, adding to recruitment and training costs and combining with
Reports
other factors to prompt price increases in some industries.
on prices generally are mixed. Prices of some materials such as
cement, paper, and steel scrap have been increasing. Gypsum board
prices were raised about 10 percent in mid-February, but one producer
reports some erosion in that increase over the last month, and a
planned increase for mid-May was abandoned. Similarly, a number of
steel suppliers are reported to have rolled back earlier price
increases and the announced July price hike for steel is not expected
to go through. In fact, one mini mill has cut its prices for a second
time.
In terms of the national outlook, Mr. Chairman, I am in
general agreement with the Greenbook.

5/23/95

-15-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the Second District
economy remains fairly flat. On balance, the data indicate that the
rate of job layoffs is slowing, but job creations and new business
incorporations have yet to show any kind of a typical post-recession
surge in growth. In April, the unemployment rate rose to 6.8 percent
in New York and 6.3 percent in New Jersey. Preliminary reports
suggest that April retail sales were up only 3 to 5 percent on a yearover-year basis despite the favorable timing of Easter, and merchants
reported widespread disappointment with such growth. Everything seems
to be for sale in the greater New York area. The realtors in the
metropolitan area reported that existing home sales fell about 10
percent below year-ago levels in the first quarter and that prices
were comparably weak. In the same period, vacancy rates for prime
commercial office space rose throughout the greater New York City
metropolitan area, largely as a result of ongoing corporate
restructurings. The boost to business confidence that we had hoped
would come from the change of government in New York State is not
materializing. The new governor has been completely tied up in knots
by the opposition party, which has the majority in the General
Assembly in New York State. He is giving up a great deal in order to
reach an agreement on a state budget that is still in the "hoped for"
stage.
At the national level, we have moved to such proximity to the
Greenbook forecast that the closest we can get to a disagreement would
have to be described as a rounding error. But we are looking, as I
think everybody is, at what developments would point to weakness and
what would point to strength in this rather difficult forecasting
period. Obviously, the factors pointing to weakness affect mainly the
interest-sensitive sectors, with consumer durables weak, especially
automobiles, and housing starts down. On the other hand, two of the
major channels of monetary policy point to strength. The stock market
is near record highs; bond prices are up; higher household wealth and
net worth of firms bode well for spending by households and firms; and
the declines in long-bond rates have a very positive effect on fixed
mortgage rates. Those rates are at about 7-3/4 percent, only 3/4
percentage point above the levels in 1993. So, I think one might
anticipate some bounceback in housing. There is a little evidence in
that direction, with starts flat in April and the Mortgage Bankers
Association survey of applications for purchase up 18 percent in the
week of May 12.
Our bottom line is that there is substantial uncertainty
about the forecast so that an open mind is very much indicated. We
think that the likely risk to the forecast is that growth will be
somewhat stronger than both our own forecast and that in the
Greenbook, although we don't completely dismiss the notion that Al
Broaddus suggested that the consumer could get spooked by present
weakness and lose confidence. The place where we are still a bit
distant from the Greenbook forecast is on inflation. You may recall
that at the last meeting we had inflation up to 3.8 percent in 1996.
We have now modified that forecast to 3.6 percent. So, we are
appreciably less optimistic than the Greenbook, which has the
inflation rate at 3 percent by the end of 1996. There is no reason to
say that the Greenbook is necessarily wrong, but perhaps heartened by
the fact that we caught the increase in the spending level in the

-16-

5/23/95

early part of this year we are emboldened to think that perhaps our
forecast of 3.6 percent might be more likely. After all, if the
Chicago Cubs can be in first place this late in the baseball season,
anything can happen!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No comment.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Economic activity in the First District is
growing at a very modest pace. Payroll employment in most of the
major industries in the District is little changed since the end of
1994. Services employment in particular seems to have lost the
buoyancy of last year, but it is too soon really to tell whether this
slowing reflects a seasonal blip or a more fundamental change.
In
some ways we are happy to see the hospital industry shedding jobs, but
for most individual services industries the monthly data are just
simply too erratic to draw many conclusions at this point. Unlike
services, manufacturing employment in New England has been in a
secular decline, so stability constitutes relatively good performance.
In general the old-time industries such as metals, rubber, and
plastics, and in particular paper are faring better than high-tech
industries, which in New England have a large defense component.
Anecdotal evidence tends to support the statistical picture.
Recent retail sales have been disappointing and expectations are
lackluster.
Furniture stores are especially anxious.
Manufacturing
results were more positive, but the pace of demand has slowed since
last year. First District companies express some relief that autorelated demand has not fallen more in fact than it has.
Overseas
sales are said to be benefiting from the weaker dollar, and in
particular some of our software companies are experiencing upticks in
sales as a result of the decline of the dollar. Housing construction
is actually holding up a little better in New England than in the
nation as a whole. Sales of existing homes in the first quarter are
about the same as in the fourth quarter, though down a little from a
year ago. Some of our small business contacts report that credit is
widely available, with numerous banks calling in search of new lending
opportunities. Markets are still quite competitive for most
businesses, eliminating the degree to which cost increases in raw
materials can be passed on and emphasizing the need for cost-cutting
and restraints on wage increases.
Generally, all the states in the region realize that New
England's slow recovery has a large structural component as well as a
cyclical component. Much attention is being paid in all the states to
the cost of doing business. This has had the effect of bringing down
egregiously high costs such as workers' compensation over the last
couple of years. Recently, there has even been some movement in the
area of bank taxes in Massachusetts.
But this movement in the states
also has increased the level of competition, both among the states in
the region and between the states of New England in general and other
regions of the country. We are now seeing the remaining large
employers in the region openly bargaining with legislatures for the
tax and utility cost breaks that they believe are necessary and
holding the threat of imminent moves, usually south and west, over the
heads of governments. Against the backdrop of general unease about
jobs in particular and the economy in general, this is not
contributing to an overall sense of confidence in the region. Those
changes that inspire real structural adjustments in the cost of doing

-17-

5/23/95

business in New England, and not just specific industry cost breaks,
could be beneficial.
On the national scene, I agree with President Broaddus and
President McDonough that it is very tempting to believe the Greenbook.
It does describe in the baseline forecast the perfect definition of a
soft landing, and I sincerely hope that the staff is right. However,
we do remain skeptical--along the lines that President Broaddus ended
up with and President McDonough described--that inflation, as measured
by the core CPI, can remain so well behaved in 1996 after a relatively
small blip in 1995.
I hope that President Forrestal is right that
inflationary trends are simply cyclical and are not showing some
wayward long-term uptick here. But I am skeptical about whether that
is true and whether we are just seeing a pause now rather than a
somewhat more permanent downward shift in demand. We could see things
heat up toward the end of the year, with an untoward impact on
inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, growth in the Twelfth District
economy still has considerable momentum, although the pace of
expansion has slowed recently. Household job growth in the first
quarter was fast enough to bring the District's unemployment rate down
about 1/4 percentage point since the end of last year. However,
growth in District payroll employment slowed about 1 percentage point
in the first quarter relative to the 1994 pace. In California, the
moderate recovery has continued and the state and local government
fiscal climate has improved a bit, although one gets a different
impression from recent articles in the Wall Street Journal and the New
York Times. Payroll employment growth through April of this year
continued at near last year's pace.
Orange County is reported to have moved closer to reaching an
agreement with bondholders to reschedule about $1 billion in shortterm debt that begins to come due in early July. Some bondholders
have been lobbying the state government to help the county honor its
obligations as originally scheduled. Thus far, the state government
has distanced itself from Orange County's woes, actually leaving it to
the county's residents to finance eventual debt repayment. The spread
between California state government bond yields and other similarly
rated municipal bond yields has remained well below the peak attained
when the Orange County crisis first erupted. California's own fiscal
situation, we believe, has improved noticeably, although a substantial
amount of the debt that accumulated during the recession remains to be
worked off. The earlier California deficits were financed largely by
a run-up in loans to the general fund of about $6 billion. More
recently, state government revenues have firmed with the pickup in
economic activity, creating moderate budget surpluses and allowing a
payback of about $1 billion of these loans.
Turning to the national economy, our forecast is about the
same as the Greenbook forecast. We certainly agree that output is
going to be weak in the near term as businesses work off excess
inventories. While there is some uncertainty about how sharp this
correction might be, we do not expect it to be prolonged. In
particular, we expect final sales to keep growing at or even somewhat
above the growth rate of potential output through next year. We

-18-

5/23/95

expect CPI inflation to stay slightly above 3 percent over the period
as the beneficial effects of the recent slowdown in wage inflation are
offset by inflationary pressures from the dollar and the rising prices
of intermediate goods. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Looking at the available statistics, the Third
District economy clearly has slowed in recent months across a broad
front, including manufacturing, retailing, and residential
construction. Looking beyond the statistics, however, I think what we
are seeing is a downward adjustment in the rate of growth rather than
a cumulative decline in economic activity. Both business and consumer
attitudes in the District still seem positive. Rail transportation
activity, often a good indicator of manufacturing activity, seems to
be bottoming out except for autos. The slowing of office leasing
seems to be more from short supply than weak demand in the District, a
positive sign for future building, and lower mortgage rates are a
positive for housing activity.
On the inflation front in the District, I think we need to
look beyond the current statistics as well. Although there is some
uptick in the rate of inflation, I doubt that what we are seeing is a
cumulative upturn in the rate of inflation, but rather a temporary
cyclical upturn that is not sustainable in the current climate of
moderating demand pressures, stiff competition for sales, and subdued
wage and benefit increases.
Turning to the national economy, my views are similar to what
is happening in the District. The national economy in my view is
making a downward adjustment in the rate of growth rather than going
through the early phase of a cumulative downturn. And the economy is
experiencing a temporary uptick in inflation rather than the beginning
of a cumulative upturn. Nonetheless, while I am still reasonably
confident about the prospects for a soft landing, I think we need to
be very sensitive to incoming information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District generally
remains strong with some signs of modest slowing starting to emerge.
Overall, though, the District's sectors generally are continuing to
exhibit strength and our directors do report consistently healthy
growth across the region. For example, recent monthly employment data
show broad-based growth. Our nonfarm jobs in the District were up
almost 4 percent in March from a year earlier. In six of our seven
states the rate of job growth is exceeding the nation's pace, and New
Mexico continues to rank among the top states. Manufacturing activity
remains robust across the region.
Durable goods producers have been
adding jobs at a fairly consistent rate, even recently.
In fact,
while there has been some reduction in overtime in our auto
manufacturing plants, they have continued in some instances to hire
new workers in the last three months. There is strong growth in
nonresidential building within our District. We also have seen loan
growth continuing at double-digit rates over the last two months.
As I said, though, there are some signs of slowing in our
regional economy. There has been a little sluggishness in retail

-19-

5/23/95

sales according to reports from our directors and some of our other
District contacts. Residential building activity also has slowed
recently. And as others have mentioned, wet weather has led to
substantial delays in planting spring crops, pointing to a slightly
more difficult year for some of our farmers. Overall wage/price
pressures remain moderate in the District, but there are very
scattered indications of emerging pressures.
On the national level, our view is in line with the Board
staff's projections. We also believe that the projections are subject
to considerable uncertainty. Our sense at this stage is that the
risks to the projections remain on the up side. A couple of examples:
I think that consumer spending could remain strong in future months as
employment income continues to grow. Consumer confidence remains
relatively good and household balance sheets are in good condition.
I
think there is some potential strength in our export sector, given the
depreciation of the dollar, as others have indicated. The housing
sector could turn stronger with long-term rates having come down a
little. So, I think there is some risk on the up side and that is a
possible area for continued inflation concerns. While I agree that
the situation is uncertain, I think we do have to be diligent in
watching those inflation numbers. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Employment growth in the Eleventh District has
slowed somewhat in recent months. Beginning in the second quarter of
1989, the Eleventh District had 22 consecutive quarters of faster
employment growth than the United States as a whole.
In the past two
quarters, our employment growth has converged with the U.S. rate and
it is now only about average. The impact of the peso crisis in Mexico
is no doubt an important factor in the relative slowing in the
Eleventh District, as trade with Mexico is roughly four times as
important for us as it is for the country as a whole. The index of
leading indicators for Texas peaked last August and has been fairly
weak since then. The weakest component of that index is the Texas
value of the dollar because the peso is so important in the Southwest.
We are, however, encouraged by the rapid adjustment in the Mexican
trade balance and the fact that it has come more from increasing
Mexican exports than from declining Mexican imports. On the inflation
side, we are not getting new reports of accelerating wages and price
pressures in District surveys and in our discussions.
On the national scene, the slowdown has been fairly sharp,
even sharper than is reflected in the fourth- and first-quarter GDP
numbers. Growth in real final sales went from 5.7 percent to 1.8
percent, a fairly sharp decline. Of course, this has been accompanied
by sharp reductions in intermediate- and long-term interest rates.
The yield curve is getting considerably flatter.
If one looks at a
graph of the slope of the yield curve plotted against business cycle
dates, it tends to make one a little bit nervous.
Generally when the
yield curve becomes negative, when short-term interest rates are being
increased relative to long-term rates, a recession follows. However,
I think, as Al Broaddus indicated, that a natural correction occurs in
the economy when interest rates can weaken as a result of weakening
economic activity. We have to be cautious not to stand in the way of
that for too long. The yield curve is not negative yet, but it is
getting closer and that puts us in a more precarious position, given

5/23/95

-20-

the game of chicken that the Administration is playing with Japan over
trade policies. So, the conditions for some unstable financial market
activities, both domestic and foreign, are there. We should be
cautious in the months ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. The economy of the Ninth District is similar to
what has been reported in virtually all the other Districts. The pace
of expansion has slowed. But I must say the tenor of the information
and anecdotes that have come in suggests to me that, relative to the
numbers that we have seen for the national economy, the District
economy remains pretty sound. The strength is concentrated right now
in basic industries. Pulp and paper production is strong; iron and
copper mining is strong; energy exploration has picked up.
I would
describe sentiment as cautious but not negative. There has been some
concern expressed about what might follow from the battle with Japan
on the auto parts issue, and whether that could inhibit some of our
producers who currently export non-auto related goods to Japan. But
industry attitudes don't seem to be particularly negative. Labor
markets remain quite tight, especially for skilled workers, but as
usual that does not seem to be translating into broad-based wage
pressures. A couple of mortgage bankers that I ran into recently have
expressed growing optimism. I gather their volume has picked up.
With regard to the national economy, I don't have any serious
problems with the soft landing pattern in the Greenbook forecast.
I
would observe that it not only is a soft landing but it is a rather
quick one.
It only takes a couple of quarters of below-trend
expansion before we get back to what appears to be trend or steady
state. And I guess I am struck that even if things work out that
well, that means in some sense that we are going to be looking at
subpar numbers on the national economy for at least six months, that
is, into October or November.
We probably ought to recognize that up
front and gird ourselves to be patient if, in fact, we get incoming
evidence on the national economy of that nature. That's inherent in
the forecast and that seems to be what we ought to be expecting, at
least as the most likely scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thank you, Alan. The pace of Eighth District
economic activity, while decelerating modestly in some areas, exhibits
few signs of a pending slump. Unemployment in the major District
states remained at 4-1/2 percent in March, well below the national
average. Parts of the District continue to report tight labor market
conditions for both entry-level and skilled workers. Many businesses
in the District report slowing economic activity, but they generally
do not view this as a precursor to a sustained downturn in the near
future--very similar to other reports we have heard today.
Instead,
the consensus is for further growth in sales and employment, although
at a slower pace than recently experienced. New residential
construction in the District is below last year's level, but 1994 was
a record year in many areas. Anecdotal reports support the potential
for a revival in housing activity with the recent decline in long-term
rates.
Commercial construction continues to increase at a steady pace
as vacancy rates decline and rental rates increase. The office
vacancy rate in the St. Louis area, for instance, has fallen to about

-21-

5/23/95

13 percent, its lowest level in ten years. Total commercial and
industrial loans outstanding at the largest District banks rose 6.1
Planned auto production
percent between mid-February and mid-April.
at District plants is contrary to the recent national trends.
Scheduled second-quarter production of more than 280,000 units
represents an increase of more than 3 percent above the number of
units scheduled at the time of the last FOMC meeting and is also 3
percent above the number of units produced in the second quarter of
1994.
I would associate this with the fact that some popular
vehicles, like the Ford Explorer, some minivans, and other models,
dominate a lot of the production in our District.
Nationally, the economy seems to be slowing further, though
there are reasons for optimism over the remainder of 1995 as a number
of people pointed out. But the central concern of this Committee
should be inflation, and the pace of price increases is picking up.
The annualized growth rate of the CPI was 4.9 percent in April. This
index has risen at a 3.6 percent annual rate since December, up from a
2.7 percent rate of increase over the last half of 1994.
In contrast
to the Greenbook, which has CPI inflation peaking in the current
quarter, many private forecasters expect inflation to rise throughout
1995.
Most worrisome from the perspective of this Committee are
longer-term inflation forecasts that indicate that market participants
expect inflation at or above its current level for horizons as long as
five or ten years. So-called low inflation of 3 percent or more is
endemic in the present U.S. economy and is being built into exchange
rates, long-term interest rates, budget planning, contract
negotiations, and economic forecasts. We are far from convincing
markets of the prospect of moving toward our stated goal of stable
prices.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. A few weeks ago, in the last couple of days or
so of April, I attended a meeting of over 100 business and civic
leaders from northeast Ohio. Martin Feldstein made a presentation to
the group and answered questions. His prepared remarks were about
Mexico, but during the question-and-answer period, Marty was asked
about the economy, the outlook, and policies. He commented at that
point that the unemployment rate was too low and we should continue
tightening monetary policy until we raise the unemployment rate to
about the 6 percent level in order to prevent inflation from
accelerating from the current level. After the session the president
of one of the companies asked me if I still believed in zero
inflation, and I told him that I did. He then asked me how high I
wanted the unemployment rate to be pushed up if Feldstein thought it
needed to be pushed up to 6 percent to hold inflation steady. Of
course, I tried to explain that I did not want the unemployment rate
pushed up at all but that the objective of moving toward price
stability was in fact to move the unemployment rate down and maintain
it at a lower level. After that exchange and then talking with a
group of business leaders last week, I was struck by just how
difficult it would be to generate broad public support, let alone
narrower political support, for the idea of price stability as long as
we couch our argument in terms of putting a floor under the
unemployment rate. The idea of using a minimum level of unemployment
as an instrument in order to achieve the objective of price stability
simply is never going to be very popular with anybody.

5/23/95

-22-

When I look at unemployment rates in Ohio and also in
metropolitan areas and other parts of our District, I am puzzled about
why those rates do not fit with the stories that we usually hear and
see in print. We have a lot of metropolitan areas that report their
unemployment rates officially as under 3 percent. When we talk to the
people in the area, they say they have effectively no unemployment.
They usually do make the distinction that there are a lot of people
who do not have any work to do, but those people have jobs--they work
in the city governments and the school districts! The state of Ohio
has overall unemployment of 4 percent, the lowest of the big eleven
states, and our manufacturing employment is double the national
average, measured as a share of total employment.
If we have some idea concerning which we can be reasonably
confident in terms of potential, it has to be generally in the goods
producing sectors of the economy and more specifically in
manufacturing. That is the largest share of the Ohio economy and
parts of the central Kentucky economy, down around Lexington and in
that corridor. And yet, we don't see that these reported levels of
unemployment are being reflected in people's thinking about future
inflation, let alone materializing in terms of wage pressures. Our
wage increases in the District are well below the national average.
Now, one conjecture could be that it is a good thing that there are a
lot of unemployed aerospace workers in southern California, given the
number of people working and producing motor vehicles in Ohio.
Otherwise, we would have a lot of inflation. And if those people in
Long Beach find jobs, I guess we are going to have to lay some people
off in Toledo!
I was in Toledo last week talking to about 100 bankers
from within a 50-mile radius, and they were complaining that their
unemployment is close to the national average. They said it was
around 5.7 percent, and they were trying to attract people into jobcreating activities to lower their unemployment rate because--even
though the rate is at the national average--it is quite high for this
region of the country as far as they are concerned. So I thought,
well, if they are successful in lowering the unemployment rate in
Toledo we will have to lay off some people in Dayton or Columbus, or
else we are going to have too low unemployment and somehow this is
going to influence the purchasing power of money.
People that I listen to about what is going on around the
District usually perceive the problems to be in somebody else's part
of the country. Yes, auto sales have fallen, but that is not
affecting the production of cars here and so they feel employment is
very good and our area is immune to whatever is happening in Tennessee
or wherever. The steel people, similar to what Mike Moskow reported,
are experiencing very strong demand but also are planning a lot of
additional capacity, especially the mini mills that will come on
stream over the next couple of years. One of our directors said that
earlier this year he had been looking for a 3 to 5 percent increase in
posted steel prices on July 1. He said that will not take place.
Even if the steel mills posted the increase, they would not be able to
get it, so there is not going to be another steel price increase.
Builders report that residential construction is above where it was at
this time last year. Nonresidential construction is considerably
above where it was before, so the investment side of the economy still
In
looks quite good to us. Agriculture is a different story, though.
particular, there are a lot of concerns about grains.
It is reported
that because of sharply higher fertilizer costs, fuel costs, and

-23-

5/23/95

interest rates, average production costs this year for the corn crop
may be about 10 percent higher than a year ago, while prices right now
are about 10 percent lower. So, farmers plan to make that up on
volume once it stops raining.
Turning to the national economy, I have a lot of trouble with
the rhetoric about a soft landing. If all the commentary that we see
in the press is going to be in terms of an airplane analogy, I wish
they would talk about leveling off at cruising altitude. That's
because I think a landing should not be the objective at all to the
majority of the American public; continuing to fly ought to be the
objective. Since I have a general view that a market economy tends to
allocate its resources to their best uses in the absence of some real
shocks or perverse policies, when I think about where the economy
might stabilize in terms of growth rates I try to think in terms of
what is going to prevent it--whether monetary policy, fiscal policy,
oil shocks, or something else. The one we are concerned with, of
course, is monetary policy. So, I ask myself whether I believe that
what I see in the Greenbook is at least consistent, whether or not I
think it is right. And I have trouble with the assumptions about the
interest rate structure, both the level of the funds rate and the rise
in bond yields, and the associated growth rates of nominal GDP, real
output, and all the component parts. I don't know which one of those
is wrong, but I think that one of them is.
Either the interest rate
structure is too high or the forecast of output and inflation that the
staff is presenting is too low, and at some point we are going to have
to reconcile those--raise our assumptions about output and inflation
or accept the idea that a lower structure of interest rates is going
to be consistent with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we are in a
classic wait-and-see period here. The expansion is obviously slowing
and there are a lot of factors, which have been well aired here this
morning, that could take the economy in the direction of either
greater near-term or longer-term weakness or strength. It is just too
early right now to be making firm judgments about what the economy is
going to look like over the forecast period. In the near term, it
would seem to me that the inventory cycle and how that plays out is
the dominant factor. If final sales hold up, it is hard for me to see
how inventories are going to be a terribly big problem. Inventorysales ratios overall are still modest.
I think there are good reasons
to believe that final sales will hold up and maybe rebound some. We
have the wealth effects from the stock and bond markets. Confidence
is still high. Long rates are down and that should help housing and
maybe cars to rebound. Those tax refunds that were delayed should
kick in here at a very opportune time.
And particularly if that plays
out well, it seems to me that the out-period risks continue to be
largely on the high side. That has been stated in a number of
contexts by several people who have spoken already, and I am still
very much in that camp. So, I think we are some distance away--I am
not sure how far, of course--from a decision point. But in my view we
are at least one meeting, maybe a number of meetings away. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

5/23/95

-24-

MS. PHILLIPS. The predicted slowdown is well under way. It
seems to be pretty widespread, led by housing and consumer durables.
Business investment is likely to be off in 1995 relative to 1994, but
still strong enough to provide a reasonable cushion during this
slowdown period. It appears that only the auto manufacturers have
been somewhat surprised by the slowdown and that is even more
surprising, given the fact that it was probably one of the best
forecast slowdowns that we have had in a long time. The inventory
adjustment, which may be largely an auto phenomenon, may well cause
the second-quarter slowdown to be deeper than would qualify us for a
perfect soft landing or a perfect "riding off into the horizon" at
some specified altitude.
The market side seems to be consistent with a sustainable
growth outlook. The dollar has rallied; the yield curve has flattened
out rather nicely; and long-term rates have declined, partly I hope
due to lowered inflation expectations. But there is also a fair
amount of attention being paid to the deficit reduction efforts that
are under way. I think that the short-term rate declines are probably
reversing the overshooting that occurred when the general sentiment
was that we were going to be tightening policy. Stock prices
generally are up this year but so are earnings, and price-earnings
ratios are not dramatically out of line with historical averages.
Several people have cited the positive benefits of the wealth effect
from both the stock market and perhaps even from the bond market. I
think these market adjustments, given the shocks that have occurred in
the markets in the last couple of years, pretty well demonstrate the
resilience of the markets. Banks and other lenders appear to be able
to support growth as needed, so I don't think we are looking at a
bottleneck with respect to the availability of credit.
On the price side, cyclical pressures clearly are showing
through in the core CPI now, but I don't think we have a firm
indication that this is a permanent ratcheting up. We have had some
easing off with respect to capacity utilization recently, both in
labor and product markets. It doesn't appear that, at least for the
moment, wage pressures are consistently building, but I do think we
need to exercise a fair amount of vigilance with respect to inflation.
Any time we have rising inflation, we have to be wary as to whether we
are facing a temporary cyclical situation or whether we are seeing the
buildup of a permanently higher inflation rate.
In sum, now that the slowdown is under way, it seems to me
that the risks to the economy are a bit better balanced than they were
earlier. There are some wild cards in the outlook, and several people
have mentioned a number of them. One that I would point to is whether
some deficit reduction is going to be enacted into law. And if it is,
who is going to be affected and by how much? I don't believe we have
adequately built that into our projections. Nor do I think we have
adequately factored in the potential trade war with Japan, whatever
that may mean. On a not unrelated factor, we have had a shock to the
dollar. How that is going to play out in the U.S. economy has yet to
be seen. So I agree with Mike Kelley. We seem to be in a wait-andsee posture at this point. The Committee is going to have to continue
to assess whether some of these wild cards are going to affect the
delicate balance that currently seems to be moving us toward a soft
landing, notably how this inventory imbalance will play itself out.
So, we have a period of sharp vigilance ahead.

-25-

5/23/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think I am going to be a
minority here. Two things concern me, one of which has not been
mentioned at all and that is credit conditions.
It was pointed out
that there has been a lot of easing of credit terms. At some point
that is going to stop. Having arrived here at a very scary time in
1991, I am getting a little nervous that we may be setting ourselves
up for another pro-cyclical move in our credit terms that might end up
exacerbating the next business cycle. Our surveys, for example, are
all saying that credit terms are easing. In the last month I must
have had four delegations of bankers through my office complaining not
only that their competitors were easing conditions, but that they were
easing conditions too much. Please stop me from doing it to myself
was their message! That has to be of some concern. I think it also
is showing up in the data. I remember getting briefings shortly after
arriving here to the effect that never again in this millenium would
another office building be built in America, and yet cranes are back
on the horizon just 2-1/2 years later. Similarly with household debt,
1.2 billion credit card solicitations were mailed out to the American
people in the first quarter of 1995. That is five for every man,
woman, and child in the country. So, I suppose if I were typical I
would have to say, now that my three-year-old has three cards and my
one-year-old has two, that I should keep accepting new cards. This is
certainly not the kind of environment that is sustainable. I would
point out that the Greenbook forecast for 1996 has a decline in the
saving rate from 1995 in order to sustain the rate of consumption
growth. Furthermore, even the higher 1995 saving rate is not
sufficient to slow the rise in the ratio of installment debt to
personal income, which means that it is going to rise even faster in
1996. Well, at some point that is going to stop; forty-four percent
of all PCE growth last year was financed through installment debt, and
that can't go on forever. At some point either the banks are going to
stop it themselves or we are going to stop it when, for example, we
have a profits downturn or a cash flow downturn and suddenly all these
backward-looking assumptions our examiners make about the quality of
the balance sheet begin to go in reverse. I don't know when that is
going to happen, but I know it is going to exacerbate the downturn
when it comes.
Second, on fiscal policy, we also have to be a bit forwardlooking and make the call. The question that Mike raised is whether
or not Congress will follow through or whether there will be some
moderation in the fiscal policy actions. We can make a bet either
way. There are four reasons why I think Congress is going to follow
through. The first has to do with the decision to take on Medicare.
All the campaign ads attacking the incumbents are already made for
1996. The advocates of Medicare cuts have heard the charge that old
people will be pulled out of their sick beds and tossed onto the curb
and everything else.
These members of Congress already know that they
are going to face that kind of attack, so they may as well get some
pluses out of this situation. The only pluses they can get are to
save the Medicare system from default and reduce the budget deficit.
There is no point in stopping now because they already have incurred
the political cost.
Second, I think the party discipline which was
expected to break down on hard votes has not done so.
There were 237
votes in the House for the reconciliation bill--they lost 5
Republicans and gained 12 Democrats on the vote. Party discipline is

5/23/95

-26-

not breaking down and won't this year. Third, in the power structure
between the Congress and the Executive Branch, we have a return to
what Madison had in mind when he envisioned a spendthrift king being
checked by the taxpayers' representatives in the legislature. That
was the model for most of the republic's history. It was reversed
legislatively in the 1974 Budget Act, and the picture we all have now
concerning how compromises are struck is based on the last 20 years.
In fact, the default option in fiscal policy is zero. The President
who wants to spend more than the Congress does not have a credible
veto threat because the default option will produce less than he wants
to spend. That is going to become clear as we move through the 12
appropriations bills this fall.
In the end, it is going to be
Congress that is going to pass a reconciliation bill. Such a bill
can't be filibustered and the President will have the choice of
shutting down the entire government or signing the reconciliation
bill. Every president has bowed in the past and presidents will
continue to bow to the more powerful position in negotiations that
Congress has. Finally, there is a temptation to lock these changes in
place. If the Medicare cuts are enacted, then point-of-order rules
will require that any increase in spending be paid for. And if you
want to enact reforms that are going to survive, and arguably that is
what some of the leadership wants to do, then the time to put those
changes in is now.
Logically, I don't understand how the process is not going to
end up with a substantial fiscal contraction in 1996. Frankly, I
think the yield curve is indicating that that is the expectation. If
it is true that we are not going to have growth in the low 2's but
growth in the mid 1's--there is a real risk in waiting to find out,
assuming the lags in monetary policy remain what they have been in
this cycle. If we wait, say, until the autumn, our rate reductions
would have their effects about the time that the second round of
fiscal reductions would hit in the fiscal 1997 budget. That is
certainly a risk. There also is a risk in moving now because we are
going to see oscillations in the likelihood of fiscal policy restraint
actually passing. I don't think we want to get involved in that game.
So, we have a tough call to make.
On net, I think that monetary policy is probably a little
tighter than we want it to be, but our regulatory policy is a little
easier than we want it to be. What I am afraid we are setting
ourselves up for is another situation where we reverse monetary
policy, and end up with too easy a monetary policy and too tight a
regulatory policy. We end up with the pushing-on-a-string phenomenon
we saw during 1991 and 1992. I would urge earlier action in both
areas to avoid that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. As I evaluate the most recent set of economic
data, I remain quite optimistic that we will achieve the soft landing
projected in the Greenbook, with growth slowing below trend during
1995 and rising back toward trend in 1996, and with inflation
remaining contained during the process. Historically, of course, soft
landings have rarely been achieved, but this time it seems to me that
the preconditions are better. First, any overshoot of potential
output that has occurred thus far is relatively small in contrast to
past cycles. Second, inflation has remained remarkably well

5/23/95

contained. Third, inflationary
we now have clear evidence of a
there is little evidence of any
automobile and housing sectors,
possibility of a hard landing.

-27-

expectations have not risen. Fourth,
significant slowdown under way, but
inventory overhang outside the
and I think that limits the

One of the favorable factors affecting the outlook is that,
in the words of the Greenbook, "labor costs remain under remarkable
Increases in compensation are running significantly below
restraint."
forecasts based on econometric wage equations. Benefit cost increases
have slowed substantially, and there has been no offset, at least thus
In recognition of that
far, in the form of higher wages and salaries.
fact, the Greenbook has revised downward its forecast of hourly
compensation growth. But with core inflation behaving about as
expected, thus far at least, the Greenbook forecast of core inflation
has been revised downward by less. That strikes me as a reasonable
assumption for the short run, but if the compensation surprise
persists over the longer run, it is quite likely that we will see
compensation restraint showing through to restraint in core inflation,
and we will end up with a slightly more favorable inflation trend as
well. In that sense, I think the forecast contains some downward
risks on the inflation side, but it is really too soon to know whether
this compensation surprise will turn out to be transitory or
If it is permanent, that would imply a decline in the
permanent.
natural rate of unemployment. At a minimum, the economy is in effect
experiencing a favorable supply shock, which is quite welcome in a
period where the economy may have overshot potential output and there
is continuing pressure from the prices of intermediate materials and
imports.
As I evaluate the risks in the forecast with respect to real
GDP growth, they seem to me to be roughly balanced at the present
time.
I do have a few concerns on the down side. First, I am
concerned about the possibility, which Governor Lindsey emphasized,
that the personal saving rate may not decline as much from its current
first-quarter level of 5.1 or 5.2 percent as the Greenbook assumes,
and hence that PCE growth may be less strong. Over the last two
years, personal consumption expenditures have been buoyed by strong
spending on durable goods. In line with the Greenbook, I think it is
quite likely that the growth of spending on durables will slow
substantially because a significant portion of the earlier spending
probably went to satisfy pent-up demand. Now, it seems natural to
expect the personal saving rate as measured in the national income and
product accounts, which include expenditures on durables, to rise when
spending on durables is weak and to fall when spending on durables is
strong simply because durable goods provide a flow of services over a
long time horizon and are thus a form of savings from the households'
perspective. In fact, this is the assumption that is embodied in the
Board's MPS model. Now, the Greenbook assumes that the NIPA personal
saving rate will decline, as Governor Lindsey mentioned, to 4.4 or 4.5
percent in 1996, and that is a level somewhat above its 4.1 percent
average in 1993 and 1994 when consumption of durables was so strong.
But it is well below its 5-1/4 percent average for 1991 and 1992.
My
concern is that that assumption may be too optimistic, and since
consumption is such a large fraction of total expenditures, an error
here can have significant repercussions for the forecast.

5/23/95

-28-

A second downside risk comes from the potential spillover
effects of the inventory adjustment currently under way in the
automobile sector, which is forecast to depress real GDP growth in the
current and subsequent quarters.
I don't want to quarrel with the
Greenbook analysis here; it is just that I always worry that there is
a possibility of significant repercussions through the multiplier if
households cut consumption in response to a decline in income and
through the accelerator process if investment slows down in response
to a decline in the growth rate of real GDP, especially at a time when
capacity constraints are easing. I am simply saying that these
spillovers could turn out to be greater than the Greenbook assumes.
Governor Lindsey has done an excellent job of describing the risks
from fiscal policy, and I share his concerns.
Of course, there are also risks on the up side. As Vice
Chairman McDonough noted, these work through interest rates, exchange
rates, and the stock market. The Greenbook assumes that the bond
market rally is overdone and that a portion of the decline in
intermediate- and long-term bond yields will be reversed. If this
assumption proves false, it is conceivable that interest-sensitive
sectors will rebound, turning a slowdown into a pause.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I'll be mercifully brief as the last speaker.
Except for a few details, one of which I mentioned about capacity
utilization and a few more which I will mention in a moment, I think
the Greenbook forecast is pretty reasonable both on the real and the
nominal fronts.
I would shade it a bit lower on real growth in the
near term, more like DRI's forecast than the Greenbook forecast,
reflecting my view that in the short term the downside risks exceed
the upside risks.
I say that without a great deal of conviction; I
don't want to exaggerate the asymmetry that I see. I thought I felt
the same way at the last meeting and, in reviewing the transcript for
that meeting, I found that that is what I did say then. Between that
meeting and this meeting, the annual growth rates in the Greenbook for
the second and third quarters of 1995 were both written down by an
average of 1/2 percentage point and my prediction of what will happen
between now and the next Greenbook is a further reduction of that
order of magnitude.
It has occurred to me that I could probably make
money by forecasting a bigger slowdown when the Greenbook is
forecasting a slowdown, and forecasting a bigger acceleration when the
Greenbook is forecasting an acceleration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is true of anyone's forecast!

MR. BLINDER. That was the next sentence out of my mouth!
[Laughter]
If it is not true of the Greenbook, it is an exception to
the rule.
There are a number of reasons for this tendency of
forecasts to underestimate changes.
I mentioned this last time, and I
am not going to go into any detail here, but a lot of those reasons
could be summarized by saying that people underestimate multiplieraccelerator interactions. Janet Yellen mentioned several such
instances. As I look across the components, I can find an explanation
having to do with consumption, that is, with saving rates, with
investment accelerators, with government spending, with fiscal policy
--about which I will have one minute's worth to say in a moment--and
with net exports as well.
It also has to do with the incredible

-29-

5/23/95

smoothness of the inventory cycle in the Greenbook, something that has
not been remarked about. Basically, the level of inventory investment
in the Greenbook simply converges to what is essentially a steady
state without ever overshooting. That would be a first if it should
happen. So, I think the multiplier-accelerator interaction is likely
to be underestimated in the forecast, not by a huge amount, but
somewhat.
As we discussed yesterday around the Board table, the
treatment of the Mexico shock as a one-quarter event is extremely
I think that Mexico will be a drag on our
optimistic, as I see it.
exports for longer than is built into this forecast. Finally, echoing
what Governor Lindsey just said, though not quite as strongly and
certainly not in as much detail, I now think that the likelihood is
for a bigger fiscal contraction than is built into the Greenbook
forecast. I was extremely skeptical about this for a long time. But
with the passage of the budget resolutions in both houses of Congress
and, as Larry said, with the hits having been taken and with the
Republican leadership very, very committed--you can either put this as
having dug themselves into a big hole or put themselves on a nice
platform--I think the prospects for a bigger fiscal contraction are
much more likely than they were a few months ago.
I want to note that
we are not talking about something that is very far into the future.
This fiscal contraction starts late this year. On the other hand, as
has been remarked, what has already happened to the bond market, the
stock market, and the exchange rate is going to be supporting the
economy later in the year. In my view, this does not add up to a
But I think it will not be quite as soft
crash landing by any means.
as in the Greenbook. I would say it is likely to be a bumpy landing
but not bumpy enough to break the landing gear.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

With that, we will go to coffee.
COFFEE BREAK

MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, is the price index that Taylor uses
the fixed weight or the implicit deflator?
MR. KOHN.

I think it is the implicit deflator.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, when the GDP figures are revised,
his normative funds rate will go up?
MR. KOHN.

I would suppose so.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that is, do you?

You don't know what the dimension of

MR. KOHN. If you use the implicit deflator in his rule, you
come out with a federal funds rate around 4-1/4 percent now. If you
use the CPI rather than the implicit deflator, you are around 5-3/4
percent.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes, it is closer to 6.

-30-

5/23/95

MR. KOHN. But using the CPI in the equation for earlier
years does not track Committee actions as well as using the deflator.
In particular, by persisting at a higher level through the 1991-1993
period, the CPI predicts a much higher federal funds rate than the
Committee actually adopted.
CHAIRMAN
that of using his
last eight years,
fallacious in the

GREENSPAN. The crucial question that you raise is
equation to capture what we were deciding over the
and I suggest to you that that may be a little
sense that it can be misspecified by the choice of

variables.

MR. BLINDER. Just an elementary observation:
It does not
make a lot of sense to take the same equation with the same intercept
and the same coefficients and then change the right hand variable to
see how it does. If you had used a different inflation index over the
eight years, you would have had a different rule.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
estimated.

That is exactly right.

Except that, Governor Blinder, this rule was not

MR. BLINDER.

Right.

MR. KOHN. He just did something that seemed to make sense
and things fell out. But you are right, if you were to estimate it,
obviously it would come out somewhat differently.
MR. BLINDER.

For both problems.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? If not, I don't
have much to add to what has been said in recent meetings because, in
fact, the economy is moving pretty much as expected. If you make the
adjustment that Governor Blinder requires, namely that forecasts are
always a moving average of actual events and they smooth out the real
world, that is one of the reasons I recall saying back in our late
January-early February meeting that one of the quarters in this first
half was going to surprise us on the down side. All I was doing was
using the Blinder rule and it always works.
MR. BLINDER.
[Laughter]

It never tells you which quarter, though!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it never is very helpful in that
sense. I think we have to look at this particular outlook in terms of
what is engendering the softening. That softening is very clearly the
result of an inventory backup, which could be a little stronger than
we may expect. I think manufacturing may have a few more months,
maybe three or so, of a lot more weakness than is implicit in our
forecast. The C&I loan figures may be pointing to a slowdown, but I
suspect that we are going to find that the inventory reduction has
been slower than we were expecting and that a goodly part of that was
an unintended inventory backup. That means that people have not yet
come to grips with the squeeze down to a significantly lower rate of
inventory investment. As a consequence, I suspect that the third
quarter is going to be softer than is projected in the Greenbook.
Were it not for the fact that inventory levels, no matter how we

5/23/95

-31-

measure them, remain quite low, I would say the concern that a number
of you have expressed with respect to the potential for reduced
inventory investment working its way through the income structure and
inducing a weaker consumption pattern in a historically typical way
would be something that we ought to be concerned about. But no matter
how we look at the numbers, the levels just remain too low for the
inventory sector to be a matter of grave concern. And because other
sectors of the economy such as capital goods and exports, and I might
add homebuilding, are showing signs of sustainability, we don't have
the conditions that would induce the underlying system to crack at
this particular stage.
The reason I asked Mike Prell earlier about the size of the
gap between orders and shipments is that I suspect that we are going
to see new orders coming down in capital goods markets. The only
question is whether they will drop far enough to breach the shipments
level and turn unfilled orders down. I think that is a mixed call at
this stage, but because there is so much of a gap there, we have
leeway for fairly significant short-term weakening. I must say that I
don't expect all that much weakening in the expansion, largely because
the profit picture still looks increasingly supportive. That is, as
the Greenbook indicates, the earnings surprises on the up side are
still 2 to 1--profits are coming in more favorably twice as often as
unfavorably. The first-quarter profit numbers that were published are
just gangbusters and profit margins are still rising. This is really
quite extraordinary, given the extent of the slowdown that is involved
here. What history tells us is that we just don't get a capital goods
contraction in the context of rising profit margins, rising stock
prices, and long-term interest rates that tend to be falling. That
may occur--it undoubtedly will at a later stage of the expansion. The
business cycle is by no means dead, but it just does not make any
sense in an historical context to presume that we will be looking at
significantly weaker capital spending. Certainly, nonresidential
building continues to strengthen and we are getting, as many of you
have indicated, a gradual, underlying healing of that problem.
Indeed, the issue may be more what Governor Lindsey is concerned
about:
There may be too much nonresidential construction going on
already or at least showing signs of being overdone, and I must say I
have a certain sympathy for that kind of concern.
We did get a surprising statistic from the mortgage bankers
last week. I don't know whether to believe it or not, but the weekly
seasonally adjusted figure on home purchases as reported by the
mortgage bankers spiked sharply upward, and it does not look like a
seasonal adjustment problem because the unadjusted number was the
highest that we have seen in a very long time. Moreover, all the
qualitative evidence--the traffic, the intentions to buy, the consumer
confidence elements associated with housing--is in the direction of a
rise in housing activity. The reason starts are weak is that we have
a very heavy overhang of unsold homes through which the market has to
work its way. The underlying quality of this market is pretty sound.
In sum, there is no evidence of a cumulative decline in the
economy. We have a very odd problem in the published inventory data,
but we also have one in the unpublished data that involves stock
adjustment inventories. In the housing industry inventories of unsold
homes will continue to hold activity down. In the motor vehicles area
I think, as President Moskow indicated, that the May data on sales

-32-

5/23/95

look somewhat stronger at this stage than those for April, although by
no means as strong as they have been. Nor, with all the weakness that
we are seeing, do the initial claims for unemployment insurance
suggest that this economy is in a continuous weakening phase. The
evidence does suggest that there are going to be a lot more surprises
on the down side in the very short run than we may be prepared for.
The debt issue that Governor Lindsey raises is an interesting
one, and I would only respond by suggesting that part of the problem
with this big increase in installment credit, which really is
outsized, is a significant displacement coming from the mortgage
market. Up until fairly recently, a rather substantial amount of
indirect financing for consumer durables has come from the turnover of
existing homes. That turnover has induced large realized capital
gains that have been financed in the mortgage market.
Those funds are
going disproportionately into the financing of consumer durables. The
slowness of the mortgage market in relation to the level of existing
home sales is suggestive of the fact that less of that is going on,
and it may be that--l-1/2 billion credit card solicitations--is that
what you said?
MR. LINDSEY.

1.2 billion in the first quarter.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you get the number?
MR. LINDSEY.

Where did

The bankers gave it to me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Is that an official figure?

No kidding!

That is scary!

It is scary!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Every dog and cat and moose has a credit
card! I think that part of the problem is merely a shift in the form
of financing, but I don't think we can look at those figures without
some concern. I do agree that the easing of credit terms is a
potential problem down the road. I say that even though, according to
the bankers, credit terms are still tighter than they were in the late
1980s; but that is scarcely the standard that one should employ, as I
think one of our colleagues indicated the other day.
I would say that there is a bigger problem down the road
related to all of this.
If in fact the economy tracks the Greenbook
forecast, it is inconceivable in my judgment that it will continue
doing so for an extended period. That is because if this happens, the
stock market is going to go straight up and then straight down. And
on the down side there will be an awful lot of demand implosion. So,
if this economy works as well as the Greenbook suggests, the really
serious problem that we will have in setting monetary policy, which we
are going to have to question ourselves on, will be how we should
respond to asset price bubbles. We know how to respond to product
price inflation and the instability that is associated with that. You
may recall that when we moved in February 1994, one of the reasons was
Little did we know that
that an asset price bubble was building up.
it was much bigger than we had imagined and that it was more in bonds
than in stocks. In retrospect, it was terribly fortunate that that
bubble got pricked at the appropriate time. I am not sure that one
can make a forecast that is as stable as the one in the Greenbook,

-33-

5/23/95

because implicit in such a forecast, given human nature, are actions
that will probably upset it and that concerns me.
So, one of the reasons why the real world is not very apt to
look like the Greenbook is that the way the real world works is not
like "that" but more something like "this." [Secretary's note: The
Chairman made a hand gesture indicating a smooth path when he said
The only problem is
"that" and an uneven path when he said "this."]
that we don't know what "this" is until after the fact. So, all
forecasters can do is to draw straight lines through things. The
disequilibrium that is implicit in this forecast is an asset price
bubble, and I am not sure at this stage that we know how or by what
means we ought to be responding to that, and whether we dare. There
is always the question, if we make a preemptive strike against an
asset bubble, of whether we could blow the economy out of the water in
the process. So, it is a slightly nervous-making type of situation.
I almost hope that the economy will be a little less tranquil,
buoyant, and pleasant because the end result of that is not terribly
helpful.
On the product price inflation side, I think what we are
looking at here is strictly the expected slowdown in productivity that
occurs as a consequence of fixed costs not being spread over the
aggregate volumes that we have seen. As unit labor costs rise
accordingly, we will be looking inevitably at the beginning of a
decline in profit margins but not enough of a decline to prevent final
prices from accelerating modestly. However, that is a cyclical
phenomenon and not one that I would be terribly concerned about. I am
certainly not as concerned about that as I would be about an asset
price bubble, which is down the road, granted, but still something to
be concerned about.
Fortunately, as I see it in the short run, none of this is
relevant!
[Laughter]
We can, as I see it, just do "B" symmetric and
wait until the next meeting. I think it is very unlikely that the
next meeting is going to be one where we are going to be confronted
with an economic expansion that is picking up, because my suspicion
is--I don't know whether I'd pick the specific timing that Governor
Blinder did--that the rate of expansion is going to be shading down a
little in the period immediately ahead. But I would not expect the
slowing to be enough to undercut the fairly solid underlying status of
this recovery for a while, perhaps a good while yet. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your
recommendation for "B" symmetric.
I think that the last time we were,
somewhat appropriately, more concerned about inflation than we need be
now, even though I think we must stay alert. And therefore the "B"
symmetric resolution is the appropriate one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. I, too, am in agreement with your proposal,
Mr. Chairman. There are a couple of things that I think we need to be
concerned about.
First, where are the uncertainties? You have talked
a bit about that. And secondly, what are the costs of being wrong in
either direction even if the uncertainties are more or less balanced?
At this point, I think the risks are reasonably balanced. But
inflation could be higher than the Greenbook projects, and my own

5/23/95

-34-

assessment is that the costs of being wrong on that side are a little
higher than the costs of being wrong on the other side. You indicated
that you are inclined to the view that the uptick in inflation is
cyclical; other people have mentioned that as well.
I am concerned
about the possibility that it is not necessarily all cyclical.
If it
isn't--and the Greenbook has built in an estimated 1/2 point increase
in the core CPI rate in 1996 versus 1994--even recognizing that 1994
was pretty low, I keep asking myself whether we should be satisfied
with that and whether that kind of outcome is something to be sanguine
about going forward. Are we certain enough that this is cyclical and
not some uptick in the trend, or is it potentially an uptick in the
trend if in fact we are experiencing a pause rather than a more
permanent downturn in the growth of demand?
So, I agree with your
comments; I agree with your proposal. I think I am just a little
more nervous about the inflation prospects.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The way I put it is that I am more
nervous about the asset bubble than I am about product prices. That
is not to say that I would disagree with you. There may be more than
a cyclical element in here that we won't know about until after the
fact.
I think most of it-MS. MINEHAN.

Is cyclical.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is cyclical, but such inflation is not
acceptable as far as I am concerned. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I think the risks are somewhat unbalanced to the
down side, and I think the recent performance of the economy would
argue for some easing today, but the markets have already done that,
both interest rates and the exchange market. I think they already are
providing some support for the economy. I agree with your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. I certainly agree with your recommendation,
Mr. Chairman. When I made my economic statement, I pointed out that
we face two risks currently--a continuing longer-term inflation risk
but also a not inconsequential possibility that the current weakness
in the economy may cumulate. If the latter situation were in fact to
materialize--again that is not what I think is going to happen but,
who knows, it certainly could in the months ahead--it would be very
nice for us to be in a position to react to that quickly and promptly.
That would be a preemptive move against recession which would be the
flip side of the preemptive move we made against inflation, I think
with some success, last year. The problem, of course, is credibility.
If we were to take an action that was in any way seen as an aggressive
easing move, that could do great damage to the credibility that we
have built up over a long period of time at some cost. That is why I
think it would be very nice if we could find some longer-term nominal
anchor for monetary policy in order to impress our longer-term
strategic goal more firmly in the public mind. We had a discussion of
this a couple of meetings ago. At that time I said that I thought it
would be nice if we were to make an explicit announcement that we were
adopting the language of the Neal Amendment as our longer-term
objective. I am less concerned, though, about what the form of the
anchor would be than that we do something to tie that down precisely

-35-

5/23/95

so that we can deal with an increase in the downside risk--should that
materialize--flexibly and effectively without giving up all of the
gains we have made on the credibility side in recent years.
In any
case, I would hope that when we get to the July meeting and we have
our usual discussion of longer-term goals, we might give that point
some attention.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

I support "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation. I
agree that in the short term the risks seem reasonably well balanced,
although I share the same views as President Minehan about emphasizing
the possibility that inflation may be a little higher than our
forecast in the shorter term. I would suggest, however, that if we in
fact are somewhat agreed about the direction that we would like to see
the rate of inflation go in the longer term, it will make us rather
cautious in moving toward lower rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to be fairly
happy with the course of monetary policy over the last year and the
results that it has achieved in the economy. There obviously are
The concerns that you point
uncertainties surrounding the forecast.
to with respect to the asset price bubble are real, but I think that
those are down the road as you have indicated. We have the luxury for
a change of sitting back and letting events unfold a little longer
before we have to make a move. So, I support your recommendation of a
"B" symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I think the wisdom of your recommendation is
evident, and I'll adopt Bob McTeer's words as my own.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Governor Kelley.

Mr. Chairman, I support "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I support "B" symmetric as well.
I am concerned about the asset bubble problem you mentioned. I think
it is a real one down the road. We may see some signs of an increase
in the inflation rate in coming months, but at this point it appears
that that increase will be transitory. There is some danger of giving
up ground on our progress toward price stability, so I think it
clearly would be inappropriate to respond too hastily to any signs of
weakening in real activity. But in light of the evenly balanced risks
that I see at this point, the current stance of monetary policy is
appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

-36-

5/23/95

MS. PHILLIPS. I agree with "B" symmetric. It seems to me
that this is a time to keep the monetary policy powder dry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I agree with "B" symmetric. I do
have concerns, as I mentioned earlier, that the inflation may be more
than cyclical, and I agree that it is wise to wait and see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I, too, agree with "B" symmetric. The only
comment I would add is that when I submitted my Humphrey-Hawkins
numbers earlier this year, I was relatively negative about the
inflation outlook, at least for this year. Unfortunately, nothing has
happened to change my view about that. On the other hand, looking at
all the incoming information on the economy, I am marginally more
confident that this may turn out to be a temporary acceleration in the
core CPI, and I don't see any reason to take action at this juncture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal for "B"
symmetric. I think that an unchanged funds rate is warranted given
the Greenbook forecast with risks roughly balanced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JORDAN.

President Jordan.

I agree with no change at this meeting.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I favor "B" symmetric as well, Alan. I think
our focus has to be on pursuing a policy that contains current
inflationary pressures and is aimed at making progress toward longerterm price stability. I am not, as you know, a great fan of short-run
fine-tuning. I think we are seeing a slowdown from a nonsustainable
rate of growth, and we should not be trying to fine-tune in those
circumstances. We may have a moderately tight monetary policy, but
that is appropriate in view of the tremendous stimulus that took place
in 1991 through 1993.
The other comment I would make, and we heard
some commentary on this issue today, is that any reaction to fiscal
policy restraint, certainly any reaction to the prospect of it, is
very dangerous. Even if we do get some fiscal restraint, I would
argue that the best thing monetary policy can do is to provide a
stable price backdrop against which the real adjustments that need to
take place in that event can occur most effectively.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Governor Lindsey.

I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would you read the directive.

MR. BERNARD. The directive is on page 15 of the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions.
In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for

-37-

5/23/95

price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
MR. LINDSEY.

I think you mean "might."

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is symmetric.

MR. BERNARD.

I used "would" for both.

MS. MINEHAN.

Somewhat or slightly?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. MINEHAN.

It doesn't matter.

So we use "somewhat" for both.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

As long as they are the same.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As long as they are the same for both.
Do we usually use "would" when the directive is symmetric?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MS. MINEHAN.
MR. BERNARD.
most of the time.

Yes.

Yes.
There have been exceptions, but "would" is used

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we should use "would."
voting on "B" symmetric.
Call the roll.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

We are

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is the multiple day
meeting, July 5th and 6th.
I gather it will be held in Dining Room
"E" because we are going to be renovating this room. This is as early
as we have ended a meeting in quite a while.
[Secretary's note: The
meeting ended at 12:15 p.m.]
END OF MEETING

