Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 19,

1995

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 19,
PRESENT:

1995, at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms .
Ms .

McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
Lindsey
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus and Parry, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and
San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Guynn, President elect, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta
Mr.

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum. Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman. Economist

Ms. Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Lindsey,
Mishkin, Promisel. Siegman, Slifman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Ramm, 1/ Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Lang, Rosenblum, and
and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve
Philadelphia, Dallas, and
Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,
Cleveland,
respectively
Ms. Rosenbaum, Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Ms. Perelmuter, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Evans, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago

1.

Did not attend portion of meeting covering the monetary policy
discussion.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
December 19, 1995
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
welcome Jack Guynn.
MR. GUYNN.

On behalf of all of us, I want to

Thank you very much.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
no introduction.

Jack is a veteran of the Fed who needs

To start off, would somebody like to move the minutes for the
November 15 meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We need acceptance
of the Report of Examination of the System Open Market Account. It
has been distributed. Any questions? If not, would somebody like to
move it?
SEVERAL.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

I now call on Peter

Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin
with the Mexican swap renewal before turning to the market reports.
All of this is summarized on the one-page outline of my report that
[Statement--see Appendix.]
you have before you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

Yes, Larry.

MR. LINDSEY. Peter, would you refresh my memory as to why we
increased the Mexican swap line from $1-1/2 to $3 billion last
February 1?
MR. FISHER.

That was part of the package.

MR. TRUMAN. Remember, there was a first phase whereby the
Committee initially activated the existing $3 billion. Then, at the
end of December 1994, there was an effort to deal with this problem in
what I sometimes call the "old fashioned" way by getting banks
together and so on. The Committee approved a "temporary" swap line of
$1.5 billion in conjunction with the arrangement that included $5
billion provided by the BIS. Then, the Committee went up to the $3
billion temporary line in the context of the President's second
program.
MR. LINDSEY.

But we are now getting out of the second

program?
MR. TRUMAN.

Right.

MR. LINDSEY. So, why are we not taking our level of
commitment back down to $1-1/2 billion?

12/19/95

MR. TRUMAN.
regular program.

The original $3 billion was associated with the

MR. FISHER. There are two $3 billion swap arrangements;
think of it that way. There is the basic $3 billion, which was what
we already had in place. Then we added a supplemental one last
December of $1.5 billion, which was increased to $3 billion on
February 1. It's just a coincidence that it was $3 billion. Now, we
are letting that whole supplemental arrangement expire, and we are
going back to the original, regular $3 billion.
MR. TRUMAN. The other part of the confusion is that the
Treasury also has a $3 billion swap line with the Mexicans.
MR. FISHER.

There are lots of threes.

MR. TRUMAN.

Too many threes around here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions for Peter?

Cathy.

MS. MINEHAN. Just a couple of factual questions:
The $650
million is from the regular swap line or from the temporary one that
was part of the program to help Mexico last year?
MR. FISHER. It's drawn under the regular swap line. They
never drew enough to get into the supplemental or temporary $3
billion.
MS. MINEHAN. Is it a function of our regular swap program
that we are repaid by the Department of the Treasury?
MR. TRUMAN. One of the conditions for the Committee's
approval of the Mexican drawings was that we would be repaid either
way--that is, by the Mexicans or by the U.S. Treasury.
MS. MINEHAN. The Treasury would repay us, if necessary,
under either program on any part of the $6 billion?
MR. TRUMAN. I think it was just an accounting convenience
that we assigned these drawings to their regular swap line. We could
have done it the other way around; it might have been somewhat more
logical.
MS. MINEHAN. I just wanted to understand that.
Secondly,
the North American Framework Agreement (NAFA) was to provide a forum,
according to footnote 2 in your memo, for more regular consultations
on economic and financial developments. Has that worked?
MR. TRUMAN. My view is that it has worked, though maybe not
as well as it should have. In particular, there have been stepped up
consultations at all levels among all three countries, some bilateral
and some trilateral. I think in fact one of the most useful things
that was done--the only thing I think we did right--was that Peter
arranged to have a weekly conference call with the Canadians and the
Mexicans, which allows us to do a once-a-week update of economic and
financial conditions in the three countries. That regular weekly call
has meant that it is therefore much easier to have ad hoc contacts.
So, that is one element that has come out of this process.

12/19/95

MS. MINEHAN. Combining that with the additional transparency
that the IMF obtained from the Mexicans in terms of some of their data
reporting, do we feel that we would not have been in the situation
that we seemed to be in earlier in terms of our knowledge of how much
their reserves were being depleted?
MR. TRUMAN. The capacity of central banks to manipulate
their reserves is quite substantial, but even in 1994 I think we had a
pretty good fix on their reserves, though we may not have kept the
Committee as well informed as we should have.
MS. MINEHAN.

It is 1994 that I was getting at.

MR. FISHER. I think you need to separate the question of
whether the market had a good sense of a number of data points from
their balance sheet and macroeconomics and whether we had good
information about their reserves. There were only a very few days in
December 1994 when we were, I think, at a loss and a little anxious
about what their reserve levels were. But I don't think, if you take
1994 as a whole, that we had a sense that we weren't getting a good
level of cooperation and understanding of what their reserve balances
were. That's internally. That's different from the public issue that
I think the IMF was addressing.
MR. TRUMAN. The one thing that has happened since we
circulated Steve Kamin's memo is that they have adopted a new
framework for their monetary policy. This is not a big deal, but they
have adopted more conventional definitions of their domestic assets
and international reserves than they used in the past.
I think this
will facilitate market analysis of their operations.
I don't think it
avoids the possibility that the market may still misinterpret
developments in Mexico, but I think the warning flag is quite
substantial.
It remains true that the capacity for the Mexicans, or
any government, to try to slip things through is still there.
knew.

MS. MINEHAN. I wasn't so concerned about whether the market
I was more concerned about whether we know in a timely way.

MR. TRUMAN. Partly because of these calls that Peter has
arranged and other contacts, we are much more informed than we were.
We can't avoid all surprises.
MS. MINEHAN. A final question:
There is an implication in
your memo that while we will approve this renewal, we won't
necessarily be receptive to letting them use this swap arrangement for
a number of different reasons.
Is that a wrong implication to draw
from this memo?
MR. TRUMAN. I think that's the right implication and
inference, if I may put it that way. I can't speak for the Committee.
We did have a visitor last Friday from the research directorate of the
Bank of Mexico. I went over both the fact that we would not renew the
$650 million drawing and that that was a matter for him to take up
with the United States Treasury. I also told him that the Committee
was going to consider this matter today but that, all things
considered, there was not a lot of FOMC appetite for new Mexican
drawings in 1996. He said that was certainly the basis on which they
were operating. His view is that of only one reasonably important

12/19/95

Mexican official on the subject, but I think he was very forthcoming
on that.
MS. MINEHAN.

So they don't expect to use the swap facility

either.
MR. TRUMAN. That's one of the reasons why I think their
preferred position would be for the Treasury to roll over the two
drawings. They have a $650 million short-term swap outstanding with
the Treasury too, and I think the Mexican position would be that they
would like to roll the two together into a medium-term obligation to
provide themselves a bit of a cushion, given that the door is going to
be closed later in 1996.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

MR. TRUMAN. Certainly that's their position; I think that's
a logical position as well.
MS. MINEHAN.

The sole roadblock is this certification issue?

MR. TRUMAN. I don't know whether that's the sole roadblock,
but that's an issue that we wanted to surface. The staff felt that it
was a little arcane, and I apologize that the memo may not have been
clear. The truth of the matter is that even absent that issue, given
everything else going on, the objective of the program was basically
to get Mexico's financial situation stabilized, and that has been
achieved. Now, whether they will be able to move from that to what
they need to do in terms of growth is a different matter. We can't do
that for them. I think the general attitude is that we have done what
we can.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I have a general question about whether we
are going to look at these swap arrangements in any broad and
organized fashion. I know you have mentioned before and others have
said here that, in the foreign exchange markets in which we operate
today, these arrangements are of questionable usefulness and ought to
be reexamined. I don't think we can single out this one with Mexico.
Are
I think we need to look at all of them together. My question is:
there any plans to do that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The answer is "yes."

MR. MELZER. Okay. Will that involve discussions with
counterparties in general about foreign exchange intervention and the
support facilities?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we should first discuss it
amongst ourselves here before we decide to involve anyone else. The
ideal solution to this obviously anachronistic setup is not
necessarily to abandon all such arrangements because they are being
employed as a means of linking us with other central banks, but to
replace them with something that reflects more relevant considerations
in the market. We would not expand the swap arrangements, but we
would do something different to maintain our relationships

12/19/95

internationally and bring this process up to the latter part of the
20th century rather than the middle part.
MR. MELZER. The other issue that I think is difficult is
that swap lines to developing countries can be troublesome. I know
that we have North American trade considerations. However, as we
learned in this case, what was intended for one purpose in effect
drags us directly or indirectly into what I would characterize as
intermediate- to long-term financing to support debt restructuring. I
don't think that's our role. As I have mentioned before, I think it
potentially raises questions about the independence of a central bank.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am not as worried as you are about the
independence question, but I certainly agree that what we have serves
no economic or financial purpose of which I am aware. President
Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Under the current arrangement, we have an
agreement with the Treasury that they will take us out if the Mexicans
don't pay back the current drawing. I may be mistaken, and this is
just a point of clarification, but I seem to have read or heard
somewhere that if we renew the swap line and if there is a drawing
despite our current intentions, the Treasury could not make a
comparable commitment to take us out in the future on such a drawing
because of some piece of legislation. Is that right?
MR. TRUMAN. As was outlined in the memo, the Treasury is
subject to the certification process of the Mexican Debt Disclosure
Act. In addition, the Treasury appropriation for fiscal year 1996
contains a provision that limits the extent to which they can use the
ESF for operations without Congressional approval. Since they may
take over our portion of the Mexican drawings, that could mean they
would be using the ESF for more than $1 billion and for longer than 60
days.
So, they would be constrained in terms of taking us out of
further Mexican swap drawings. Coming back to President Minehan's
question, that is one of the reasons why it's unlikely that the
Treasury will want to get into this right away once disbursements
under the President's program come to an end. Since they could not be
our partner, we would be less likely to want to do something on our
own than we might have been in the past.
MR. FISHER. I think it's important to keep in mind that we
have not thought of Treasury takeouts as the presumption under which
we have swap lines. It was a presumption under which the Committee
undertook this drawing in the set of circumstances that existed in
January, including the President's program, but reliance on Treasury
takeouts has not been a presumption for the existence of swap lines.
MR. BROADDUS. I am focusing specifically on whether there
could be a Treasury takeout if the current arrangement were continued
and a further drawing were made.
MR. TRUMAN. There would have to be an assured means of
repayment for any drawing under the general arrangements. Actually,
the Mexican Debt Disclosure Act has a provision requiring an assured
means of repayment in our case. So, we would have to have some sense
of how the System was going to get repaid in any case. In the
particular circumstances that Mexico was in, we were getting involved

12/19/95

at least indirectly in a medium-term program and the Committee felt
that stretching the maturity to 12 months was about as far--maybe
further for some members--as it could be stretched in terms of our
normal financial operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
gentleman?

Any further questions for either

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
swap line renewal, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

I move approval of the $3 billion

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
continue on, Peter?
MR. FISHER.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would you like to
[Statement--see

Questions for Peter?

MR. MELZER. Peter, you mentioned that the bond market was
selling off further this morning. What is it doing now?
MR. FISHER.
is backing up a bit.
up.

The long bond is at 6.22 percent, I think, so it
The middle of the maturity range is also backing

MR. KOHN. There was more news on the budget and, as I
understand it, more pessimism about the prospects for an agreement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

How many 32nds was that down?

It was down about 1/2 point.

MR. FISHER. Yes, 1/2 point. In yield, the long bond traded
up to 6.22 percent early overnight in Tokyo, came down to 6.18
percent, and was back up to the 6.22 - 6.24 percent range in the last
hour.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
(Consulting a pocket electronic market
monitor) The truth is the markets are down 10/32. The cash market
for the long bond is at 6.22 percent.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. You are our official source on the
[Laughter]
matter of long-term bond rates!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. With all the technology we have in this
room, I can't have a little old gadget?

remark!

MR. BLINDER.
[Laughter]

It's in the transcript that you made that

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sorry.

Further questions for Peter?

12/19/95

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

I move approval of his domestic

transactions.
Is there a second?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. KELLEY.
MR. LINDSEY.

Second.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
staff reports. Mr. Prell.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

Let's move on to the

[Statement--see

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. This isn't a question, just a
comment on the economic situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Moskow.

If there are no questions--yes,

MR. MOSKOW. Mike, this is a question on the Greenbook. On
Page 1-12, your report projected an increase of 100,000 payroll
employment jobs per month over the next two years, the 1996-1997
period. This is keeping in mind that we are dealing with a forecast
of close to potential output during this period. I was wondering
about this 100,000 job figure. It seems low compared to figures that
we have looked at. I was wondering whether you would expect that if
we get to higher levels of payroll employment gains--125,000 or
150,000 new jobs per month--this would strain the economy's capacity
during the forecast period.
MR. PRELL. One feature of the latest forecast is a change in
our projection of labor force growth. As we have reported from time
to time over the past few years, we have been surprised by the lack of
rise in the labor force participation rate. The most recent
observation was distinctly short of our expectations. So, we have
flattened that path out considerably and have less labor force growth
going forward. Now, what would happen if demand were stronger and
employment were to grow faster? One possibility is that labor force
participation remains on the track we are forecasting and we do get a
decline in the unemployment rate relative to the path we projected and
that creates some additional pressures. Alternatively, maybe at long
last what we would see is a response by potential workers to the
healthy demand for them, and you would see some renewed growth in
labor force participation and stability in the unemployment rate.
I
don't think we can say what will happen with any certainty at this
point, but we have made a distinct change in the trajectory of the
labor force in this forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Mike?
Vice Chairman, do you want to start off?

If not,

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes. The Second District continues
to show slow growth essentially across the board. Retail sales for
the holiday period have been quite weak in New York, although the more

12/19/95

upscale stores like Saks Fifth Avenue have been doing reasonably well,
perhaps to some degree because of the considerably higher bonuses from
the financial services industry.
Our forecast for the national economy is somewhat lower than
that of the Greenbook, but the general shape is similar. Under
present monetary policy we have growth slowing to 2.2 percent in 1996
and 2.0 percent in 1997 as compared with 2-1/2 percent for both years
in the Greenbook. Not surprisingly, inflation is a bit lower in our
forecast, 2.9 percent in 1996 and 2.8 percent in 1997, with the
unemployment rate rising to 5.9 percent and 6.2 percent in the two
years. We have, of course, tried to produce a forecast that has the
risks balanced. However, I am concerned about a number of factors
that I believe slant the risks to the down side. In an atmosphere of
continuing rationalization and restructurings of business, job
security, especially for white-collar workers, could cause concerns
that would make consumer spending lower than that in either forecast.
Second, business fixed investment has held up extraordinarily well;
both we and the Greenbook have it slowing down. But it is still the
primary driver of growth and could be less strong, especially if
consumer spending should be somewhat weaker. Third, the growth we are
assuming in Canada, Mexico, Japan, and Europe is not terribly strong.
But if we are wrong, I think it quite likely that growth will be
weaker in those countries and not stronger. Because inflation has
been lower and we believe it will continue to be lower than we thought
it would be when we last adjusted monetary policy in July, we have had
an effective real tightening of policy, and in our forecast this
phenomenon will continue. For a central bank with a goal of price
stability, a somewhat firm and firming policy may be a good and
desirable thing, especially if you think as I do that an inflation
rate of about 3 percent nominal--say, 2 percent real if we take out
the bias in the CPI--is too high. However, I would prefer that policy
not be so tight as to be a source of additional weakness to the real
economy, which we consider to be the case now. We must be flexible in
our policy. This year we finished tightening in February and eased
slightly in July. If growth should turn out to be stronger than we or
even the Greenbook suggest, clearly the Committee should evaluate that
strength and what it tells us about the future; and if policy has to
be adjusted, it should be adjusted. However, we generally believe
that the approach to an even lower inflation rate should be
opportunistic. Our policy should be slanted toward fighting inflation
if it should move up; but rather than force it down at the excessive
expense of real growth, we should be opportunistic in taking advantage
of lower inflation when it happens.
There is a question whether the present market conditions in
either the stock or bond markets should be allowed to inhibit policy.
Clearly, despite the slight correction yesterday, the stock market by
any historical standard is overvalued. If one relates it to dividend
payout or price earnings ratio or market-to-book, it is considerably
overvalued, but it has been considerably overvalued for about three
years. What one isn't sure of is whether this is a phenomenon that
could continue or whether a correction will take place. In any event,
I don't think that the stock market should drive policy. It seems to
me that the present level of the bond market, given what we have been
able to do and what the market and the economy have been able to do in
reducing inflation, is not unrealistic at all.

-9-

12/19/95

Lastly, as regards the budget debate, it seems to me the best
thing we can do is to distance ourselves from the debate. I don't
believe we should be punishing politicians for what we don't like or
rewarding them for what we do like, but rather that monetary policy
should follow an independent path. In my view, to the degree that we
have opportunities to show that that path is independent, we should
take advantage of them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to focus on
one of the points that Mike Prell made, and that is how we could
interpret the likely consumption response to the rise in asset values.
He was kind enough to share the regressions with me. The general
story is that the marginal propensity to consume from an incremental
stock market gain is about 5 percent. The macroeconomic regressions
very much support that. What I would like to do today is to test that
at the micro level.
I asked the National Bureau of Economic Research
to run the 1991 individual tax model file, which is the latest one
they have up, to look at a detailed distribution of dividends received
by taxpayers.
I would be happy to give the detailed tables to anyone
who wants them. I broke this down into five classes.
Look at Table 1, which has been distributed to you, and you
can get a feel for this.
The first row is zero dividends; 80 percent
of taxpayers, which I call households and the terms are roughly
synonymous, received no dividends at all. Another 13 percent of
households received less than $1,000 in dividends, and these dividends
made up about 4.4 percent of the total. As you can see, about 6
percent of households got about 30 percent of total dividends. At the
very top, I broke down those people who received over $10,000 of
dividends into those with less than $200,000 of adjusted gross income
and those with more than $200,000 of adjusted gross income. Group 5,
the high-income, high-dividend recipients make up about 230,000
households and got 30 percent of total dividends. The next thing I
asked the NBER to do was to calculate after-tax adjusted gross income.
They have a federal tax calculator, a state tax calculator, and a
social security tax calculator. Column 3 in Table 1 shows the
distribution of after-tax adjusted gross income for each of those
groups. The last column is designed to get at disposable personal
income in the national income and product accounts. The main
ingredients that are not in AGI but are in disposable personal income
are first, transfer payments, second, fringe benefits, and third, the
excluded portions of dividends and interest, which generally tend to
flow into 401(k) plans and other constrained vehicles.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That includes taxes?

MR. LINDSEY. No. Personal taxes and direct taxes are out of
both columns three and four.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But adjusted gross income includes

taxes.
MR. LINDSEY. That's true, but I computed "after tax"
adjusted gross income.
I started with AGI and and took out federal,
state, and employee FICA taxes.

-10-

12/19/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It says that on your table.

I beg your

pardon.

MR. LINDSEY. As you can see, it doesn't make that much
difference, but I allocated that portion of disposable personal income
that was not in AGI in proportion to wages and that gives me the last
column. Then comes the thought experiment.
Let's assume that we get
a $50 billion increment to consumption, which is about 1 percent of
personal outlays. That would correspond to a 5 percent marginal
propensity to consume out of a trillion dollar rise in the markets,
If you
which is about the order of magnitude we are talking about.
assume that the distribution of dividends is a rough proxy for the
distribution of stock market wealth, then we can calculate for each
group how much its total consumption would be expected to change. Of
course, if you don't have any stocks, tough luck. If you are in group
two, which includes people with less than $1,000 in dividends, then on
average we would expect your household consumption to go up by $154.
Maybe this can be picked up in the statistics and maybe it can't.
It
amounts to about 0.25 percent of disposable personal income for people
in group two. Now you get to the interesting people, people in group
three, which I suppose does not include me since I am in the zero
category and I can't even borrow at Toys 'R Us!
[Laughter]
It does
include my mother with her AT&T stock. There are a lot of households
in that group. They might be expected to increase their consumption
by $2,000 per household or about 3 percent of income. Now we get to
the people who have dividends and therefore the capital gains. Again,
just doing the straight apportionment, for those households making
less than $200,000 but having at least $10,000 in dividends, we would
expect an average increase in consumption out of stock market wealth
of $14,000.
It is conceivable to me that I could spend an extra
$14,000 a year, but it isn't conceivable that these households would
do so, given their relatively low level of disposable personal income.
Remember, they are making less than $200,000, and if this is right, we
would expect them to increase their consumption by almost one-fourth
in order to account for that extra spending out of wealth. In
category five, where everyone's income is over $200,000 and the

average income is substantially higher at about $800,000, each
household would have to spend an extra $65,000.
They could buy two
Cadillacs they otherwise would not have bought, and that would mean a
7.7 percent increase in their consumption out of disposable personal
income.
The lesson that I draw from this is that, given the very
narrow distribution of dividends, it would seem that the increments to
wealth are relatively concentrated. Even combining those two
categories, I find a 12 percent increase in spending out of stock
market wealth by well-to-do individuals implausible. Therefore, I
don't see how the microeconomic data support the macroeconomic
estimate of $50 billion in extra consumption as a result of the rise
in stock market wealth. There are other channels that could allow it
I could, for example, feel happier and more secure in my
to happen.
job because the stock market is booming and go out and spend. There
must be channels through which it operates, but I am not going to go
on any longer. I have other tables to show how liquidity-constrained
households are. They suggest that it would be very hard for that kind
of transmission mechanism to account for a lot, particularly when
saving rates are already as low as they are.

-11-

12/19/95

So, Mike, I have to disagree with you. I don't see the
upside potential.
I think we are unlikely to get an extra $50 billion
in consumption out of the stock market increase.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me note just another channel that
may or may not be relevant. Higher stock market values tend to be
associated at a micro level with higher capital investment within a
firm. That increase in capital investment spills through into
disposable income and could have an impact that way. So, it is quite
conceivable that, despite your very interesting appraisal, there is a
channel that bypasses this and effectively impacts disposable personal
income through all of these five categories to the extent that that is
relevant. Obviously implicit in any evaluation of stock market wealth
going into consumption, one would have to trace to be sure that the
level of capital investment is reflecting the stock market wealth
creation.
MR. LINDSEY. I think that is a very fair observation and I
would be happy to use that to supplement my interpretation of the
regression. The regression had labor income, capital income, transfer
income, and wealth in it.
So, I would expect that that would appear
in that transition. The extra capital spending might feed through
into higher disposable income. I think that would show up in the
income numbers and not in the wealth numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It does.
I am just saying that if that
channel is working vigorously, you could reconcile both these data and
the reduced form regression of the wealth effect on consumption.
MR. LINDSEY.

As I read it, the income was in the regression.

MR. BLINDER. Just a point of fact:
Does the regression have
labor income on the right or total income on the right?
MR. PRELL. I don't know what this particular regression is.
I assume we are talking about the MPS model.
MR. BLINDER.

Yes.

MR. STOCKTON. The MPS model has both labor income and
property income on the right-hand side.
MR. LINDSEY.

They are in there as well as the stock market.

MR. PRELL. Let me say, we are looking at net worth in the
model, so that also shows up, which is the other side that you cited
in passing at the end of your comments. Could I clarify one point
without getting into an argument about the construction of these
numbers? There is no significant wealth effect built into our
forecast. If you look at the personal saving rate, there is no
decline from where we have been. In essence, we pretty much
neutralized this, taking into account also the debt side of the
picture. That's why I characterized this as an upside risk. It
doesn't take the full dimension of the model wealth effect in order to
give rise to an upside risk of the sort that I was suggesting.
MR. LINDSEY. So, the consumption levels in the forecast do
not reflect those from the MPS model?

-12-

12/19/95

MR. PRELL.

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

PRESIDENT BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The basic story
in the Philadelphia District is essentially the same. Mainly, the
region is a laggard compared to the nation. The outlook is for more
of the same. Much of the laggard effect is coming from Pennsylvania;
Delaware and New Jersey compare more favorably to the nation. On
balance, the evidence from recent indicators is that the pace of
growth in the District is slower now than it was several months ago.
Retail sales in particular reflect a cautious attitude on the part of
consumers. Retailers are still hopeful that the last week before
Christmas will deliver them from an otherwise dismal season, but the
discounting over this past weekend has been very heavy. Employment
growth is quite slow in the region, even in industries like
manufacturing and construction where activity is expanding. Attitudes
--business attitudes in particular--are still generally positive about
the outlook, but they appear to be somewhat more fluid. They could
resolidify on the more positive side or they could flow more to the
pessimistic side depending on how policy and other developments
unfold. I have the sense that we are at one of those pivotal periods
where people are less certain about where things are going and
attitudes can flow either way.
Turning to the national economy, most recent economic data
suggest that the expansion is decelerating some from earlier months.
The extent of the deceleration is an open question. It may be that
the strength of the third quarter borrowed from the fourth quarter and
that the underlying strength of the economy remains intact. Or, it
could mean that the underlying strength is beginning to wane. On
balance, my judgment is that the downside risk to the economy has
risen some since we last met. The possibility of more of an inventory
overhang is higher now than a month or two ago. The strength of
exports is more open to question. The economies of Canada, the U.K.,
and Germany may be weaker than the forecasts suggest, not to mention
Mexico or Japan. While we can debate the consumer outlook, my sense
is that if we are surprised, we will be surprised because consumption
will be weaker rather than stronger. Also, the case that U.S.
monetary policy may be inadvertently tighter is now more convincing in
my judgment than it was several months ago, although that's a subject
for later in the meeting.
The outlook for inflation remains about as it has been,
neither accelerating nor decelerating much during the next year or so.
Given that the economy is in a mature expansion phase, I think we need
to remain alert to signs of accelerating inflation. However, price
pressures remain remarkably subdued.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic growth in the Twelfth
District slowed this fall.
California lost a considerable number of
government jobs in October and November, particularly at the local
government level. This job loss apparently boosted the state
unemployment rate. However, private-sector growth appeared to have
substantial momentum in the state. Economic activity in the State of
Washington paused during the Boeing strike. Retailers there worried

-13-

12/19/95

about slow holiday sales, as about 1 percent of the state's workforce
missed paychecks from Boeing during the strike. However, under the
new contract returning workers are getting a big Christmas present, a
10 percent lump sum payment that will make up the income lost earlier.
Elsewhere, labor markets remain tight in much of the District.
Employment growth slowed but generally continued to outpace the
nation. In fact, in terms of employment growth over the past year,
the District now has three of the four fastest growing states in the
nation. Nevada and Utah are number one and number two, and Oregon has
moved up to number four.
I should also note that the Arizona economy
continues to expand rapidly despite the adverse effects of the
situation in Mexico. So far this year, exports to Mexico from Arizona
and California have fallen 8 percent, a bit less sharply than overall
U.S. exports to Mexico. Apparently, Arizona and California are
providing a lot of the components and materials to Mexican maquiladora
plants whose production has been increased.
Turning to the national economy, despite sluggish growth
during the current quarter, our model forecast calls for real growth
at a rate between 2-3/4 and 3 percent over 1996, which is somewhat
higher than the Greenbook. Our structural model predicts that
inflation will remain close to 3 percent over the next year or so but
will eventually go up because the economy is operating at a high
level.
The acceleration in inflation occurs despite the fact that the
policy rule in our model acts to restrict the growth of nominal GDP by
raising the funds rate by a small amount late next year and follows
through with further increases throughout the forecast. However, I
expect that the economy will turn out somewhat weaker than the model
is predicting. Surveys suggest that inflation expectations of both
long and short horizons have come down about 20 to 30 basis points
over the last quarter, and perhaps around 50 basis points since the
beginning of this year. I believe that the behavior of financial
markets is consistent with this evidence. If inflation expectations
have indeed come down this much, the implication is that the real
funds rate has gone up. As a consequence, policy may be somewhat more
restrictive than in our forecast since the model we use is based on
backward-looking expectations. Thus, both real output growth and
inflation could come in somewhat lower than in our forecast. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, slow growth continues in New
England. Nonfarm employment grew for the third straight month,
although the overall gain was quite small.
In total, the region's job
count was up only slightly less than 1 percent over the previous year
as compared with nearly 3 times that rate of growth over the 12 months
prior to that. The region's unemployment rate declined to a level
well below the national rate, but consumers remained wary and
uncertain. Real wage growth has been negative. Consumer confidence
dropped, especially in the component of that measure that looks at
expectations. Retailers have felt this pressure. As one of our
Beigebook contacts put it, he could not explain the fits and starts
Business is
that have characterized the retail market this fall.
horrible one week and very strong the next. On a more upbeat note,
manufacturing contacts report solid recent sales, with demand
increasing for machine tools and industrial equipment, computer and
electronics products, health care supplies, and a range of building

-14-

12/19/95

products and equipment. Input prices have stabilized somewhat, and
continued competitive pressures have precluded increases in output
prices. Manufacturing jobs continue to decline, but employees are
getting hard to find for some job vacancies that call for especially
high technical skills.
The market for residential real estate is
neither good nor bad. Expectations of next spring's seasonal pickup
are positive, given this year's decline in interest rates.
In fact,
if rates go any lower we could see a mini surge, at least in the three
northern states and in Massachusetts where markets are stronger. Some
commercial building is under way, though the improvement is spotty and
confined to eastern Massachusetts. Bank lending in the District
remains slower than that of the nation as a whole, with negative
growth in commercial and industrial loans most recently. Consumer
loan growth is somewhat erratic but generally in line with, if not
stronger than, the national pace.
Finally, while the economic climate is tepid, if not cool, we
are going to witness a very hot senatorial race. Bill Weld is taking
on John Kerry for his Senate seat, a contest that has been labeled by
such far flung media as The Economist as the battle of the blue
bloods. This may augur well for Massachusetts at least until the
election. As an example, since a mill burned down in Lawrence
recently,
to
insure that displaced workers receive as much aid as possible. Their
efforts have paid off according to
with workers being sure they can survive until the new facility is
completed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

Doesn't that create a moral hazard?

MS. MINEHAN. In some sense, yes!
Turning to the national
scene, we are very much in agreement with the Greenbook scenario. I
must say that I have a lot of sympathy for the 4 or 5 points that Mike
Prell mentioned as potential sources, if you will, of upside risks to
the forecast.

We looked at some of those and thought that there is

some upside risk here but also some downside risk. Overall, though,
we thought that the risks were reasonably balanced. And given where
we are in terms of the tightness of labor markets and the basic
underlying strength of economic growth that the Greenbook mentioned
and Mike highlighted and that we also see in our forecast, this
balance of risk looks pretty good and the overall forecast looks
pretty good. So, we don't have much to argue about with your take on
the national scene, Mike.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, there really has not been a lot
of change in the quite mixed situation in our region that I reported
on at the November meeting. I would have to say, however, that the
broad tone of most of the anecdotal commentary we are getting is less
optimistic than earlier. Looking at the District's economy sector by
sector, retail activity did rise somewhat in our latest monthly
District survey. But, anecdotally, it's described as quite sluggish.
Retailers express their usual concern about rising household debt and
Some of the
consumer reluctance to spend as a consequence of that.
sluggishness at the retail level is attributed to a lack of inventory,
especially stocks of the more popular new model cars, but most of it

12/19/95

-15-

is attributed to diminishing demand. Elsewhere, manufacturing
activity, as indexed by shipments of new orders and so forth, has
slipped somewhat lately. The textile industry, which is a very
important industry in our region, is particularly weak at the moment.
Finally, construction activity is very mixed in both the residential
and commercial sectors in our region. New construction activity in
some areas like Raleigh and the Washington/Baltimore corridor is
clearly strengthening, but it's very sluggish in other regions like
West Virginia. So, again, we see a very mixed, conflictive picture
overall as I reported last month.
With respect to the national economy, probably for me at
least the most striking point in the Greenbook this time is its
expectation that the third-quarter GDP growth rate will be revised up
from the already pretty robust preliminary figure to maybe as much as
5-1/2 percent on a fixed-weight basis. I guess we were supposed to
get that figure this morning.
MR. PRELL. We won't get a 1987 dollar figure. The waters
could be muddied in other ways, but we do think the third quarter
looks stronger than it did before.
MR. BROADDUS.
I am still thinking of it in terms of those
1987 figures and that would be a much, much stronger performance than
I think anyone was expecting back last summer. Given that, I think a
key question at this point is whether that much stronger quarterly
gain will be followed by another stronger-than-anticipated performance
in the current quarter. Not many people seem to expect that. Of
course, the staff revised its 2.6 percent growth projection for the
current quarter down to 1.9 percent in the current Greenbook. But the
Greenbook also suggests that there is plenty of upside risk in that
projection, even though that risk is not getting much attention these
days, and Mike underlined that very eloquently in his comments this
morning. In particular, as Mike said, production-worker hours have
been growing at a healthy pace lately. The staff is projecting hours
to be up at over a 2-1/2 percent annual rate this quarter. So, even a
very small quarterly increase in productivity could on the old basis
give us a growth rate in the current quarter of 3 percent at an annual
rate or even higher. We have the very real possibility, it seems to
me, of two consecutive relatively strong quarters despite all the
pessimistic economic commentary we read about. With the economy
already operating at least in the neighborhood of potential GDP, it
seems to me that that should be a source of some concern.
The bottom line is that there is considerable room for
forecast error on either side of the staff's 1.9 percent projection
for the current quarter. From a policymaking perspective, the picture
hopefully should become considerably clearer once we have some of the
data for the month of December. We will be getting that information
not too many days down the road.
One final comment:
It disturbs me a little that the staff is
still projecting an essentially flat 3 percent inflation rate through
the forecast horizon ending in 1997.
I am not questioning the
projection. I am just stating that I don't like it very much. Since
3 percent is such a mild rate compared to our experience over the last
15-20 years, I think a lot of people--not around this table--are
probably fairly comfortable with that scenario. But it's worth

-16-

12/19/95

remembering, if I have calculated this right, that at a 3 percent
annual inflation rate the price level doubles in something like 23-1/2
or 24 years. Moreover, a reasonable confidence interval around a 3
percent point forecast would certainly include at least a 3-1/2
percent rate of inflation, maybe something more than that. That's not
price stability. I don't think we should be satisfied with it.
In
that regard, Mr. Chairman, we talked in July about the possibility of
adding a longer-term inflation objective to our monetary aggregate
I would
targets to make our longer-term strategy more meaningful.
hope that we might have an opportunity to resume or reopen that
discussion when we look at longer-term issues at the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I have four general points to
make today. The first is that the Eighth District economy continues
to grow at a moderate pace. District retailers expect this holiday
season to be somewhat better than last year's. About half of District
auto dealers report autumn sales levels above those of last year, and
to the extent sales have been damped, one often-cited factor has been
shortages of popular trucks and mini vans. Industry contacts continue
to report slow, steady growth, although contractions continue in the
apparel, shoe manufacturing, and coal mining industries.
The pace of
residential construction has slowed slightly, but multifamily
construction is picking up the slack in some areas. Nonresidential
construction continues to be a bright spot in many parts of the
District. Overall loan demand remains healthy with some signs of
softening, and District banks continue to post record profits. I
might mention that a couple of bankers on our board expect a possible
mini mortgage refinancing boom to get started early next year. There
is some evidence of that starting now. An informal survey of District
contacts reveals that labor problems of various kinds, such as
shortages, unqualified applicants, and retention are affecting many
businesses.
Reports of tight labor markets, defined as a shortage of
available qualified workers, are concentrated in areas in the southern
parts of the District, especially northwest and central Arkansas,
northern Mississippi, and western Tennessee. Some contacts believe
the shortage is so acute now that it is discouraging firms from
expanding operations or setting up new operations in the affected
areas. An added number of firms have begun to import foreign labor to
fill positions.
My second major point is that the long-term inflation outlook
is inconsistent with the Committee's price stability goals. The
central concern of the FOMC should be progress toward price stability
and there seems to be little public confidence that substantial gains
on this front will be made anytime in the foreseeable future. Some
long-term inflation forecasts with horizons of five years or more have
indeed been adjusted downward over the last year. But generally these
forecasts still show that market participants expect inflation at
current levels well into the next century. One such forecast was
released in October by the Blue Chip group. Their consensus forecast
is for consumer price inflation to average about 3.2 percent annually
through the year 2006.
The Livingston Survey of Economists released
yesterday predicts a similar 3 percent rate over the same period,
while the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers has the same 3
percent figure, according to preliminary December data.

12/19/95

-17-

In addition, wage pressures may not remain quiescent over the
next year, which is something that I think we all have been puzzled
about to some extent given the reported tightness in labor markets for
some time. The recent settlement with workers at Boeing was, in the
view of some of our directors, surprisingly rich. As Bob Parry
mentioned, it included a lump sum payment of 10 percent in the first
year, a 4-1/2 percent lump sum payment in the second year, general
wage increases of 3 percent in years three and four, and, I haven't
been able to nail this down, but one individual mentioned to me that
these general wage increases appeared to be on top of cost-of-living
increases.
I will have to try to nail that down. Finally, there was
a major reversal on company plans to shift more medical costs to
employees. They have gone from trying to shift costs on insured
health care to the employee to actually paying a substantial bonus if
employees opt for HMOs, and they have not shifted any costs to workers
on the traditional plans. I am afraid that this settlement could be a
harbinger of things to come. Stubbornly high inflation expectations
and possible future wage increases have led me to view the current
situation as a window of opportunity. Ed Boehne mentioned fluid
expectations.
I think that had to do with the real side. I would
also say that expectations could be quite fluid with respect to
inflation. Moves now to place downward pressure on inflation
expectations might pay handsome dividends in the future. The FOMC,
and I agree with what Al Broaddus said a minute ago, should develop a
plan to move further toward price stability and offer markets some
convincing evidence that we intend to achieve such a goal in a
reasonable timeframe.
I think some specific objective would go a long
way in that direction.
My third major point is that the national economy seems to be
growing near the post-war average. Most private forecasters predict
stable and sustainable growth in real output through 1997.
The Blue
Chip group, for example, foresees growth of about 2-1/2 percent
through the end of 1996, and a majority of respondents expect growth
to continue into 1997.
The unemployment rate is low and belies
predictions of imminent weakness. The index of leading indicators, of
course, has been falling through most of 1995, but almost all of this
decline is dominated by the changes in the prices of sensitive
materials. The rate of increase in these materials prices, I think,
has merely been tapering off from the very rapid pace set in 1994 and

in fact could be interpreted as a positive factor for the economy, not
a negative. The rally in longer-term bonds is mostly good news for
1996 growth prospects. It should help the housing industry as well as
business investment and may lead, as I mentioned before, to a new wave
of mortgage refinancing.
My final point is that recent trends in financial markets
seem consistent with continued expansion, which I think is a point
Mike made earlier in his briefing. Aggregate credit remains readily
available even though growth in total bank loans has slowed recently
as firms have turned to longer-term capital markets.
In addition, the
growth in M2 since the beginning of 1995 seems consistent with an
economy growing at potential. The marked runoff in total reserves
over the last two years, albeit distorted by the spread of sweep
accounts, is a cause for concern. On balance, however, growth in the
monetary aggregates supports an expectation of continued moderate
expansion in nominal GDP. Thank you.

-18-

12/19/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start by saying
that I agree with Mike's comment that the expansion at the national
level has not run out of steam and that it will continue.
As far as the Ninth District economy is concerned, it remains
in pretty good shape, although the anecdotes this time around are
perhaps a bit more mixed than they have been in a while, and I will
comment on that.
Retailers, of course, express concern. That goes
I think the concern also reflects
with the territory to some extent.
the fact that there are simply more of them, and they are getting
smaller shares of a growing market.
That is part of what is going on
here. Certainly, some of the large auto dealers in our District point
out that a shortage of sports utility vehicles in particular is
restraining sales from what they otherwise would be. I happened to be
at a meeting with a variety of real estate and construction tycoons
whose business is concentrated, but not exclusively, in the Twin
Cities metropolitan area. They were all smiles, because 1995 was a
very good year for these people, though not a record year. This
included everything from single-family and multifamily developers on
up through commercial construction, large-scale projects, and so
forth. They seem very comfortable with the outlook for 1996.
I would
say that they were confident that they were going to have another good
year.
As has been the case for quite some time, labor markets in
the District are tight. There are shortages of skilled and unskilled
workers in various parts of the District. As Tom Melzer mentioned for
his District, I think the shortages are constraining expansion in some
parts of our District. That also has started to translate into more
signs of wage pressures than formerly was the case.
It's by no means
universal, but I did hear more about sizable wage increases recently
than I had earlier. The principal area of concern is in
manufacturing. Even those manufacturers who have had a pretty good
year in 1995, and there is quite a number of them, say that orders
I have a sense
have slowed, and they express some concern about 1996.
that inventories are higher in a large part of manufacturing than
They intend, of course, to pare those
managers would like them to be.
back, but that implies that the manufacturing sector could remain
soggy for some time. That seems to me to be the principal area of
softness at the moment.
I think Mike Prell's commentary about inflation and the risks
on the up side is well taken. But I wonder if there isn't an equally
good case to suggest that maybe we are going to do better on inflation
than the published forecasts suggest.
If I wanted to make that case,
I would point to the following factors. They are not additive; I will
just throw them out as factors. One is a number of consecutive years
of modest growth in the money supply measures. The second is my sense
that productivity has done better than anticipated and probably better
than measured in many cases. This is something that may well
continue. Third, I think we are going to get a continuation of
restrictive fiscal policy. It may be back loaded and all of that, but
I think it is still likely to occur. Finally, I have a sense that
more and more central banks around the world are committed to low
inflation policies. Ultimately, that matters. So, I think one can

-19-

12/19/95

make a case that the inflation outlook based on those factors may be a
bit more promising than we might otherwise expect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, the level of economic activity in
the Seventh District continues to be somewhat higher on balance than
that for the nation, but the recent pattern of slowing growth seems to
parallel what is happening nationally. I should note that our
directors at their meeting last week expressed somewhat more concern
about the District and national economies than they had in recent
months. Mr. Chairman, you heard those comments firsthand by
telephone.
Reports from District retailers have been mixed, with
national chains continuing to report that sales at their stores
located in the District generally are slightly stronger than their
sales nationally. Several retailers reported that price-conscious
consumers have been hesitant during this holiday shopping season,
hoping to get even better deals as the season draws to a close.
Promotional activity and discounting have been intense this year, as
Ed Boehne mentioned, not only because consumer spending growth has
slowed but also because of overcapacity in the industry, as Gary Stern
mentioned. But there is one piece of good news. Some of this excess
capacity in the Chicago area has been taken up by a dramatic surge in
sales of anything with the name Northwestern University on it
[Laughter], particularly when it has roses on it, to celebrate
Northwestern's first trip to the Rose Bowl since 1949.
In the District's housing sector, which has been quite
strong, home sales and starts have softened recently, in part due to
the adverse weather. In contrast to a decline nationally, housing
permits in our region actually moved up in October. So, our regional
market may not be as soft as the October sales and starts data
suggested. In terms of autos and light trucks, the situation has not
changed significantly since our last meeting. This is still an area
of concern. While it's too early to get a good fix on December sales,
industry contacts report that the current pace is in line with or
slightly higher than the November level. Despite some improvement in
sales rates since October, production plans for light vehicles through
the first quarter have been pared back gradually as inventories have
climbed this quarter. For manufacturing generally, the momentum that
was developing this fall appears to have dissipated somewhat in
November. Purchasing manager surveys from around the District, for
example, indicate that overall activity in the region's manufacturing
sector flattened out in November after having expanded in October.
However, we do have advance information on the Chicago Purchasing
Managers' Index that will be released to the public at the end of
December. That indicates a rebound from 49.9 in November to 57.6 in
December. Again, a word of caution; that information won't be
released until the end of this month. Steel shipments continue at
high levels in the fourth quarter, led by demand in constructionrelated markets.
Overall demand growth, however, has slowed in recent
months. I have been talking to people in the steel industry recently
and, of course, their main concern is that prices are soft in their
industry, in part due to the slower growth and in part due to the new
capacity that is coming on stream. Another reason that steel prices
are expected to continue to be soft is that the integrated producers

-20-

12/19/95

now have labor contracts that prevent them from laying off employees
regardless of production levels.
So, even if they close down blast
furnaces, they still have these employees on the payroll and, of
course, this encourages them to continue producing at very high
levels. That contract provision was negotiated in 1993.
Labor
markets in the District remain tight, with unemployment rates still
well below the national average, and we are still receiving some
reports of rising wage pressures, especially for low-skill, entrylevel jobs. Price patterns in the District do not seem to have
changed much since our last meeting. Natural gas prices increased
sharply with the cold weather in November and early December, but this
is viewed as a short-term phenomenon.
Turning to the national picture, we see the economy growing
near its potential over the next year but perhaps slightly below the
Greenbook path. CPI inflation should continue around 2-3/4 percent,
which is basically similar to the Greenbook assessment.
This view of
the economy is shared by other economists in our District who attended
our ninth annual economic outlook symposium earlier this month. The
median forecast of this group of 33 economists was for real GDP to
increase 2.4 percent over the four quarters of 1996, the CPI to rise
2.8 percent over the same period, and unemployment to average 5.8
percent in the fourth quarter of next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Eleventh District continues
to be healthy. Throughout 1995, we kept hearing that employment
growth had slowed in our District and that we were converging toward
the slower rate of growth in the nation as a whole. These District
estimates kept being revised up. Through October, employment growth
has been about 3 percent for the year, about double the rate of the
country as a whole. Reports from our directors and Beigebook contacts
suggest moderate to strong growth across virtually all the Dallas
District. We had a joint board meeting last week of all of our
offices, and the reports were quite upbeat. The directors from the
major cities in Texas were competing with each other in claiming that
their local economies were stronger and that they were more on the
leading edge of high tech. It's been quite a while since there has
been that sort of competition and optimism in our District. There
were some exceptions, though. Retail is doing poorly. Agriculture
has been hurt by low beef prices, especially low beef prices relative
to grain prices, and by boll weevils in the cotton fields. Our areas
along the Mexican border are flat overall, with weak retail results
being offset by strong construction activities related to the
maquiladora operations on the Mexican side of the border. These
factories continue to expand as they benefit from the weak peso and
the resulting low wages in dollar terms. Our friends at
tell us that sales in recent weeks have been absolutely terrible, with
general merchandise and apparel sales being at recession levels. My
concern is that this weak performance will pass through to reduced
orders, a rundown of bloated inventories, production cutbacks, and all
the rest.
I fear that without some reduction of monetary restraint, the
economy at the national level could run out of momentum before very
long. I think our research economists would almost without exception

-21-

12/19/95

agree with Mike Prell's five points. My instinct is that the downside
risks are somewhat greater than that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, the Tenth District economy remains
strong overall, with only a couple of our directors indicating some
evidence of slight slowing. Payroll employment in the District, for
example, has been growing at a fairly healthy pace with gains in all
our District states. Among other signs of strength, District
manufacturers continue to operate at levels near or at capacity,
especially in our durable goods industries. Our directors also report
that retail sales appear to be holding up during the holiday season,
although sales probably will grow less than they did a year ago in
some areas. Finally, construction activity has been brisk throughout
our District, typically the building of roads and other public
infrastructure. While the economy in the Kansas City District appears
to be generally strong, a few sectors are giving us some mixed
signals. One of those, of course, is the farm economy, which has been
helped by higher crop prices, but financial losses continue to hurt
the cattle industry, which is a very important industry within our
region. While oil and gas drilling activity has picked up recently,
the District energy industry remains lackluster overall, with the
workforce continuing to shrink somewhat.
The final point I would make on the District is that, to date
at least, upward pressure on wages and prices has been limited. Labor
markets remain tight in many parts of the District, but reports of
rising wages, though evident, still remain scattered.
For the national economy, I believe that, given current
policy, conditions are such that growth for the next several quarters
will be about 2 to 2-1/2 percent and inflation will be 3 percent,
perhaps a little less.
In this environment, moreover, economic
resources will continue to be used at or near capacity levels. A
little concern has been raised here about consumer spending and fiscal
drag. As for consumption, I think it certainly needs to be monitored,
but I believe it can be maintained at levels consistent with the
income growth projected in these GDP forecasts. Consumer debt, while
it indeed has increased relative to income, is not at historical
peaks, and I think it would allow consumption to continue upward.
Also, if we assume that consumer debt burdens are excessive, I am not
sure that monetary policy can address that issue in the longer run.
As regards fiscal policy, I agree that the budget debate should not be
a consideration for us. Reasonable estimates suggest, though, that
the deficit reductions in 1996 are likely to be quite small. Thus,
any drag on the economy from fiscal actions will be limited in the
foreseeable future at least.
I also would point out that lower yields
in long-term debt markets have been stimulative. That suggests to me
that in the context of developments in those markets our policy has
been neutral and not slightly tight. Thus, overall, we have an
economy slowing to potential and inflation capped at only 3 percent,
and that is something that I think we should keep in mind as we go
forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President-elect Guynn.

-22-

12/19/95

MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Southeast continues
to grow at a rate that appears to be above the national average. Thus
far, no sector appears to be overextended. Wage and price pressures
are stable. Our District's pretty extensive manufacturers' survey
shows no net movement in either input or final goods prices.
The
scattered labor shortages that we saw earlier this year, particularly
in the Atlanta and Nashville markets, appear to have abated without
any persisting effect on wages. This time of the year we, like
everyone else, have been watching retail activity. For our District,
retail sales have been quite good compared to last year and to
expectations, especially for high-end goods like jewelry and home
furnishings. That pattern has been pretty even across our District.
Of course, auto sales have been noticeably weak, as others have
indicated for other parts of the country. I might mention that
commercial construction in the Southeast is also quite strong; that
construction activity is concentrated in the retail sector. While we
are seeing some speculative building of retail space, mostly in
Atlanta and Miami, that is not yet at a worrisome level.
We also are
seeing expansion of office and industrial building, but most of that
is on a build-to-suit basis. We see very little speculative building
in the office market. As one might expect, Olympic-related building
and public projects are adding measurably to activity in both Atlanta
and surrounding cities that are getting some draw from the Olympics.
Overall, the Sixth District is expanding smartly, although activity
has slowed noticeably from this time last year. Still, it remains
hard to find problems that are widespread or worsening in either
economic activity or in pricing practices.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, the Atlanta
forecast on the surface is remarkably similar to the Greenbook's:
It
includes moderate growth in consumer spending, strong but decelerating
business fixed investment, little net contribution that we can see in
either direction from net exports, and fairly stable inflation near
the 3 percent level. Neither forecast sees serious imbalances.
Nevertheless, there are differences in interpretation between our
forecast and the Greenbook that have implications for our policy
discussion. I will say more about that during the policy go-around.
We interpret the relatively benign inflation environment as being in
large measure the outcome of the last fifteen years of tough inflation
policy. The Greenbook does not seem as confident on that change. But
I would also underscore the point that Gary Stern made toward the end
of his comments about some of the fundamental changes that have taken
place and the reasons that one can be optimistic about the inflation
outlook. We do not see the current forecast as a rigid limit on
potential growth. In our view, moderate additional growth would
In that way, our outlook is
likely have no effective inflation cost.
somewhat different from the Greenbook and somewhat different from the
other comments that have been made around the table. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it does seem that fourth-quarter
growth is somewhat slower than the torrid pace of the third quarter,
and that slowing may be in response to that torrid pace. But I
continue to be quite optimistic that this slowing is not very likely
I
to be indicative of an undue weakness beginning to set in.
certainly concur with the thrust of Mike Prell's briefing earlier. I

-23-

12/19/95

think there are some important trends that are going to have an impact
in the near term and a little further out in the future stemming from
the remarkable decline that we have had in long-term interest rates
over the last year. We still seem to be able to create jobs in this
country at a rate of roughly 100,000 per month, and the unemployment
rate has stayed steady at 5-1/2 percent. Credit availability still
seems to be quite ample. Debt formation is going forward a bit more
slowly than the very rapid pace of a few quarters ago, but that is
welcome. Retail sales are certainly unexciting; the anecdotal
evidence about Christmas sales is not strong, but the most recent
monthly data that we have, for November, were really rather good. So,
that sector of the economy may be all right, and I think with the
lower interest rates, housing is going to be all right and probably
autos as well. Consumer sentiment continues to be strong, a bit off
its highs perhaps but still strong. So, these developments and others
leave me pretty comfortable with the Greenbook forecast, which
essentially showed no change from November. I liked it then and I
like it now. Basically, it calls for growth near potential as the
highest probability.
We have to ponder what might change this outlook. As far as
an upside breakout goes, it is difficult for me to see where that is
liable to come from in the foreseeable future. I would think that an
upside breakout would have a fairly low probability. There is always
the possibility of shocks, and if we get one of those, we will have to
deal with it.
But it would seem to me that if one wants to focus on a
concern, we might see in the further reaches of the forecast period a
general exhaustion at the margin of growth-creating demand, maybe a
I don't see that as a very high probability
weakening of investment.
in the next several quarters.
But further out in the forecast period,
I think that concern grows because we do have a very mature expansion
on our hands.
On the inflation front, I think everyone has remarked, and
everyone realizes, that inflation continues to be remarkably well
contained. I am particularly impressed with the way that unit labor
costs continue to behave. Productivity is still growing very nicely,
and the ECI is flat.
In the inflation area, the foreign outlook
certainly appears benign, and commodities generally have behaved well
recently. In sum, I just don't see strong pressures on policy at this
time, one way or the other. This leaves us with the rather rare
luxury of having a bit of rather low-risk discretionary room to
maneuver. I think the question for the next half of the meeting is
going to be how we intend to use that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Although we have
obtained a significant slug of new data on the economy since our last
meeting, my view concerning the outlook has changed very little. I
continue to think that the inflation outlook is favorable, that growth
is likely to proceed at a moderate pace over the next year, and that
under current monetary policy, there will be a bias toward below-trend
growth over the longer term. With respect to inflation, I have been
particularly impressed by the decline in inflationary expectations,
which Bob Parry mentioned. Both long- and short-term inflationary
expectations have fallen about 1/2 percentage point since the second
quarter of 1995. Direct measures of inflationary expectations

12/19/95

-24-

suggest, I think, a dwindling fear of an inflation breakout on the
part of both households and forecasters, and that is a change in
perception that is well warranted. We should remember that such
expectations do have at least some direct impact on workers' demands
for wage increases and the willingness of firms to grant them at any
given level of labor market slack. So, reduced inflationary
expectations make a direct contribution to an improved inflation
outlook. As Bob also mentioned, the decline in inflationary
expectations means that real interest rates, both long- and shortterm, have not declined as much as nominal interest rates. Now, I
have no quarrel with the short-term outlook in the Greenbook, although
I do think the jury remains out on whether or not inventory adjustment
is going to proceed along the very benign path that is projected in
the Greenbook. But really my most important concern has to do with
the longer-term outlook, not for 1996 but into 1997 and beyond. I
think that should be the focus of our deliberations since that is when
the monetary policy changes we undertake now will really take hold,
given the long lags in policy. My reasoning here is similar to that
offered by Larry Meyer in his latest forecast. According to his
characterization, the outlook is for what he calls a soft landing with
bias. After a period of near-trend growth in 1996, he foresees a bias
toward below-trend growth thereafter with rising unemployment,
assuming that the real federal funds rate is kept at its current
level.
Similarly, our own MPS model contains such a bias toward
below-trend growth under the Greenbook fed funds assumption, although
it does project an even stronger 1996 than the Greenbook due to the
lagged but temporary influence of wealth effects from the stock
market.
I thought I might enumerate some of my reasons for expecting
this bias toward below-trend growth, and I will just quickly mention
seven factors that are operative in my view. The first is that lower
long-term rates have been boosting residential construction with a
lag, and I would expect, as does the Greenbook, that that effect
ultimately will peter out. Second, we are finally seeing a cessation
of the at least year-long trend toward easier credit terms, and that
means that one source of stimulus that has been working as an offset
to monetary policy over the last year will stop imparting further
impetus to aggregate demand. Now, we can dispute whether and how much
stock prices matter to consumption, but if higher stock prices are
contributing and will continue to contribute in 1996 to strong
consumption growth, eventually this influence is going to subside. I
think it will be gone by the end of 1996 even assuming there is no
major market correction. Fourth, pent-up demand for consumer durables
is presumably spent, and it seems to me that rising delinquencies on
consumer debt coupled with higher debt service ratios suggest at a
minimum less robust consumption growth going forward. Fifth, the
growth in business fixed investment seems likely to wane through
accelerator effects. Sixth, the lagged effects of the depreciation of
the dollar, which should stimulate exports in 1996, will be petering
out in 1997 and thereafter under the Greenbook assumption of a stable
dollar. Finally, seventh, I would mention that fiscal drag will, of
course, be at work throughout and beyond the forecast horizon.
So, it becomes hard for me to see exactly what is going to
keep the economy growing at trend over the longer haul.
In addition,
if consumption spending, in contrast to the Greenbook assumption, is
currently being buoyed by the strong performance of the stock market,

-25-

12/19/95

then any significant stock market correction imparts some downside
risk to the forecast. There is consistent empirical evidence in favor
of the MPS model assumption of a marginal propensity to consume of 4
or 5 percent out of added wealth.
If we take that seriously-obviously we can dispute that--it makes quite a difference.
In
particular, a 10 percent correction of the stock market would add a
half percentage point to the unemployment rate after 6 to 8 quarters.
So, clearly, the view that policy is restrictive at this stage
involves a difficult and tricky judgment call.
I think type I and
type II errors are both possible. The Greenbook does offer a very
coherent defense of the opposing view, and I think Mike defended that
view vigorously. Fortunately for us, monetary policy is a flexible
instrument; it can be adjusted in either direction so that any
mistakes we might make are reversible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy has been
considerably stronger than we might have expected, with growth
probably exceeding 5 percent for the third quarter and higher than 3
percent, or at least in the vicinity of 3 percent, for the year 1995.
The question for us is how much momentum we can expect going forward.
There are some sources of strength to the economy. One area is the
labor market. At 5.6 percent unemployment, people are working. They
may not be working at the jobs they want. This implies that they may
be willing to move, which suggests in turn more flexibility in the
labor force than is implied by a 5.6 percent unemployment rate. I
think the proof of this assertion is the fact that wage rates have not
consistently been under pressure. We have heard a lot of anecdotal
stories about labor shortages, but that has not been widespread nor
has it crept into the statistics.
With respect to consumer spending, we clearly are getting
some mixed signals in both the published data and in the anecdotal
reports. We probably have, as Janet Yellen mentioned, worked through
the pent-up demand for durables. Consumers appear to be very price
conscious and cautious; consumer debt is probably reinforcing this
caution. It is pretty difficult to assess the fourth-quarter retail
situation. People are probably waiting until that last store
markdown, or perhaps they are hitting the discount stores or the
catalogs. But as long as people are working, I don't think there is
any reason to assume that they will stop spending in any big way. I
think it is fair to say that growth in consumer spending is likely to
approximate the pace of income growth. So, the upside surprises in
this sector of the economy are unlikely.
The housing side has been disappointing recently, but I don't
see any reason why it should not pick up a bit, or at least not
decline, given the affordability statistics and also the availability
of reasonably low mortgage rates. On the business investment side,
the fundamentals are reasonably strong for continued investment,
though probably not at the strong pace that we saw in 1994 and early
1995. Profits and cash flows are holding up and the cost of capital
is low. The markets, I think, are fairly supportive of moderate
economic growth. The stock market is strong, generally supported by
corporate earnings. I guess I am not quite as pessimistic as Bill
McDonough about the stock market being massively overvalued. In the
debt market, we have seen the emergence of a flatter yield curve. It

-26-

12/19/95

has not yet turned negative, but it definitely has flattened out. At
the long-term end, the decline in inflation expectations has some
obvious benefits for lowering financing costs and improving
refinancing opportunities.
In the inflation area, we have seen more
progress than we probably have a right to have expected. In short,
there are no obvious bottlenecks or major imbalances in the economy.
This is not to say that there aren't any risks to the economy, and
there may be some adjustments forthcoming. The manufacturing sector,
as has been reported around the table today, is pretty uneven. We may
still have to work off some inventories.
The international demand side, I think, is a bit more risky.
Certainly, the United States is in a better competitive situation than
has been the case historically. But the question is: Will the
international demand be there? The economic outlook for Europe has
weakened; the Mexican economy may be bottoming out, but there are
still significant risks; and it is questionable whether Japan has
fully faced up to some of its difficulties.
With respect to the fiscal negotiations, with a good part of
the government still closed down, this remains a concern. I would
argue, however, that we know more now than we did at our meetings in
September and November. With respect to the debt ceiling, we clearly
have bought some time. Rather, I should say that Secretary Rubin has
bought some time, and there is a commitment to avoid default.
Government operations are going to reopen one way or another.
I think
politicians will not be able to resist the political backlash from the
inability of the public to get services. We also have the specter of
public employees getting a paid holiday. In a week or so, they will
be eligible to file for unemployment benefits. There also will be
complaints about the unfairness of unpaid layoffs for the holidays.
Under either a continuing resolution or an agreement, which may not
come until next year, there will be some fiscal drag, but not that
much in the near term. It seems to me that the point for us, with
respect to the fiscal situation is that the areas of discussion are
narrowing. From our perspective, I think there is probably more
confidence that a deal eventually will be struck, but there will be
some federal drag on the economy.
In sum, I think the case continues for moderate growth, but I
think there clearly will be some unevenness in that growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The only new piece of
information of an optimistic type coming from our District was a
report that recent shipments and backlogged orders for candlewicks
I have not seen that indicator
[Laughter]
were at record levels.
before, and I don't know if staff can attest to its reliability! One
of the chief executives of a major company said to me that if we want
to avoid a pickup in inflation, we need to ease monetary policy very
substantially. I asked him to explain that. He said that recently
his sales were off, orders for the first half of next year did not
look very good, earnings were under pressure, and if things did not
pick up, he was going to have to raise his prices. This is one of
those occasions where I regret that this job prevents me from shorting
his stock!

12/19/95

-27-

Western Pennsylvania resembles what Ed Boehne was describing
for his District; it had been relatively soft throughout this period
of robust expansion in the rest of the Cleveland District. But the
other parts of the District including all of Ohio and especially
central and western Kentucky that had been so strong have distinctly
cooled in every respect, especially in motor vehicles, metals-related
industries, residential and nonresidential construction, and on down
the list. One director reported that pre-Christmas retail sales were
very disappointing. A banker responded that they have been
disappointing for the last forty years, and so that exchange didn't
seem to add too much to our knowledge.
Two years ago at this time, we were contemplating head winds
and the extent to which those head winds had diminished sufficiently
so that we could start to raise the funds rate and get our foot off
the gas pedal so to speak. Everyone inside and outside the System
agreed that a 3 percent funds rate was simply too low at that time. A
year ago at this time, we were observing tail winds. We were busily
reefing the main sails to keep them from gaining too much momentum and
trying to figure out how high it was going to be necessary to take the
funds rate in order to prevent an acceleration of inflation. As it
turns out with the advantage of hindsight, 6 percent was sufficient.
Whether it was more than sufficient is debatable, but it was certainly
adequate for this round. That says that 3 percent was too low and
that 6 percent was at least sufficiently high, so we have the range
bounded. We are talking about where the rate should be in between.
Currently, at least from my District, it feels very much like the tail
winds are diminishing. Two years ago, our anecdotal information put
us ahead of the Commerce Department or even the BLS statistics about
the need to start raising the funds rate. A year ago, our own
anecdotal information or observations around the System led us to
believe that we were reaching the topping-out point well before most
forecasters were saying that we were going to stop raising the funds
rate. Now the information from the majority of us around the table
tells me that we are a bit ahead of the numbers in hand and that de
facto policy has become more restrictive. I think that a 5-3/4
percent funds rate is now more restrictive than 6 percent was last
February because of what has happened in between. The anecdotal
information says to me that the equilibrium real rate has moved down,
and what we do about the nominal rate has become a question of timing.
Let me make a normative comment or two about the Greenbook
forecast. I like the real growth rate and the employment and
unemployment numbers projected through 1997. If they turn out to be
close to the mark, I would be very happy with that result. As some
others have commented, I don't like the inflation numbers, especially
the CPI numbers. What is puzzling is that if we were targeting
nominal GDP, I think the numbers in the Greenbook would look pretty
acceptable to everybody, with growth in nominal GDP getting down to a
rate of about 4 percent in the second half of 1997.
If nominal GDP is
cruising along at about 4 percent, that ought to get us pretty close
to where we think we want to be in terms of the purchasing power of
the dollar. But the CPI doesn't show that kind of progress in the
Greenbook projection, and I don't think the Greenbook is internally
consistent on the policy assumption and the numbers that are being
produced there.
I simply don't believe that a nominal 5-3/4 percent
funds rate out well into 1997 is consistent with the kind of pattern
that is being shown for nominal GDP. Like Al Broaddus or Tom Melzer,

-28-

12/19/95

I would like to have a forecast that would move us in the direction of
price stability. Current policy at best is going to be influencing
inflation in 1997 and beyond. I would like very much to have a
forecast that shows inflation at about a 2 percent rate at the end of
1997. The reason we can't ask the staff to produce such a forecast is
that it requires us to raise unemployment or contract output or hold
it below potential. Since I don't want to do that, I can't ask the
staff to produce a forecast of inflation that I can translate into an
objective. We have to sit and wait and hope that we get lucky and
find that potential output turns out be higher than we thought, and we
get positive productivity surprises that produce lower inflation.
That would be true even if we were at 10 percent inflation. In this
framework, once we get to full employment and potential output, it
doesn't matter what the inflation rate is. We are stuck with it
forever until we produce a recession or raise the unemployment rate.
I don't want to do that. I don't know how to end this process and
establish an objective of lowering the 3 percent CPI to 2 percent or 1
percent or whatever number we said we were going to accept. I am
uncomfortable with this forecast because I believe fundamentally that
if inflation rates are not moving down, they are moving up. Yet, we
have an inflation rate that continues unchanged forever out there, and
I find that difficult to accept.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. I am going to be blissfully brief. As I sat
down last night to write some notes for this meeting, I remembered
something my basketball coach taught me when I was very young about
shooting free throws. He used to say: the basket is the same, the
ball is the same, why can't you be the same?
Here we are in December,
and I am thinking back to November. The Greenbook is the same, the
economy looks the same, and I feel the same way about the economy. I
want to elaborate on that just a little. I want to make one point:
As has been noted by several people, the Greenbook, except for a few
trivial details, is essentially the same Greenbook we had five weeks
ago. The economy, I would say, looks the same as it did then, only
more so. In broad outline, we were looking then at an economy that
had shown a surprisingly strong third quarter; now the third quarter
looks surprisingly stronger. The economy was showing signals of
weakening in the fourth quarter, which I think have continued to come
in. In addition, we had a big question mark about the budget, and now
In consequence, I
we have a huge question mark about the budget.
essentially feel the same way about the economy as I did five weeks
ago, only more so.
The preponderance of risks, as I said last time, looks to me
to be on the down side.
I am not going to go into the details of why
since you have already heard that around the table. I think the
biggest new risk in the last five weeks is the additional inventory
pileup that seems to have occurred since then. I am a bit more
worried about that than I was five weeks ago. Secondly, it certainly
looks, as it did five weeks ago, that the economy can grow at trend
with about 5.6 percent unemployment and about 3 percent inflation for
a while, maybe a long while. But private forecasts that have this
scenario, and many do, are almost all predicated on an easing of Fed
policy; the Greenbook forecast is not predicated on an easing of Fed
policy. I might add that the market rallies that are propelling or
expected to propel the economy forward are also predicated on a Fed

-29-

12/19/95

easing. We saw a little of that come out of the markets yesterday.
The part of the argument that said, "the budget will be fixed and
therefore the Fed will ease" took a small hit yesterday in the market.
I think we got a little microcosm of what might happen if in fact we
don't ease. Thirdly, the real fed funds rate looks restrictive to me
as it did a month or so ago. My notes here say exactly what Jerry
It seems to me that the funds rate is more restrictive
Jordan said:
now than it was in February when we were actively stepping on the
brake. It is hard for me to understand why in December we would want
to be stepping on the brake more firmly than we were in February. I
can't understand that at all, nor could I five weeks ago.
The only thing that I have to say today that is not a repeat
of what I said five weeks ago is a comment about wage pressures. This
has been mentioned by several people around the table. We ought to
recall that labor lately has been taking it on the chin quite badly,
despite apparently tight labor markets. Real wages are going nowhere,
and profit margins are going everywhere. One manifestation of this is
that the gains from diminished health care costs are being pocketed by
firms in the form of profits, not by labor in the form of wages,
which is what a conventional theory of incidence would have led us to
I raise this point for those who have a fear of wage
expect.
pressures. I raise it to suggest that we ought to expect some
reversal of this in the natural order of things. There ought to be a
period of time when wages grow faster than prices just as there has
been a period of time when prices grew faster than wages. As this
aberration straightens itself out, and the wage-price relationship
goes back to what most of us think is consistent with the normal longrun theory of incidence, there does not necessarily have to be an
acceleration of prices.
It would simply be the relative wage-price
ratio snapping back toward what it was a few years ago. That is all I
have to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's break for coffee.
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. JORDAN. Don, ignoring lags and transition problems, in a
future steady state environment with nominal spending expanding at a 3
to 4 percent rate, output growing at potential, and the economy
perceived to be at full employment with price stability, in what ball
park would you guess the nominal fed funds rate would fall?
MR. KOHN. I think under those circumstances it would be
below where it is now. You are talking about 2 percentage points less
inflation than now, 1 percent instead of 3 percent. So, as a first
approximation, I would shave 2 percentage points off the nominal funds
rate just to keep the real funds rate from rising, since inflation is
that much lower. As to what real funds rate is consistent with the
economy growing at its potential, which is the other part of your
question, I think that is really difficult to say. We have discussed
that a couple of times over the last six months. You can see that socalled equilibrium funds rate bouncing around quite a bit in any model
simulation or any look at how the real funds rate has behaved over

12/19/95

-30-

time relative to how the economy has behaved. We ran for much of the
1980s, certainly the middle part of the 1980s, with nominal interest
rates pretty consistently above the growth of nominal GDP, though not
every year. That pattern was consistent with a fairly vigorously
growing economy and steady inflation in the 4 to 5 percent range.
Now, that was associated with some fiscal stimulus, so I think we had
a higher equilibrium funds rate in that period. Most people think
that the equilibrium funds rate is probably down relative to what it
might have been in the 1980s, but how far down is very hard to say.
The structure of the economy and the structure of financial markets
have changed markedly since the 1950s and the 1960s. We don't have
Reg Q, for example, to cut off spending when market rates get high.
It is quite conceivable to me that the long-run equilibrium real
interest rate at steady inflation right now would be higher than it
was back then. One could perhaps run with nominal interest rates
above nominal GDP for awhile; it would depend on the stance of fiscal
policy and the other things that affect the economy. I don't think
there is a simple mapping of nominal GDP growth and nominal interest
rates, although there is a relationship.
MR. JORDAN. Maybe you answered it with this matrix and your
other remarks. It is all very interesting. Maybe I didn't understand
what you were saying; I am trying to clarify it.
Starting from where
we are today--the perception of full employment, an economy operating
at capacity, the current funds rate, and the inherited inflation rate
as it is reported--what is the transition mechanism for getting the
funds rate from where it is to where it would be in a steady state
environment without creating slack?
MR. KOHN.
inflation down?

What is the transition mechanism for getting

MR. JORDAN. What are the conditions under which you would
say, without economic slack occurring or being forecast, that we move
from the 5-3/4 percent funds rate to that steady state funds rate?
MR. KOHN. I think there are two points. One would be that
slack occurs that you had not anticipated, perhaps because potential
is higher than you thought or there is a shortfall in demand you had
not anticipated. When that occurs, you are going to have a little
slack in the economy. You react to get rid of that slack, but
meanwhile you are running below potential and that would put downward
pressure on inflation. I think the opportunistic strategy here is to
take that downward pressure. Don't try to push the economy back above
potential to make up for the output that you have lost in the
meantime. So that's one source. Another source would be that
inflation expectations have come down--something that, as I hear it,
some of the people around the table think has happened recently. If
inflation expectations have come down, that would put some downward
pressure on the inflation process. As Governor Yellen mentioned in
her remarks, if they truly have come down and particularly if they are
in the process of declining further, that would enable you to hold the
economy at potential and have inflation come down further. Now,
whether you could logically count on much of this sort of immaculate
conception of a decline in inflation expectations--if you'll pardon
the expression--while holding the economy at potential is difficult to
say. But that would be the other way it could happen. You are right,
President Jordan, in suggesting that the economy is constantly being

-31-

12/19/95

hit by shocks, and it is not a question of deliberately putting slack
in the economy to bring inflation down. It is a question of taking
those shocks, whether they are on inflation expectations, demand,
supply, or whatnot, and using them to bring inflation down. Over
time, if you react asymmetrically to shocks, strongly to upward shocks
and less strongly to downward shocks, the inflation rate will work its
way lower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman McDonough.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Don, without benefit of your very
good two pages, which would have saved me a good deal of work last
night, I spoke in favor of the opportunistic approach this morning.
Since we don't agree with the Greenbook, I guess our model would fit
in your matrix where you have disinflation pressures and would then
move down to the box that indicates a permanent drop in inflation
expectations and ergo a reduction in nominal rates that leaves real
rates unchanged. My question is, is it safe to assume that
opportunistic versus deliberate are two different policies without
implying that one is necessarily more virtuous than the other?
MR. KOHN. I am not sitting in moral judgment here. I think
it is a question of your ultimate goal and the gains you think you are
getting from your ultimate goal--that is, price stability--and the
losses you are willing to incur to get there.
If you really believe
that 1 percent inflation would produce over time a lot higher
productivity, a lot higher output, a lot more benefit to the economy
than 3 percent inflation, then perhaps deliberately giving up shortrun output gains would be warranted to allow you to get to 1 percent
inflation faster. If you are somewhat uncertain about the net gains
of going from 3 percent to 1 percent inflation, it seems to me that
you are potentially maximizing society's welfare by going there slowly
and taking advantage of the opportunities of getting there without
necessarily punishing the body economic.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Just a comment:
I think you could
be equally convinced of the benefits of getting to the low inflation
rate but just decide that the price of getting there very quickly is
excessive. There would be no difference in the goal, in my view, only
in the speed at which you are willing to get there and the cost to
society that you are willing to incur.
MR. KOHN. That's a good point. A lot of models put in
utility functions that penalize large misses from output more than
small misses from output. On the other hand, if you think that the
world is pretty linear and symmetric, in the end it's not so clear. I
think it's an open question if you really want to get there, whether
going there slowly results in higher utility for society than going
there quickly, assuming there is a lot to be gained when you get
there. You are giving up years at price stability by going there
slowly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Don, I just want to make sure that I
understand the paradigm completely, not using the current policy
issues so much as a bit of recent history. I would be interested to
know, within the context of this, how you would interpret our initial

-32-

12/19/95

tightening back in 1994.
I would have thought of that intuitively as
opportunistic. As I recall, the inflation rate was not rising
significantly. What was happening was that bond rates were backing
up.
Some of us at least had a sense that that indicated a rise in
inflation expectations, and of course there was evidence of strength
in the real economy.
MR. KOHN. I would interpret it under 3.b.i. in my outline,
that is, leaning hard against potential increases in inflation. As
So, I
you saw inflation developing, you moved vigorously against it.
think it's perfectly consistent with the opportunistic strategy. Some
of this may be a bit endogenous since the people who practice that
policy are defining the opportunistic strategy. But as I defined it-we are listening to you folks--I think that is perfectly consistent
lean hard against shocks in one
with an opportunistic strategy:
direction, take a more measured approach to shocks in another
direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Don, I would like to
focus on the middle column of your bottom chart. Would you speak
specifically as to what this column means to you in the current
situation? When I look at the Philadelphia survey of inflationary
expectations, it seems to me that the first thing to make assumptions
about is how much of the drop is permanent.
If I wanted to keep the
real rate constant and thought it was all permanent, I would probably
need to reduce the rate by 50 basis points.
If I wanted to take more
of a Brainard approach and not go the full distance, the rate
reduction might be a quarter. What does it mean to you?
MR. KOHN. I think that from the perspective of the real
world situation of the last six months, it is a little fuzzier than it
seems in these boxes.
For one thing, I think the Committee
anticipated a drop in inflation and inflation expectations when it cut
the funds rate in July. That's why you did it.
Inflation had come
up, and you could see that that rise wasn't permanent. It was going
to come down, and you expected it to come down. If you had not
expected it to come down, you would not have cut the funds rate at
that time. What we really need to know is what you thought inflation
would be when you cut that rate. Judging from the central tendencies
in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, you thought inflation would be about a
quarter point higher than it seems to be turning out for 1995.
Whether that's what the market expected and how your expectations
compared to that is not clear. But you have had a favorable inflation
surprise relative to your own expectations as given in the HumphreyHawkins report. I just don't think it's a full half point because
some of that is the market catching up with what FOMC members expected
to happen. The other point, of course, is that leaving real rates
unchanged assumes that the intended real rate was the right real rate.
That's the other judgment you have to make. In fact, you have had a
lot more growth in the second half of the year than you anticipated in
the Humphrey-Hawkins report.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Don, I am a little surprised that you recommend
responding to a supply shock or a demand shock in the same way in your

-33-

12/19/95

matrix. I would have expected different signs.
The easiest way for
me to think about it is to suppose the reverse happens if you have a
negative supply shock, say an oil embargo, versus a positive demand
shock. If you had a positive demand shock, I think the right
prescription would be to raise nominal real rates because you would
want to offset the demand. If you had an oil embargo, I would not
recommend raising nominal and real rates.
In other words, I think
there is a difference.
MR. KOHN. I am not sure I followed you entirely, but there
Part of this is the asymmetry of the
are a couple of points.
opportunistic strategy. Several types of supply shocks are possible,
If you are looking at the
and I think that is a complication as well.
middle panel here with a positive supply shock, cutting nominal rates
enough to keep real rates unchanged is what keeps you at potential,
since under the opportunistic strategy the Committee is not seeking to
drive the economy below potential or have it above potential. On the
other side, if you have a negative kind of supply shock, you might
want to drive real rates higher to lean against that supply shock.
That was the example in 3.b.i. of my outline where policy attempts to
hold the line against increases in inflation by accepting output
losses in the event of adverse supply developments. So, it seems to
me that if you had an adverse supply shock, you would want to raise
nominal rates perhaps by even more than the increase in inflation
expectations in order to raise real rates. This presumes that you
thought the supply shock was feeding through to inflation
expectations, and you wanted to respond so that you wouldn't end up
with a higher inflation rate at the end of the day than when you
started.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. KOHN.

I will talk to you another time.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. The answer to that question obviously depends,
among other things, on whether you think the shock is temporary or
permanent. That is extremely important. Larry is looking at a
temporary shock, and I believe Don is thinking about one that is
permanent. That is not the only variable but it is critical.
I want to make a couple of points. First, I think this is a
very good discussion to have. I only wish I knew we were going to
have it, because I began thinking about this subject only when you
started talking. I have thought about it before, but not within the
last month. So, I hope this won't be the last of it for this
Committee because I don't think I am the only one who didn't know that
this subject would be on the agenda.
I have a couple of substantive points. Among the
considerations in choosing between these two strategies are the
following, though these are not the only considerations. How
important do you think losses of output are? That is very important.
And--Don, you touched on this obliquely--what are the relative social
costs of the level of inflation, especially at low levels, and changes
in the inflation rate? This is critical, I believe. Then there are
technical considerations, and if I had known about this topic last

12/19/95

-34-

night, I would have pulled out the work that the staff did on it and
could be eloquent on the subject. The choice does hinge sensitively
on the marginal costs, around the target inflation rate, of small
deviations in output and inflation. Are these costs linear or
quadratic; how is the loss function curved; and so on.
I won't try to
get that right now, because if I try, I will probably get it wrong.
That is one set of comments.
You characterized the
The second set of comments:
opportunistic strategy, which like Bill McDonough I favor, as waiting
for the unanticipated to happen. In some sense that is right, except
that we know it will happen. It is not that we think we will go for
the next thirty years without a recession. We don't know when the
recession will come, but we know it will come. We also know that when
it comes, even if we are being opportunistic the way you describe it
here, we will not react fast enough to stop it in its tracks. So,
there will be a recession and there will be a period of slack. That
is what a lot of us mean when we say that we are "one recession away
from price stability."
It takes a very nimble central bank to move
fast enough to avoid the slack that drags inflation down a point or
two points when a recession occurs. It will happen with a probability
of one. So, it is not unanticipated in some long-run sense; it is
unanticipated only as to the timing. That's crucial because, if it
was literally unanticipated, you might never get to price stability by
the opportunistic strategy.
I also have a couple of quarrels with the way I think you
portrayed the strategy. Although in your discussion with Jerry Jordan
it went the other way, I thought you said you were looking back at
inflation performance rather than looking forward at inflationary
expectations.
I would have thought you would have wanted to do the
latter--to look forward at inflationary expectations, not backward at
the actual performance. Secondly, I think your matrix, as I think of
it, is not quite right in terms of changes versus levels. That is,
"tighten" or "tight" and "easier" or "easy," so to speak, are two
different things.
I would have thought the question was whether you
wanted to be "tight" or "easy."
I can imagine easing from a very
tight position, and I can imagine tightening from an easy position.
Either could still leave policy on the same side of neutral. I think
the critical distinction here is which side of neutral are we on, and
which do we wish to be on.
In that regard, we cannot avoid taking a
stand, to use a well worn phrase, even though we know we don't know
for certain what the equilibrium real interest rate is. That is our
choice. Do we want to be on the north side or the south side of the
equilibrium real rate? Once we put ourselves there, the rest
basically will take care of itself if we are right, but with very long
lags and uncertain timing. If we are close to equilibrium, it is
going to be uncertain as to whether we are on the right side because,
as I said, we don't actually know the equilibrium real rate. But the
fact that we can't know this number with certainty doesn't avoid the
need to estimate it. It is the same sort of uncertainty that we face
all the time. We don't know what the economy is going to do in the
next six months, but we have all these people here to estimate what it
is going to do in that period.
My last remark will tie that to the current situation. I
think that right now we are in a deliberate strategy posture, since I
believe, as many but not all of those around the table believe, that

-35-

12/19/95

we are on the north side of the equilibrium real funds rate. A
version of the deliberate strategy is to hold the funds rate unchanged
and let the economy do what it will, which is to create slack and
bring the inflation rate down. Whereas the opportunistic strategy, as
Bill characterized it, would ease now and presumably try to bring the
real fed funds rate to roughly what you think the equilibrium rate is.
MR. KOHN. I thought in effect that's what I had in the lower
row here. One way to think about this--the way I thought about it as
I was writing it--was that the upper row had the Greenbook assumption
and the equilibrium real rate approximately where it is now. The
lower row had some words like this-MR. BLINDER. I would have labeled the top row as having a
real equilibrium short rate of 2.75 percent and the bottom row as
having a rate of less than 2.75 percent.
MR. KOHN. That's exactly what I had in mind. I was not
taking a stand since I had two alternatives here, but I think those
notions of the real rate were behind these alternatives. I want to go
to one other comment that you made because I think it raises an
interesting issue that I tried to point out as we were going through
this. The question of why you take disinflation but you don't seek
disinflation does rest on these points about the utility of less
inflation and how much is gained or lost by different actions relating
to the level of inflation versus a change in inflation or the level of
output versus movement of output away from potential.
I think these
are the sorts of things we need to think more about to write down a
model in which we really can be confident. I agree that my colleagues
have written down an interesting model that produces this result, but
it is that issue that I think is the most difficult to confront when
you are talking about the opportunistic strategy. I think we talked
about this at the September meeting. If the Mack bill ever becomes
law, the Committee will need to confront these issues: Why are you
doing this deliberately? Why are you not doing this deliberately?
Why do you have the opportunistic approach? Is it worth going to
price stability? Why not get there? This question of justifying this
opportunistic strategy in a fundamental underlying sense of society's
utility will, I think, be very much on the table if we have to
confront that particular bill.
MR. BLINDER.

I agree with that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don?
If not,
let me start off.
I will take a little more time than usual because
despite the short-term budget turmoil and all sorts of churning in the
economy, in concert with Don's endeavor to sketch out longer-term
policy issues, I want to raise a broad hypothesis about where the
economy is going over the longer term and what the underlying forces
are. While I have not seen Don's set of boxes before, I am sure you
are going to fit me in one box after another as I go through this, but
I hope you won't try to do it too readily!
[Laughter]
You may recall that earlier this year I raised the issue of
the extraordinary impact of accelerating technologies, largely
silicon-based technologies, on the turnover of capital stock, the
fairly dramatic decline in the average age of the stock, and the
creation as a consequence of a high degree of insecurity for those

12/19/95

-36-

individuals in the labor markets who have to deal with continually
changing technological apparatus. One example that I think brings
this development close to home, even though it is an unrealistic
example, is how secretaries would feel if the location of the keys on
their typewriters were changed every two years. We are in effect
doing that to the overall workforce.
As I indicated in my remarks two or three meetings ago, we
are getting as a consequence of this a very significant increase in
the sense of job insecurity and indeed the trade-off between job
insecurity and wage increases. To my mind, this increasingly explains
why wage patterns have been as restrained as they have been. One
extraordinary piece of recent evidence is an unprecedented number of
labor contracts with five- or six-year maturities. We never had a
labor contract of more than three years' duration in the last 30 to 40
years, though I am certain that somebody can come up with an example
of some quirk somewhere along the line. As far back as I can recall,
the maturity distribution of labor contracts in the BLS data was
always cut off at three years. The underlying technology changes that
support this hypothesis really appear only once every century, or 50
years, or something like that as best I can judge, and many of you
have been giving various examples that support this hypothesis, Gary
Stern obviously being one.
I think the accelerated capital turnover and the advancing
technology are having, in addition to the labor market effect, a
fairly pronounced impact on costs for different reasons. Basically,
the downsizing of products as a consequence of computer chip
technologies has created, as you are all aware, a significant decline
in implicit transportation costs. We are producing very small
products that are cheaper to move. They also are cheaper to move
across borders, and so we see them spreading around the world. More
importantly--and this is really a relatively recent phenomenon--is the
dramatic effect of telecommunications technology in reducing the cost
of communications. A while back, The Economist had an article that
They were pointing out,
was called, I think, "The Death of Distance."
as one readily observes, that we are gaining the ability to make
telephone calls between Washington and London, for example, at the
same cost as between Washington and Baltimore. The reason is that
increasingly as fiber-optic-related technologies and satellite
communications evolve, the cost of adding 200 or 1,000 miles doesn't
matter when you are going 22,000 miles up and 22,000 miles down. That
is why the Internet charges essentially flat fees for all subscribers,
and connections can be made anywhere. The reason is that distance
doesn't change the underlying cost.
What this has done is to create a major force for increasing
labor specialization because it broadens the scope of what an
individual or company can get involved in. We are raising the old
issues of comparative advantage and the division of labor out of the
old Economics I textbooks. In effect, as the downsized products have
spread and the cost of communications has fallen, the globe has become
increasingly smaller. In the 1850s, a farm somewhere in the Midwest
would have been a self-sufficient, fairly low productivity operation
because there was no comparative advantage. What we are now seeing is
a tremendous move toward the proliferation of outsourcing, not only in
the immediate area but ever increasingly around the globe. What one
would expect to see as this occurs--and indeed it is happening--is the

12/19/95

-37-

combination of rising capital efficiency and falling nominal unit
labor costs.
In fact, that is happening by every measure we can look
at.
One may readily argue that this process has been going on in
one way or another since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution,
but I think we are now seeing an acceleration of the process largely
as a consequence of the type of technological change that is
occurring. I have been looking at business cycles since the late
1940s and have been aware of the various technological changes; there
was just nothing like this earlier. This is a new phenomenon, and it
raises interesting questions as to whether in fact there is something
more profoundly important going on in the longer run. We usually
dismiss that sort of development on the grounds that its effect on the
short run is nominal. I have a suspicion that in this period, unlike
previous periods, we will find that the long-run, deep-seated forces
are not so gradual as to be readily dismissed in any short-term
economic evaluation. I suspect that the evidence is increasingly
emerging that there is something different going on, which we have not
looked at for awhile.
One would certainly assume that we would see this in the
productivity data, but it is difficult to find it there. In my
judgment there are several reasons, the most important of which is
that the data are lousy. I think we have not correctly defined how to
capture the value added in various industries, as I believe I have
pointed out previously. Looking at market values, we are not
capitalizing various types of activities properly. In the past, we
looked at capital expenditures only as spending on a blast furnace or
a steel rolling mill. Now, improvement in the value of a firm is
influenced by such factors as how much in-house training they have and
what type. That creates economic value in the stock-market sense, and
we are not measuring it properly.
Secondly, I suspect that we also may well be looking at the
lag that Professor Paul David of Stanford has been talking about. It
relates to the question of why computer technology is not creating the
productivity that we would expect to observe by looking at individual
companies. The reason is largely that the global infrastructure has
not yet adjusted. In a similar manner, we had electric motors coming
into use in the late part of the 19th century, but they were put into
a system whose infrastructure was built on minimizing costs for steam
engines. The technology of a steam-engine economy is fundamentally
different from that of an electric-motor economy. It wasn't until the
construction of horizontal types of factory buildings in the 1920s
that our manufacturing firms finally were able to take advantage of
the synergies implicit in the electric dynamo and achieve fairly
dramatic increases in productivity. This showed up and correlated
fairly directly with trends in unit motor use and secondary uses of
electric motors, which I thought Professor David did a remarkably
thorough job in evaluating.
While the analogies are not exact, there is something
extraordinarily obvious as we read through what he is saying and
observe what is going on now. Firms are putting tremendous efforts
into computer technology. A lot of it is wasted, as inevitably it
must be, and we still have not restructured vast parts of the way we
do business to fit a fundamentally new technology. It is going to

12/19/95

-38-

take a long while to do that.
It is unclear exactly how that fits
into our policy process. But I think it is important to put this
point on the table, and I present this as a hypothesis since it is
something that we will not be sure is the appropriate assessment of
our changing world for probably five to ten years. But the point that
Don Kohn has been raising and we have just been discussing is very
critical to what we are doing.
Let me suggest to you what the recent short-term evidence
appears to be that is consistent with this hypothesis. Ultimately,
when we have a hypothesis, the facts either fit it or they don't. The
wage pattern that I mentioned is clearly consistent with it.
It also
has been mentioned here, I think quite importantly, that breaking the
back of the inflationary surge last year and early this year was a lot
easier in retrospect than it should have been. You may recall that
the markets had federal funds rates projected to the moon a year ago.
The reason they did is not because they were not thoughtful.
The
reason is that previous relationships implicitly called for
substantial increases in the federal funds rate to restrain and
contain the burgeoning inflationary pressures that we were looking at.
As has been mentioned many times, the CPI is currently
running under expectations or forecasts. My suspicion is--and this is
a benevolent outlook in Don's context--that we are going to find that
the inflation rate will continue to come in below expectations. I
think this process is not about to come to an immediate end, although
I will suggest in a minute why it is not a permanent state of the
world that would allow central banks to pack up and go home.
I found
the charts on long-term inflation expectations in the Greenbook, Part
II, really quite startling because they suddenly dip fairly sharply
with the emergence of a general awareness that we are in a late stage
of a business cycle period that has not created the inflationary
problems that previously have occurred in the post-World War II
period.
The sharp decline in long-term yields has struck me as quite
extraordinary. I know of no one who forecast that with any degree of
confidence.
Despite the Treasury, we are getting issues of 100-year
bonds, and that occurs only infrequently. The last time it happened
Before that, I think it was the turn of the century.
was in 1993.
That in effect is saying that there are people out there who are
willing to take low yields for 100 years. The fact that some
borrowers are issuing these bonds is terrific. Until you get somebody
dumb enough to buy them, that is terrific.
But the point is that they
are selling, although they may not sell in the future because of the
new tax concerns.
Finally, it is very difficult to find typical inflationary
forces anywhere in the world. If this phenomenon is correct, it has
to be worldwide. What we are observing is 1 to 2 percent inflation in
Europe, and none to speak of in some areas where inflation really
should be at a high level. What has surprised me most of all very
recently is that the CPI inflation rate in Argentina was 1.7 percent
for the last 12 months, and that was not per month. Even the outside
inflationary processes are being contained. Something different is
going on. I don't deny, as has been argued here, that central banks
I suggest to you that we are probably
have been a factor in this.
necessary conditions for this state of affairs to persist. But I

12/19/95

would suspect that if we did not have these technological changes
going on, our job and that of our counterparts abroad would have been
materially more difficult.
I certainly can agree that my hypothesis is the statistical
equivalent of a falling NAIRU. That's all fine and good, but merely
saying that the NAIRU has fallen, which is what we tend to do, is not
very helpful. That's because whenever we miss the inflation forecast,
we say the NAIRU fell. We have to understand what it is that is
causing this.
I am always uncomfortable with a national NAIRU number
because I always look at local NAIRUs.
I do not think there is the
same slope on inflationary expectations across local areas. I am a
little dubious of the national number, but I would grant that there is
a fairly impressive statistical relationship between inflation and the
national NAIRU. What I am saying is that if this hypothesis is
correct, we are looking at a significantly different set of inflation
pressures in the world economy. I keep mentioning the word "if"
because it is a hypothesis.
It is one that I have been thinking about
for over a year. The evidence continues to come in and suggest that
there is something going on here. If it is true, then clearly we can
reach price stability with real interest rates lower than where they
are now. I do not know where this hypothesis fits in Don's chart, but
it is in the most benevolent square.
MR. BLINDER.

The positive supply shock square in Don's

chart.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, the positive supply shock square.
However, before I go too far, let me repeat what I said when I first
raised this issue about worker insecurity and wages. If at a fixed
degree of job insecurity there is an associated rise in real wages,
then at a higher level of job insecurity we would get the same trend
at a lower level of real wages. What I think is happening to us now
is that we are going from this higher level of insecurity and tilting
down into a lower level. The transition period, by definition,
temporarily creates a much slower rate of change, but ultimately we
get back to a new level with a rising trend. The same thing occurs
when we look at capital efficiency or this type of hypothesis. It is
a transitional issue, and it is not one that puts us in a permanent
state of noninflation. What we do not know is where the fulcrum of
this process is, whether it is out there six months or six years. The
I don't
Paul David argument would say that it is out there six years.
feel that confident about it, but clearly this article, which
incidentally was written in 1989, has turned out to be extraordinarily
prescient as to what has occurred.
Getting down to the mundane question of where that leaves us
for policy today, as a number of you have maintained, falling
inflation expectations have increased the real funds rate since July.
Indeed, there is a question as to whether in fact the rate is higher
now in real terms than it was when the nominal rate was at 6 percent.
It is a close call as to whether it is higher, but it is not something
I know there is a sense of strength
that one readily rules out.
implicit in the Greenbook. I have difficulty with it. To me, the
economy has more of a feel of driving with the parking brake partially
engaged. One gets the sense that the economy is not breaking out as I
thought it might last summer. That suggests to me that the upside
potential in this economy is limited. I come to the conclusion, which

12/19/95

-40-

should not come as a surprise, that we rightfully should be moving the
funds rate lower.
What are the risks?
I am not worried about product price
inflation if for no other reason than I think that the longer term is
helpful. But I am a little concerned that the behavior of inventories
has not been as benevolent as I would have expected. I agree with
Mike Prell; I do not think that one can readily see real overhangs
except in motor vehicles. But we are not down to the slimmed pace
that I felt we might have reached by now, and it is making me a little
uncomfortable. So, I am not concerned about moving lower in the
I
context of worrying about reigniting product inflationary forces.
think the probability of that is very low and frankly 25 basis points
is not in that regard a big deal. The real danger is that we are at
the edge of a bond and stock bubble. Yesterday's market clearly
helped, but it is not going to last very long. The sharp runup in
stock prices is very heavily determined by the climb in long-term bond
prices, but not fully. There has been some not insignificant decline
in real equity premiums, and even though we are still well above the
dangerous levels of October 1987 prior to the stock market crash, we
are in the lower ranges so to speak. It would not take terribly much
to drive us through. That is the reason why, if we are perceived to
be easing policy, it is conceivable that we could foster further
problems in that regard. Fortunately, I think we may be close to at
least some temporary peak in stock prices if for no other reason than
that markets do not go straight up indefinitely, and the Dow Jones
Industrial average has been going literally straight up.
I have no problem with moving down now knowing that, if the
economy picks up, we have a quite significant amount of time to move
back up again and to tighten to whatever extent we think might be
required. I think nonetheless that we have to be a little careful
about being too aggressive.
I would be uncomfortable with 50 basis
points unless I knew for certain that the hypothesis that I have laid
out here today were really true.
In fact, if somebody guaranteed it
to me, I think we could safely go down 100 basis points.
I would go 25 basis points now with no change in the discount
rate. It is conceivable that we may have to go lower. I do not think
that we have to make that judgment, and indeed it is not a judgment
that I think it is appropriate for us to make at this time. The
reason that moving down more than 25 basis points would be a big deal
is that we would then raise the discount rate question. I think that
requires a great deal more confidence that inflation is contained. I
I would
would go symmetrical if we move down 25 basis points.
recommend that the action be accompanied by a statement that
emphasized that the reason for the action would largely be the
behavior of inflation. For example if we were to do it, I would
recommend that the operative paragraph of our press statement say
something like: "Inflation has been somewhat more favorable than
anticipated since the last easing of monetary policy in July, and this
result along with an associated moderation in inflation expectations
warrants a modest easing in monetary conditions."
I would eschew two issues in the press release.
One, I would
not say anything that has to do with the economy because I do not
think the economy is what is relevant here. I may not feel as
strongly positive about the economic outlook as the Greenbook, but

-41-

12/19/95

there is no real evidence here of cumulative deterioration. I think
this is basically a long-term inflation adjustment process in which we
are trying to set the real funds rate at the point where we can move
toward price stability in a coherent way. Secondly, I would not like
to see the word "budget" mentioned in the release because there has
been much too much said about our basically rewarding good budget
actions and penalizing bad budget actions. We are not in that
business nor can we nor should we be in such a business. Nonstatement
of any budget considerations will, I think, speak more loudly than
anything we could say. In any event, I have run out of things to
discuss, and that is my recommendation at the moment. I call on
President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I think you have laid out an extraordinarily
intriguing and interesting scenario. When preparing for this meeting
and looking at the forces in the economy, our use of a traditional
Keynesian framework to evaluate the Greenbook forecast led us to agree
with that forecast--the patterns of good solid growth, stable
inflation rates, low unemployment and so forth--and we saw the risks
to that forecast as being relatively balanced. However, when one
begins to think about the changing framework--that is, the NAIRU being
lower, using that as convenient terminology, or the economy's
potential being higher and perhaps providing a little more room for
growth without higher inflation if that new environment has
materialized--then it is quite tempting to think of the current level
of real interest rates as too high to promote the projected levels of
growth. The new framework suggests some additional room to probe on
the up side or the down side, however one wants to look at it, and
possibly to get more growth out of the economy at given levels of
inflation or even declining rates of inflation. I would like to
believe that such a new world is here and that there is some evidence,
given the reactions of wages and so forth, that says it is here.
However, I don't think the evidence is strong enough yet to be really
persuasive.
Reflecting on your comments about the potential bubble in the
bond and stock markets, Mr. Chairman, it is hard for me to believe
that real interest rates are too high. It is also hard for me to
think about easing credit in the face of the kinds of financial
markets that we have right now. The costs of being wrong, both in
terms of the stock and bond market bubbles and in terms of capacity
constraints and so on if the world has not changed, clearly are much
higher if upside risks are realized as opposed to downside risks.
So my basic inclination would be not to change policy at this
meeting, but I can't debate 25 basis points. We talk about having
purchased insurance against downside risks in July. My attitude at
this point would be not to change policy in the sense that that
purchases insurance against upside risks. All that said, I don't
think I will dissent over 25 basis points, but I think there are risks
here and the risks pertain to whether or not we have that new world
you described sufficiently in hand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, on the basis of my
earlier comments, nobody will be surprised that I think your policy
recommendation is right, for the right reasons, and in the right

-42-

12/19/95

amount. I don't think we should expect the market to be particularly
pleased with our action. There is a fair likelihood that the market
correction in both stocks and bonds will continue, partially because
even though the market is erratic, some will think our move is not as
big as they would like it to be. But more importantly, we are near
the year-end, the markets are relatively thin, and people have some
very large gains that they may well decide to realize so that 1995
will look like a good year for them. We might also have some
additional stock selling shortly after the turn of the year. There
does seem to be a fair number of investors who have held off selling
stocks, or selling bonds for that matter, in the hope that the capital
gains tax will be lower effective January 1, 1996.
How much of that
sentiment there is, nobody knows, but I believe that there is some.
In my view, it is very important that we not do more than 25 basis
points and that we not touch the discount rate because there is
sufficient uncertainty that, even though I happen to agree that your
hypothesis is likely to turn out to be right, I think we should
proceed cautiously. While I am very much a member of the
opportunistic school for achieving price stability, I am a nearfanatic believer in achieving price stability. I think that the 25
basis point move leaves our price stability drive very much intact.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am one of those
opportunists who think that we have the real funds rate too high. As
you said, it's higher than it was at the peak of our tightening.
I
don't see a reason to keep it there. I hope you will allow me to
agree with the reasons that you gave for lowering the rate without
signing on to your brave new world scenario, which I am not quite
ready to do.
I do agree 100 percent with all your reasons--the level
of real interest rates, a weaker forecast than that in the Greenbook,
and the minimal inflationary dangers.
I definitely want to underscore
that we are quite fortunate to be sitting here on December 19-ironically, we are quite fortunate, but the country is not--able to
take this action and disassociate it entirely from the budget

negotiation process, which I think is a very good thing for the
Federal Reserve. Do it now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Anything on symmetry?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. BLINDER.

Symmetric is fine with me.

Symmetric will be okay with me.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. Not surprisingly I would prefer
alternative B because I think we have the opportunity to move
inflation and inflation expectations lower in the context of an
economy that is continuing to expand generally in line with the 10I also feel very strongly that 3 percent
year moving average.
inflation expectations are too high. On the other hand, I can accept
some easing of restraint. My quibble is really with its timing and
not so much with the direction in which we are moving. I think the
stance of policy will still be somewhat restrictive with a 25 basis
point reduction, and such a reduction could well be consistent with
lower inflation. I think the risk, and you put your finger on this,

-43-

12/19/95

has to do with how our actions are perceived. People could well ask
whether we are committed to long-term price stability or preoccupied
with short-term considerations relating to the real economy. The
statement you read that would accompany this action is very
significant in terms of not mentioning the real economy. In fact, I
had a comment on the minutes for the November meeting that I passed on
to Don and Norm; we had almost two pages of draft text with respect to
the policy decision last time before inflation was mentioned. So, no
matter what we say in that statement, for a lot of reasons the
perception is out there and will be out there that we are moving in
part in response to concerns about the real economy. I would strongly
object to any move greater than 25 basis points now or one that
involved a cut in the discount rate for the reasons you cited. I
agree that an advantage of moving now, though not a reason, is to
emphasize the absence of any short-run linkage between monetary policy
and fiscal policy negotiations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I won't say anything about the
budget, but I might just mention the economy in passing. I think your
longer-term vision of what I would describe as a permanent or at least
persistent positive supply shock is an appealing hypothesis and may
well be a valid one.
But in talking about today's policy decision, I
am taking a little shorter-run point of view. Clearly, one can make a
case for some easing this morning; I don't deny that. But on the
bottom line, I would come out with Cathy and Tom, as I am sure will
not be surprising. There are risks in taking this action now. There
is a risk that we may send a message, at least to some people, that we
think the economy still has a good bit of room to run even though we
had a very strong third quarter, and we may well find that we have a
relatively strong fourth quarter when the figures come out.
I feel
there is a risk that they could undermine our credibility at a time
when we may well be on the verge of a breakthrough in our quest for
price stability. I mentioned in my economic statement that I think
the current situation and the very short-term outlook are unusually
uncertain. I know one can always make the case, and sometimes it's
made too frequently, to wait until the next number or the next batch
of data, but to me that argument seems more compelling in this
situation than normally. Against that background, I think our best
move today is no move. The economy's strength in the third quarter,
the likely possibility that we will get another strong quarter in the
current quarter, and the economy's proximity to something like
potential GDP all argue to me that it's better to wait at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Having dissented in
favor of ease last time, I am reminded of Governor Blinder's
basketball coach. I certainly support your recommendation. I also
support your view that there should be no mention of fiscal policy in
our statement, but I do think that in fact there will be some linkage
made and in this case an unfortunate one. We would have been much
better off to have moved in November. Also, I don't think we should
pretend that we in fact ignore fiscal policy in our actions. To do so
would be silly. The government is one-third of the economy. For us
to ignore the actions of one-third of the economy, well, we don't do
that.
If there were a 10 percent cut in government spending or a 10

-44-

12/19/95

percent tax increase, would any of us say that we should hold the
nominal fed funds rate the same?
That is just preposterous. I don't
think that was what is implied; we certainly pay attention to fiscal
policy. I would give those two cases as examples of demand shocks
where we clearly should respond. There is also a question about
government causing a supply shock. For example, if the government
were to raise the minimum wage to $10 an hour, that would be an
adverse supply shock. If I followed Don's outline, trying to be
symmetric in following your logic, we would respond to that with a cut
in interest rates. It's an adverse supply shock.
MR. KOHN. I don't think the Committee would want to cut
rates in that case.
SPEAKER(?).

No, a rise in rates.

MR. LINDSEY. A rise in interest rates, yes. So, we should
I think this sort of analysis
make ourselves even more miserable!
tends to break down, and that's why I have problems with the
difference between a demand shock and a supply shock. Basically, when
it comes to government actions on the supply side, I really don't
think that we should get in the way. I think that's particularly
applicable to what I am afraid may be the response next year to our
action today. There was a major bond market rally this year in large
part because of an expectation that the out-year federal deficits were
going to be reduced substantially. If those reductions do not come to
pass, and according to reports yesterday's stock and bond market
corrections were in large part linked to the first realization on Wall
Street that such reductions may not materialize, we may have a backup
in intermediate and long rates.
If that were to happen, I would view
that as an adverse supply shock. Government is doing something stupid
and the markets know it.
Therefore, there is less confidence
reflected in the price at which the markets are willing to lend to the
government.
If that were to occur, I don't think there is a lot we
could do to undo it. So, I will look forward between this meeting and
the next meeting to see what happens on the intermediate- and long-

term portions of the yield curve. If in fact we get a backup, I think
it is going to be very difficult to make any further easing moves.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, Don, let
me say that I appreciate your effort here in looking at opportunistic
versus deliberate strategies.
I found this very helpful.
I
understand better what I meant!
[Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN.

I'm glad you do, Gary!

[Laughter]

MR. STERN. Maybe I'm the only one. Just to talk a minute
about that, I do think the opportunistic approach is the one we ought
to follow. I say that because as I understand the evidence and given
the quality of the evidence, and both may be flawed--that is, my
understanding and the evidence [Laughter]--it doesn't suggest that
there are big gains in taking inflation from 3 percent to 1 percent or
If that's true, we should not want to pay a very
something like that.
big cost to do that. I think that comes out in favor of an
opportunistic approach. Having said that, it may surprise you to

12/19/95

learn that I favor no change in policy at this meeting. As I
commented earlier, while I believe that we may get a soggy quarter or
two because of the inventory situation, there is nothing at the moment
we are going to do about that with a policy change. As I look out
further into 1996 and 1997, I am hard pressed to see cumulative
weakness in the economy. I am hard pressed to see a significant
problem that I can identify. Yes, there can always be shocks; yes, I
recognize that there are risks, but I think there is a good
possibility that something like the Greenbook forecast will be
realized. Maybe real short-term interest rates are on the high side.
but I guess I am not entirely persuaded of that. Even if they are,
perhaps that will reveal itself in lower inflation rather than
anything else. So, at this juncture, I would favor "no change."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, I really appreciated your
discussion of longer-term trends. You discussed some of them in your
talk when you were out in Chicago, and I think that has been very
helpful. My preference actually is to wait at this meeting and not to
move today. To quote Mike Prell, growth is not steady and we had a
very strong third quarter and it could be that the sogginess we see in
the economy now is just some slowing down from that quarter.
I don't
see any urgency to move today as opposed to the next meeting, and I
think the 25 basis points symbolically is extremely important, even
though it's not 50 basis points.
I should add, however, that I don't
feel strongly enough to dissent.
I think, as Larry Lindsey said, that
there will be some linkage to the budget discussions that are going on
now, although that was not even mentioned in any of our discussion
earlier today. I agree that it is very important in the press release
you are suggesting to relate our action to receding inflation and
declining inflationary expectations.
I certainly would not want to
change the discount rate. I agree with the symmetric language
proposal as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that a rising real
funds rate is warranted at this time. Also, our nominal income
targeting rule that we follow calls for a cut in the funds rate of
about 25 basis points. Therefore, I favor your recommendation and
also the symmetric language you proposed. At least in terms of the
work that my staff has done, it is quite possible that we may have to
reverse that reduction sometime in 1996 if we maintain our longer-term
price stability objective. As I think I indicated in July, clearly a
move down at this time should be accompanied by the recognition that
it may have to be followed by a move in the other direction at some
later time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I can support your recommendation for a small
easing move, but I don't think that the case is very strong; we could
wait. The economy is growing; the stock market is strong; the Wall
Street Journal says we are off the hook; and the shrimp index is up!
But we are behind the yield curve, perhaps by 50 to 75 basis points.
We are getting mixed reports on demand, which to me reduces the chance
of an upside breakout.
I think the range of potential outcomes on the

-46-

12/19/95

fiscal situation has narrowed, and I agree that we should not be
holding back until there is a resolution. In fact, a move today would
clarify that we are in fact taking into account the overall economic
situation and not tying ourselves or being tied by a particular budget
situation. To me the crucial thing is the inflation experience. It
is much improved.
I think there is a good chance, that inflation may
not pick up, at least in the near term, given the slackening growth in
demand, the increases in capacity, the international competitive
pressures, and the labor market flexibility that we have talked about.
Maybe this is the time to seize the opportunity, and I don't see that
there is much reason to wait. If we go ahead and move today, then I
would think that a symmetric directive is appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support your
recommendation. As I said earlier, I see no strong pressures for a
change in monetary policy at this moment one way or the other, and
under those conditions my normal instinct would be to not move. I
think the risks are symmetric and relatively small at this point. But
of course we know policy does work with a lag and as this expansion
continues to mature, I think the risks are more likely to turn to the
down side as time goes along. As a consequence, I can support 25
basis points as a useful and modest move. I certainly concur with the
spirit of your proposed statement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Mr. Chairman, I support your proposal.
I think
we have good reasons to feel pleased with the performance of the
economy over the last 18 months. Our job now, as I perceive it, is
simply to enable these favorable trends to continue. For the reasons
that I have already enumerated, I think the current level of the real
It is arguably higher now than it was
funds rate is on the high side.
last February--as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman--given the decline in
inflationary expectations. I think this poses a danger to the
outlook, not in the short run, not over 1996, but over the longer term
even though I recognize that that is a difficult call about which
reasonable people can disagree. Nevertheless, having made that call I
think that monetary policy should be forward-looking when we are
lowering interest rates just as we are when raising them. On the
fiscal policy linkage issue, it seems to me that acting today rather
than waiting for a budget deal to be completed will enable us to
mitigate at least to some extent the unfortunate public perception of
a Fed that plays budget politics by holding out rewards and
punishments related to progress on the negotiations. Although having
said that, I certainly agree with what Governor Lindsey said. Fiscal
policy matters to the economy and, of course, we cannot ignore fiscal
policy linkages in deciding on our own policies.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

President McTeer.

I agree with the proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer that we not change
the funds rate right now given the projections of our economists in

-47-

12/19/95

Kansas City and in the Greenbook. However, given that we are talking
about a small adjustment and given that there would be the
expectation, which I would fully endorse, of no discount rate change,
I can accept your proposal at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President-elect Guynn.

MR. GUYNN. As my earlier comments suggested, I prefer
I think 25 basis points and a symmetrical directive
alternative A.
I don't think I can add to the arguments
are the right construct.
that already have been made and will spare you a repetition of those
arguments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Mr. Chairman, I think that over time the evidence
will accumulate that your hypothesis is correct. I am concerned that
that evidence will accumulate very slowly, judged in terms of being
persuasive to everybody within the System and to others who need to
The slow but eventual acceptance of the
think about these things.
evidence and the hypothesis means that policy ultimately, ex post,
will be viewed as having been too tight for the evolving conditions.
I support the move today, but I think we need to be prepared to be a
little more aggressive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. It's in times like this that we wish we had
measures of the money supply and reserves that would accurately
reflect the stance of monetary policy. I think if we did, it would
clearly show that there has been a tightening of policy. But we don't
have those measures, and we are stuck with the federal funds rate.
There is a long history around this table of using and abusing a
I think what we are doing today is the
federal funds rate target.
right thing in terms of using the fed funds rate and making
discretionary adjustments when it is necessary to avoid the pegging
problem that we have had so often in the past. So, I think what we
are doing here is the right thing. This is not the time to be
tightening policy. Your admonition about referring to the budget is
well taken. I must say, as others have said, that I have been
increasingly uncomfortable in recent months about the perception that
there is a tight link between what we do in the Fed and what happens
on the fiscal policy front. I think it's important that that link be
broken. I also agree with you that this ought to be a cautious move.
There is enough uncertainty about the economy. I think the asset
inflation problem, the bubble effect, is one that we ought to take
into account. Our announcement ought to be couched in terms of a
I agree that our action
reduction in inflationary expectations.
should be a 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate with a
symmetrical directive and no discount rate change.
On the issue of opportunistic versus deliberative, I think it
should always be clear in this discussion that whether one takes the
opportunistic road or the deliberative road, the commitment to
achieving price stability is absolutely firm. I don't think there is
any difference in the commitment between those who adhere to one
process or another. We need to be clear about that. My own view is
that the opportunistic approach is the preferred one mainly because it

-48-

12/19/95

works. There is a practical history to it, and I think that there is
a practical future to it. While we are independent, what we do has to
make sense to the country as a whole. I think the opportunistic
approach will get us to price stability, and I think it will be a more
acceptable approach broadly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. There is a consensus for a
25 basis point decline in the funds rate and a symmetric directive.
MR. BERNARD. The wording of the operational paragraph is on
page 15 of the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2
and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
and I now move to adjourn.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The next meeting is January 30-31, 1996,

END OF MEETING

