Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 22,

1995

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, August 22,
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

1995,

at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Blinder
Hoenig
Kelley
Lindsey
Melzer
Minehan
Moskow
Phillips
Yellen

Messrs. Boehne, Jordan, McTeer, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Baxter, Deputy General Counsel

Ms.

Browne, Messrs. Davis, Dewald, Hunter,
Lindsey, Mishkin, Promisel, Siegman,
Slifman, and Stockton, Associate Economists

Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Ramm, 1/ Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Governors
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Ms.

Strand, First Vice President,
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Federal

Messrs. Beebe, Goodfriend, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Sniderman, Mses. Tschinkel and White, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Richmond, Minneapolis,
Dallas, Cleveland, Atlanta, and New York,
respectively
Mr. Meyer, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia

1.

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's economic
discussion.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
August 22, 1995
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is the first meeting in our
rejuvenated Board Room. The map of the Federal Reserve Districts has
been enhanced but not redrawn, so your Districts are what they were;
you need not worry about that. However, as in the old James Bond
movies, there are a lot of buttons here that you can't see. If I push
one in an appropriate manner, you fall through the floor with your
chair, and there is a pool down there with sharks and all sorts of
other creatures. That is not meant to influence your vote!
[Laughter]
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. BROADDUS.

I support your proposal.
Whatever it is!

MS. MINEHAN. Will this be part of the transcript to be
[Laughter]
released five years from now?
MR. LINDSEY.

It's recorded.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think there is anything else
that has to be discussed with respect to the Board Room. What you see
is what you get. We will soon find out if it is a major improvement
[Laughter]
or just more expense.
We have with us today First Vice President Colleen Strand
from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. She is attending the
meeting for the first time under our new procedures. We welcome her.
Would somebody like to move approval of the minutes?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MS. MINEHAN.

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The July 5-6 minutes have been moved and
approved. We now turn to Peter Fisher for his report on foreign
currency and domestic open market operations during the period since
the July meeting.
MR. FISHER.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Peter?

MS. MINEHAN. Peter, in the absence of financial difficulties
in Japan, would the U.S. Treasury on its own have supported actions in
the market to increase the value of the dollar?
minds.

MR. FISHER. You're asking me to put myself inside their
I am a little squeamish about doing that.

MS. MINEHAN. I'm not really asking that. I am asking what
the driving reason was behind these interventions. Why did the U.S.
Treasury perceive that there was a problem with the foreign exchange
value of the dollar independent of Japan, which is what Secretary
Rubin implied in his comments after the intervention? Or was that a

8/22/95

way to make palatable to a variety of different constituencies
something that was really done more to help the Japanese situation?
MR. FISHER. I don't see it as an either/or situation. I
think the Treasury feels very strongly about the commitment made in
the G-7 communique in April that they were seeking an orderly reversal
of previous exchange rate moves. At that point, they were referring
to the downward movement of the dollar from January through the end of
April. When they say they are seeking an orderly reversal, they
really mean that. I think the financial sector difficulties in Japan
and the weakness of the Japanese economy are an additional reason why
the Treasury was concerned about exchange rates when they reached
But I don't think it is really an either/or situation.
their lows.
They would like to see a stronger dollar and now we have a somewhat
stronger dollar, though I would note that it is not yet back to the
levels of mid-January. I don't think anyone thought the dollar was
I tried in my remarks to be
over-valued in mid-January of 1995.
rather careful to say that the dollar is off its lows and we have had
a big move, but it was a bigger move down.
MS. MINEHAN. Yes, but there are two issues here. First,
there is a sort of long-term mindset about why you intervene. You
intervene to counteract disorderly markets, at least that's the
received wisdom coming through the Fed. Second, who really knows the
right value of the dollar? There are winners and losers for any value
of the dollar. Why would we support strengthening in the absence of a
real rout that was damaging to the financial markets?
MR. FISHER. I think the Treasury is looking at the decline
of the dollar from January through the spring and seeing that as
something that is not positive for U.S. financial markets or the
perception of the U.S. economy. It's really the time horizon that is
involved here. You can think about disorderly markets as a fifteen
minute phenomenon; you can think about them as a 24-hour phenomenon;
or you can worry about whether there wasn't a bit of an overshoot on a
quarter-by-quarter basis. I think the Treasury's focus has been more
on the quarter-by-quarter basis.
MS. MINEHAN. But it seems to me that is a different position
than the one that I at least have been led to understand is our
position vis-a-vis defending the dollar, to use that old terminology.
But second, once the winners and losers have been decided over a
period of a week after exchange market instability settles down, it
looks as if we are taking actions well after the fact that are
detrimental to the people who are seeing this new exchange rate level
as not really all that bad. In fact, our firms are more competitive
in foreign markets.
MR. FISHER. I think this Treasury has tried to shy away from
putting it so pithily. They are trying very hard to shake the image
that there is any effort to depreciate ourselves into prosperity. So
that would be their rather direct rebuttal to the point you are
making. They are trying to shake that image.
MS. MINEHAN.
me, in perspective.

It's just an interesting change, at least to

8/22/95

MR. SIEGMAN. President Minehan, in addition the Treasury has
been seeking opportunities in market conditions where its intervention
would have a positive effect and where it might ride a rally where one
was already occurring. So they piggybacked on the various measures
that the Japanese took with regard to external investments, and they
caught the market by surprise on several occasions. And that turns
out to be, for the moment at least, a little more effective than just
intervening randomly.
MS. MINEHAN.

So you think that this is an--

MR. SIEGMAN.

They found an opportune time.

MS. MINEHAN. Right, and are they going to try to do this a
few times to prove the point that intervention can be successful so
that when we have a disorderly market and they do intervene it works?
Is that the logic here? Or are they seeking some particular foreign
exchange value for the dollar?
MR. FISHER. I am not aware of any exchange rate target or
particular objective other than the sense that the dollar was a bit
low this spring.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say that I think the Treasury
people are aware that they cannot do this very much more without
falling into the trap,
where they basically are
intervening all the time to no effect. My impression is that this is
the end of the series. We have not been behind the Treasury pushing
them in this direction, to say the least. They have acknowledged that
this is a risky business and that if they prolong it or try to do it
too often, the market will come back and bite them. I don't think
there is a newfound insight that modest intervention of a few hundred
million dollars or a billion dollars or whatever can really move the
market. I think the people who make the decisions at the Treasury are
aware that the only way we can effectively change the exchange rate
through intervention is to catch the market short against our
intervention and the reaction is strictly that. By definition, we
cannot continuously surprise the market; at some point, it is waiting
for us to move and catch us when we move. I think there has been an
element of luck here that we should put in the bank and let it draw
interest and not try to spend right away.
Any other questions for Peter? If not, would somebody like
to move to ratify the foreign currency transactions since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. KELLEY.

So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Would somebody like
to move to ratify the domestic open market transactions since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. KELLEY.

Second.

So moved.

8/22/95

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on to
the economic situation. Are you going to use the big screens for your
presentation?
MR. STOCKTON.

I'm not going to inaugurate the screens.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm disappointed. We have new
technologies here that enhance the economic outlook, I do believe.
MR. STOCKTON. I'm not sure the screens will enhance the
quality of the forecast!
MR. KOHN.
[Laughter]

More investment in producers durable equipment.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STOCKTON.
Appendix.]
MR. SIEGMAN.

Dave Stockton has the floor.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. FORRESTAL. Dave, you have some fiscal restraint built
into your forecast and you just indicated-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Excuse me; may I just interrupt for a
second? Let me request that everyone move their papers away from the
microphones, the little disks directly in front of you. I think the
system works fine provided we don't block up the microphone system.
MR. FORRESTAL. Your forecast has some fiscal restraint built
into it and you also, as you just indicated, have a relatively lower
inflation forecast; and yet I notice that your assumed long-term
interest rates remain pretty much at their current levels over the
forecast horizon. I am a little confused about that.
I would have
expected some decrease in long-term rates.
MR. STOCKTON. The principal reason we have relatively flat
rates over the next year or so is that our forecast is basically
balanced. We have the occurrence of fiscal restraint. We also have
additional demand crowding in on the net export side and relatively
well maintained private domestic demand. In our inflation forecast,
the underlying picture is one of flatness, not one of moving lower.
So, the underlying view behind the interest rate forecast is our
expectation of unchanged longer-term prospects for inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry?

MR. PARRY. Dave, I would like to ask two questions about
labor force developments. As I am sure you know, in the last year or
so there has been a lot of volatility in participation rates and in
particular a very sharp decline in May and a further decline in June.
I wonder if the staff has had any thoughts about what is going on in
terms of this volatility of participation rates. Secondly, is it
possible that there is somewhat greater elasticity in the
participation rate such that the current 5.7 percent unemployment rate

8/22/95

may be giving us misleading information about the degree of tightness
in labor markets?
MR. STOCKTON. On the first part, we have been less puzzled
with respect to the volatility in the participation rate, which has
often been volatile in the past. The real question has been the basic
flatness that we have had in participation, even as labor markets
appeared to improve considerably. To be quite frank, I don't think we
have very good stories at this point; one reason is that with the
changeover in the CPS, it has been very difficult to interpret the
aggregate movements in the participation rate. I don't think we see
any particular change in labor force behavior that would suggest that
participation is going to absorb more of the fluctuations in demand
and therefore leave the unemployment rate as a less important
indicator of labor market slack at this point. But one can't rule out
that possibility.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I have a couple of questions. First, Charlie, on
the international side: With regard to the other industrial nations,
as I looked at your projections I couldn't discern the reasons you are
expecting improvement in their economic activity. Is that based on
the general cyclical notion that those economies have been growing
slowly, if at all, so they are bound to do better in the future or is
there something more fundamental going on that has led you to believe
they are going to do better?
MR. SIEGMAN. It is partly that the slowdown in the first
half may well be an aberration with respect to underlying trends and
underlying strength in those countries. The German economy felt some
impact from the depreciation of the mark, which is now being partially
reversed. We anticipate some Japanese policy measures as well,
although we have projected a very slow Japanese performance. So,
there is a correction for the weakness of the first half that we don't
expect will continue.
MR. STERN. Second question: I don't fully understand it,
but I gather that BEA is going to use the chain-weighted index to
deflate GDP and that will lower previous estimates of real GDP,
significantly in some cases. Does that also mean that productivity
estimates are going to come down significantly? If so, is that
really credible?
MR. STOCKTON. We have taken a look at trend productivity
estimated by using the new Fisher ideal chain-weighted index, and that
suggests that the trend in productivity has basically been constant
since about 1980. What one sees as a pickup in trend productivity
using 1987-based dollars appears to be a statistical artifact that
arises from giving much greater weight in recent years to the growth
of computers, and that tends to boost GDP growth rates. We think a
chain-weighted index is probably going to be a better measure for
judging longer-run trends in the economy because it does not assume
that the relative prices of computers today are a good reflection of
what they were twenty years ago. But it certainly does raise a
question as to whether we have witnessed any improvement in trend

8/22/95

productivity. On many occasions people have forecast or thought that
trend productivity was in the process of improving only to be
disappointed later. This, in some sense, is just another measure that
would suggest that perhaps we can't be as optimistic as we might have
been on the basis of the fixed-weighted index.
MR. SLIFMAN. Let me add just one other comment that works in
the other direction. There are other changes that BEA is considering
implementing over the next several years. One in particular that
would work the other way would be the inclusion of software as final
output. At present, when software is not bundled with the computer,
it is counted as an intermediate product.
If output of software has
been growing faster than other output, that would push up "true"
output growth. There are some other things that are service-related
where BEA is planning to implement new procedures to try to get a
better handle on service output, such as this issue with software.
Those things won't be reflected in the next benchmark this December,
but they will be reflected in the following benchmark revision. In
fact, it may well be that productivity is growing faster and that we
just are not measuring output properly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a major statistical problem.
We are all acutely aware that there has been a shift toward
increasingly conceptual and impalpable value added and that actual GDP
in constant dollars is becoming progressively less visible. All of
these intellectual services have historically tended to be written off
as expenses in income statements, research and development clearly
being the largest and most obvious of these. We are moving toward an
economy in which the value added is increasingly software,
telecommunications technologies, and various means of conveying value
to people without the transference of a physical good; entertainment
is the obvious classical case. So, we are getting increasing evidence
that we probably are expensing items that really should be
capitalized. This is the issue with software. We have all seen, as I
think you are aware, a number of industries in which the ratio of
In fact, in
stock market value to book value is much higher than one.
certain industries it is a huge multiple. The trend of market to book
value has been rising very dramatically over the years, and I suspect
we cannot extract all of that from changing market valuations of
stocks in general. What appears to be the case is that an increasing
amount of capital expenditures in the classic sense is being
misclassified as expenses and that obviously lowers the book value of
the firm to well below where it would be if those expenses had more
appropriately been capitalized. The stock market is basically telling
us that there has indeed been an acceleration of productivity if one
properly incorporates in output that which the markets value as
output.
If in effect there has been a failure to capture all the
output that has been occurring, we will indeed show productivity
growth that is too low. It is hard to imagine that productivity is
moving up only around 1 percent under the new weighting basis with
profit margins moving the way they are and with the widespread
business restructuring that is occurring. I think the difficulty is
not in productivity; I think it is at the Department of Commerce.
MR. PARRY. Didn't the previous Greenbook mention a switch
from basing productivity on income to basing it on expenditures as a
more realistic way to assess productivity because of the increase in

8/22/95

the statistical discrepancy?
productivity.

Doing that will reduce the growth of

MR. SLIFMAN. Only in the most recent quarters.
The
statistical discrepancy doesn't have a particular trend to it.
MR. PARRY.
MR. SLIFMAN.

Hasn't it gotten wider in recent quarters?
In the most recent couple of quarters.

MR. PARRY. That's a factor that is going to work in the same
direction as the chain-weighted index.
MR. SLIFMAN.

I don't think that's a trend phenomenon.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Dave, when you outlined the downside and upside
risks, you didn't mention what I had guessed you would start with,
which was the fiscal situation. If you were doing the Greenbook
forecast in a DRI framework, which gives the majority probability
forecast, and, say, your alternatives, and you said: here is my
forecast with probability P1 and my forecast with probability P2,
where P1 and P2 add up to about .3, what would you say about the
fiscal situation?
MR. STOCKTON. I am not sure that we have any particular
political forecasting acumen that could predict how this fall's budget
negotiations are going to unfold. Obviously, our best estimate or
highest probability estimate is that some agreement will be reached in
the fourth quarter that will avoid the more dire fiscal scenarios that
have been mentioned. Clearly, there is a tremendous amount of
uncertainty as to what actually will occur.
MR. BLINDER. What I am getting at is this: You have one
alternative forecast that has more fiscal contraction, and you have
another that has less fiscal contraction.
MR. STOCKTON. Right. I would say that we are still showing
less fiscal restraint in our forecast than is embodied in the budget
resolution passed in Congress. Therefore, if we end up with almost
exactly what that budget resolution shows, we probably would show
slightly weaker activity next year than we currently are forecasting.
We are not doing that because typically, even when these budget plans
have been put on the table, when everything is added up in the end, it
usually comes out shy of what was thought when everybody signed the
deal. We felt comfortable doing that. But I guess the probability of
a tighter fiscal policy than our forecast is somewhat higher than the
probability of a looser fiscal policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. This gets back to Bob Parry's question about
labor force participation rates and volatility. One of the changes
that appears to have taken place in the labor market is this greater
use of temporary workers or people who have less than permanent
attachment to the workforce. I have two questions relating to this:
One, is this in any way related to the volatility that we were talking

8/22/95

about before? And second, has the Board staff done any studies on
this, particularly in relation to whether this growth of temporary
workers affects the speed with which firms respond either in
expansions or slowdowns in terms of their hiring policies?
MR. STOCKTON. To have an effect on the participation rate,
these contingent workers would have to be moved in and out of the
labor force. That could actually be occurring; so that could be a
factor in some of the additional volatility. I think more typically
folks are with some kind of temporary agency and would probably
consider themselves to be in the labor market most of the time. But
on the margin, there are probably people who can more easily drop in
and out of the labor force given the kinds of opportunites that are
available. We don't have any studies yet on whether this increasing
use of contingent workers is fundamentally changing the dynamics of
labor force participation. But we are acquiring data to take a look
at this issue of increasing use of contingent workers and temporary
help agencies.
MR. MOSKOW. We have two of those firms in our District.
are working with them to get some data as well.
MR. STOCKTON.
MR. MOSKOW.

We

Our staff has been working with yours.

Good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. A quick question:
In your answer to one of the
earlier questions, you talked about inflation flattening out.
I
thought I read in the Greenbook that you were really somewhat more
optimistic about inflation coming down somewhat. In your projections
by quarter, you have a pretty significant decline. Yet, given where
we are in the cycle and given where we are with your projections on
output, that seemed a little optimistic to me, although I read your
rationale. Is there one particular reason why you are foreseeing the
improvement?
MR. STOCKTON. In my answer to President Forrestal, I was
thinking more in terms of the kind of long-term inflation expectations
that might be a factor in determining long-term interest rates rather
than the quarterly pattern of our inflation forecast, which does have
some deceleration. The deceleration is from a bulge earlier this year
that was, in our view, related to some special factors including
significant increases in auto finance charges and airfares that are
now receding; it also is related to the materials prices and import
prices that were rising quite rapidly but now seem to be slowing down
significantly. I tried to convey in my remarks that, indeed, in some
sense we have been surprised by how well labor costs have performed in
a period when, by our assessment, labor markets were tight.
I think
that has played an important role in our thinking about the prospects
for inflation and has underpinned our optimism for the outlook over
this particular horizon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Just following up on that question: I was
struck by the fortuitous timing that you have in the Greenbook of the

8/22/95

halt, if you will, of the one-time--although it seems to be a long
time--decline in costs of benefits due to employer efforts and so
forth. I am referring to the coincidence of that with our coming to a
point in the cycle where the unemployment rate is such that it should
not be causing labor market pressures and pressures on prices. You
don't see an upturn in inflation after the downward impact of the drop
in benefits costs subsides, which will occur sooner or later. Could
you talk a little about that timing? Obviously, you think it is
probable because it is part of your forecast. How do you come to that
fortuitous timing?
MR. STOCKTON. It wasn't exactly by design that we did that.
We reached a point where the unemployment rate had dropped to the
5-1/2 to 5-3/4 percent level and we were expecting to see some pickup
in compensation inflation. It just has not occurred. As we indicated
in the Greenbook, we don't really see any reason yet for revising
significantly lower our estimates of the natural rate in the face of
that; in our view that would be giving too much weight in some sense
to the recent performance. But as this year has progressed, we have
been impressed by the significant slowdown that we saw in health care
benefits costs, particularly in the first quarter. We thought perhaps
that was just a flukey number and it was going to reverse itself or at
least not be occurring with much strength in the second quarter; but,
it occurred again. The anecdotal evidence is that some employers
really are making significant efforts to make this adjustment. Now,
maybe that could go on even longer than in our Greenbook forecast, in
which case the inflation outlook beyond our forecast horizon would
remain relatively benign. But as we have the forecast now, we have
enough slowdown in the economy and inching up of the unemployment rate
to rescue us from the possibility of that rate running below the
natural rate for a period of time and ever showing through into
In some sense, it is like having a favorable supply shock
prices.
right at the time when you need it the most. That could be. Then the
question becomes:
Is it a permanent improvement in supply or is it
temporary? In some sense our forecast doesn't really have to come
down too firmly on that point because the forecast horizon is not long
enough for the effect to show through.
MS. MINEHAN. We have this discussion once a month at our
directors' table because our chairman is the president and chairman of
New England Medical Center and because of the predominance of the
health care industry in the First District. For at least the last two
years, we have tried to get a handle, both from questioning on our
side and from concerns on his side, on how long business efforts to
control costs will continue to have an impact in terms of cutting
medical costs.
It just strikes me that they don't have a handle on it
at all. They are being pushed by market forces that have become
extremely strong and unavoidable, at least in the First District. I
assume that is reflected nationwide.
MR. STOCKTON. That is just one reason for being somewhat
cautious in looking ahead and thinking that somehow the entire medical
care problem has been licked. There are still some significant issues
about what is driving medical care prices and whether we are going
through a transition period where employers are able to get a series
of one-time improvements.
It looked for a time as if the health care
inflation problems were behind us.
But given that we have not solved

-10-

8/22/95

the deeper problems there, one suspects that at some point those could
come back again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
If not, would
President Hoenig.
somebody like to start the roundtable?
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will start with the
District economy, which remains relatively strong and actually shows
fewer signs of weakness than it did the last time we met. This firmer
tone in the region's economy is evident across a wide range of
indicators. The broadest gauge of improvement is that the District's
employment levels have in fact leveled off after some earlier declines
this spring and are up substantially over a year ago. Manufacturing
remains sound. It's not growing significantly but remains sound, with
plants operating at relatively high levels of capacity and firms
generally satisfied with their inventory levels. The District's
construction industry shows signs of improving from this spring's
slowdown. We have seen some movement in contracts in the commercial
as well as the residential side. Our directors are reporting
improving consumer confidence and rising retail sales, and this has
been evident this past July. Finally, confirming the overall strength
in the District, loans at our banks have resumed growing at a healthy
pace after slowing earlier in the summer. Indeed, we see some signs
of increased deposit rates as loan and deposit ratios move up, and
there seems to be a drive for increased funding at the banks.
There are a couple of weaker spots. The energy industry as
you know continues to languish due to low prices. The District's farm
economy has been hurt by a poor wheat harvest, especially in Oklahoma
and Kansas, and by financial losses in the cattle industry. Despite
the overall strength in the economy, wage and price pressures remain
subdued; we have seen only spotty movements in prices.
At the national level, we concur with the general assessment
that the inventory correction is for the most part behind us and that
the economy will be rebounding as we go forward. Looking out over the
remainder of this year and into next year, I anticipate a pickup in
activity, as does the Greenbook, to the 2 to 2-1/2 percent growth
range. Factors contributing to this pickup are continued strength in
consumption and business fixed investment and a modest turnaround in
residential construction.
On the inflation side, I am not as optimistic as the
Greenbook. While we are reasonably confident that inflation will be
capped at the 3 or 3-1/4 percent level, I do not expect core inflation
to move much below 3 percent, if at all. With most measures of the
economy still operating at or above capacity and likely to do so for
some time, I think the fundamentals indicate that price pressures will
remain firm. I will stop with that comment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

MR. MOSKOW. For the most part, Mr. Chairman, changes in our
outlook for the economy parallel those in the Greenbook, so I am going
to focus my comments on developments in the Seventh District.
Overall, it appears that District economic growth increased in the
early stages of the third quarter. The inventory correction that
slowed growth in the second quarter appears to be nearing completion

8/22/95

in several industries, notably appliances and steel. Recent reports
from the appliances industry point to a pickup in shipments to dealers
These reports were
and a sizable reduction in factory inventories.
also consistent with increasing production levels in July and early
August. In the steel industry, District output climbed relatively
sharply in the first half of August. Orders seemed to be flowing in
at a good rate. Customers had built up inventories late last year in
anticipation of price increases, but stocks now seem to have been
worked down to more normal levels. Most steel markets have remained
fundamentally healthy, especially those linked to construction
activity.
In the automobile industry, some progress has been made in
addressing the inventory overhang, but the July drop in sales may have
raised some concern that additional production cutbacks will be
needed. Automakers we have talked to tend to attribute the July drop
in light vehicle sales to temporary factors including reduced fleet
sales, shortages of some popular models related to model changeovers,
and a drop in Japanese luxury car sales. Through the first two weeks
of August, showroom traffic is up and sales rates are showing marked
increases over July with reports ranging from a 14.6 to 14.8 million
unit rate for August; that's for the first two weeks. At this point,
only Chrysler has extensive incentives on 1995 models, but at least
one other manufacturer is expected to follow in coming months.
Inventories have not been a problem in the heavy duty truck market
where production has been at capacity for some time. However, there
have been some significant changes in this industry over the past
month or so.
In June and July, order cancellations for heavy duty
trucks jumped to their highest levels since the early 1980s.
Incoming
orders have slowed somewhat from earlier in the year, but backlogs
remain nearly as large as last year's record output level. Order
cancellations are causing production slots to open in the fourth
quarter and some producers are responding by trimming production plans
and overtime. However, major adjustments to production schedules are
not expected until early next year.
While reports were mixed, most retailers in the District
reported stronger sales growth in June and July than earlier in the
second quarter. As expected, air conditioner sales have been quite
robust, but sales gains in June and July were broadly distributed
across a wide variety of durable goods categories. So far in August,
retailers report that hard good sales remain strong but some sales
have been hurt by the hot weather, particularly back-to-school and
fall fashions as well as home building and remodeling merchandise.
Retail inventories generally seem to be back near desired levels even
for apparel stocks, and some retailers now expect to be adding to
stocks over the balance of 1995. Reports from District realtors point
to a significant strengthening in existing home sales during June and
July. Homebuilders remain optimistic, but we have not yet had reports
of a strong revival in building activity, partly due to the weather
and partly due to the remaining inventory of new homes for sale.
Crop conditions vary widely across District states, with
crops in Iowa, Wisconsin, and Michigan regarded as above normal and
those in Illinois and Indiana below normal. Due to late plantings,
the corn crop in most areas is not as far along as usual, but warm
temperatures have permitted some catch-up. The hot weather was not

8/22/95

beneficial for poultry and livestock production, which was temporarily
curtailed.
Labor markets in the District remain relatively tight, but
slowing economic growth has tempered demand for workers.
The average
unemployment rate in the five District states has drifted higher this
year, but it remains below the national average in every state. Help
wanted advertising in the region has slipped a bit. There are still
areas, though, within the District experiencing labor shortages. One
Iowa contact, for example, noted that he needs to import workers from
South Dakota and Missouri.
Reports on prices have been mixed but generally continue to
indicate receding inflationary pressures, mainly in input prices.
Plastic resin prices have actually fallen in recent months.
Paper
prices are still rising, causing concern for catalog retailers and
other District firms. However, the rate of increase in paper prices
seems to be diminishing. Steel scrap prices recently rose, climbing
to their highest level in four years, but this probably reflects
strong demand for scrap-based steels going into construction markets.
Price index components of the various District purchasing managers'
reports continued to move lower through July. Our early receipt of
the Chicago purchasing managers' report for August, which I caution is
confidential until it is released on August 31st, indicates further
moderation in price increases. The overall Chicago purchasing
managers' index shows a modest decline in manufacturing activity, with
the index moving down to 49.3 in August from 49.7 in July. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic growth in the Twelfth
District accelerated a bit in early summer after slowing earlier this
year. A pickup in California is evident from strengthening retail
sales, faster job growth, and a falling unemployment rate. Employment
gains have been particularly large among California's manufacturers of
semiconductors and other electronic components. Growth in hightechnology industries also is spurring employment gains in the Pacific
Northwest. In Oregon, much of the strength is also at manufacturers
of electronic components and other electronic equipment. In the state
of Washington, employment in the software industry continues to expand
rapidly from a high level. Farther inland in the District, economic
activity in states such as Nevada and Utah is growing fast and
construction continues to boom. Excluding these fast growing
intermountain states, the District construction sector had weakened in
early 1995, but more recently employment growth and residential permit
activity have picked up.
Turning to the outlook for the national economy, I guess I
have a pretty rosy scenario in mind, which is probably a good reason
for suspicion. Although real GDP growth virtually halted in the
second quarter, I believe its composition bodes well for the future.
The modest sustained rate of increase in final sales was encouraging.
In addition, it seems clear that firms made progress in working off
the inventory overhang that had built up in the first quarter. This
development in combination with continued modest growth in final sales
sets the stage for resumption of real GDP growth in coming quarters,
perhaps to the 2 to 2-1/2 percent range.

-13-

8/22/95

Finally, the recent slowdown in real GDP growth should help
nip in the bud any potential surge in inflation. It should help
eliminate excess demands in labor and product markets that otherwise
might have boosted inflation next year. In addition, our model
suggests that the so-called speed effects on inflation of swings in
the economy will restrain inflation, perhaps by 1/2 percent in 1996.
Overall, I would expect to see CPI inflation come in at around 2-3/4
percent next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Overall, the New
England economy can be characterized as moving sideways.
It is not
declining as it did earlier in the spring and summer, but it is not
moving up markedly either. As in the past, there is considerable
variation in employment growth among the states, with the northern
states down through Massachusetts doing much better than the Rhode
Island and Connecticut region. In fact, I think I reported in the
past that Connecticut had barely inched out of its recession lows.
Actually, even though the economy is not doing well there, it is doing
better than Rhode Island, which is on a downward trend. As an offset
to this, unemployment rates in the region are below what they were a
year ago, although there are some labor force participation issues in
this assessment. Consumer confidence has improved; price pressures
are modest overall. Things are, as I said, moving sideways.
Looking at bank lending, our growth in bank loans had been
below that of the nation as a whole. We are now running at about the
nation's rate of increase.
I think that is more reflective of the
fact that bank lending nationwide has slowed and we have come into
line with that. I don't think much has changed in the First District.
We don't have any large firms anymore that drive the First
District economy. When you look at it, there tend to be more
similarities among firms of roughly equal size than there are among
firms of different size within similar industry categories. Our
larger industries seem to be tremendously affected by downsizing, by
defense industry contraction and all of that, and they tend to drive
the headlines and some elements of consumer confidence. The small
industries tend to be where the growth in output and jobs is
occurring. We get very different impressions of what is going on when
we look at the data, which tend to show relatively sluggish business
activity, versus what we pick up anecdotally when we talk to business
people. We have a small business advisory council. These people tell
us that New England is booming. Now, it may be that we selected the
right people or the right people agreed to join our council. They are
finding it difficult to hire the workers that they need; they see
price pressures that they can't pass on; they see a lot of
competition; they see more economic growth than we do in the numbers
for the District or what we read in the newspapers. The latter
So, we
probably reflect more of the impact of the large industries.
are seeing something that people have commented on as a national
trend. People in New England like to think that things happening in
New England precede what is going to happen in the nation. That's
really the dominance of small industries in terms of the economic
pattern of the District.

8/22/95

On the national side, we see the economy very much the way
the Greenbook sees it.
If we were going to quibble, we would quibble
about the optimism on the external side and we would quibble a bit
about the downward trend in the inflation forecast. I personally was
very happy to see the revision in this Greenbook versus the last one
in terms of the uptick in GDP for the remainder of the year. We
continue to believe that there are forces working in the economy that
are going to produce more growth than the Committee certainly expected
at the last meeting. I was happy to see the Greenbook reflecting that
this time.
In our view the Greenbook forecast--as you pointed out,
Dave--seems the perfect definition of a soft landing. This also led
us to concerns about where the risks are and the probability of ever
landing where the Greenbook is forecasting. We evaluated the
likelihood of that pretty much the same way you did. We were struck,
as you seem to be, by the apparent balance in those risks, even though
the risks are sizable on either side and there isn't a high
probability of hitting the forecast on the head. So, we would assess
the balancing of the risks the same way you do, and I think that is
probably enough to say prior to our policy discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Most of the recent
anecdotal and statistical information suggests that economic growth is
resuming in the Philadelphia District. Manufacturing, which has been
a major drag, appears to be bottoming out and the outlook is positive.
Retailers report the usual summer slowdown, but the underlying trend
is favorable and retailers are upbeat about the fall. Bankers
continue to report that consumer lending is rising. Auto dealers are
maintaining positive sales trends, although extensive incentives are
underpinning the sales rate. Residential sales have picked up in
response to falling mortgage rates as well as effective price
reductions by builders. There are some indications that the pricing
of office buildings may be firming, although prices are low and
vacancy rates are only steady at high levels. The employment
situation is mixed, with the jobless rate still high in parts of
southern New Jersey and the old industrial and mining regions of
Pennsylvania. Other parts of Pennsylvania and Delaware have tighter
labor markets. Wage and price pressures remain contained.
On the national level, the inventory adjustment appears to be
Final demand appears to be holding up and
proceeding reasonably well.
inflationary pressures appear to be subsiding. There are always risks
to any outlook as has been pointed out, and there can always be
surprises. At this point, however, the outlook is favorable for
sustainable growth and further progress toward reducing inflation over
time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, after a brief pause earlier in
the year, the expansion in the Sixth District has resumed. We see
broad-based growth continuing for some time to come and this is partly
due to continued migration to the region. This is a trend that shows
very little signs of abating, and it is supporting economic
performance that I suspect is stronger than in the nation as a whole.
Our contacts in the District, including our directors, report that
retail sales rebounded in July. Apparel is doing fairly well and

8/22/95

-15-

household items, particularly those relating to home sales, are doing
well also. The exception is auto sales, which are mixed.
Manufacturers have begun using incentives to clear out end-of-year
models. Tourism has improved markedly in comparison to last year.
The increasing publicity being given to the Olympic games in 1996 is
generating interest generally throughout the District, but perhaps
more importantly there has been a return of European visitors to
Florida.
Our manufacturing survey released just about a week ago
showed gains in output but not gains in shipments during July. As a
result of this, inventories of finished goods appear to have risen,
but the expectational elements in that survey were quite positive.
Business has been particularly strong for manufacturers of
electronics, medical equipment, and heavy duty trucks. Weakness again
is evident in autos and related goods as well as the District's
apparel and textile plants, which continue to suffer from import
competition. Defense is also weak in the District. Sales of paper
and paper products have been good, but industry representatives
express concern about prospects for the continuation of that good
growth.
Sales of single-family homes improved in July and rose to
Inventories of homes
levels above those of a year ago in many areas.
for sale appear tight at the moment; and new home construction, while
rising, is still somewhat below last year's level. Multifamily
markets are also doing quite well, which I think is in contrast with
the rest of the country. Occupancy and rental rates are rising,
although this is probably going to be moderated in 1996 by new units
coming on line. Commercial construction is also doing quite well and
we are beginning to see some speculative office and industrial
projects coming on line. Again related to the Olympics, we are seeing
a lot of building activity, particularly in Atlanta.
On the banking side, bankers are reporting moderate growth in
loan demand and very, very strong competition. That competition
unfortunately is reflected in credit terms as well as in price.
Business loans have been moderate so far this year, but the demand
seems to be decelerating. Consumer loans are mixed and lenders are
somewhat disappointed with the demand for refinancing.
Wage pressures in the District remain in check, almost
throughout the District. Skilled workers are still in high demand in
a few places, but reports of labor shortages have diminished quite a
lot in the last few months. Product prices also seem to be in check
with the exception of some pressure in the pulp and paper and the
chemical sectors.
With respect to the national economy, our forecast is very
close to the Greenbook for the balance of this year, but we do show a
little greater strength and somewhat more inflation. Our forecast
does not have any adjustment for fiscal policy changes, so I believe
the differences between our two forecasts are consistent. I think
that the outlook is reasonably good for continued growth and moderate
inflation. But with the uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy and
with the continued softness in the economies of our trading partners
abroad, there is some risk of deviation from both of those forecasts.

-16-

8/22/95

But at this point, I think the risks are about balanced.
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you,

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District continues to show modest
overall growth with a noticeable flattening of employment growth in
New Mexico and Louisiana being offset by slightly improving employment
in Texas. High-tech industries like electronics, semiconductors,
computers, and communications services, which are increasingly
important in the Eleventh District, continue to be an important source
of regional growth. Our contacts in real estate are voicing a renewed
sense of optimism particularly in single-family construction, which is
believed to finally have hit bottom. However, we are beginning to
hear of some fears of overbuilding of apartments, particularly in the
Dallas area, and banks in the District have indicated that concerns
about apartment overbuilding have led them to tighten standards for
apartment construction loans. Retail sales have improved somewhat in
most parts of the Eleventh District in recent months, with the notable
exception of the cities along the Mexican border where conditions
continue to deteriorate. Most of our peso-sensitive manufacturing
industries have been showing flat or declining employment, with
electronics and electronic equipment as I previously mentioned being
the exception. Electronics have benefitted from strong worldwide
demand, and our contacts have indicated that prices have been falling
at a slower rate than previously, which has added somewhat to
inflationary pressures. We continue to hear scattered reports of
tight labor markets but little about wage pressures.
On the national scene, we really have no significant quibbles
with the Greenbook. The only bit of inside information I have to
share with you is that up through the middle of August, sales of
nationwide have been weaker than expected. They have
maintained unit sales, but have done so only by cutting prices. The
weakest areas are in the Northeast and the Southwest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. At our board meeting a couple of weeks ago,
Mr. Chairman, one of our directors summed up his comments on the local
economic situation by saying that things were not as good as they had
been, presumably back in 1994, but they were better than most people
had expected when the economy began to slow earlier this year. I
think that remark fairly characterizes the general sentiment not only
I read that
in his area but pretty much across our whole District.
remark as offering some confirmation for your remark in your HumphreyHawkins testimony that we may be past the point of maximum risk in the
slowdown. I think it offers some support for the staff forecast-maybe it raises the probability from zero to three or four percent or
something like that!
[Laughter]
There really has not been much change in conditions overall
in our region since the last FOMC meeting. The economy in the
District continues to grow at a subdued pace, but it is growing. As I
have mentioned at previous meetings, we still have some pockets of
very strong activity, especially in central North Carolina. To a
large extent that is because a number of businesses from other parts
of the country have been relocating recently to that area. In any

-17-

8/22/95

case, we have been told that the market for office space is extremely
tight in places like Raleigh-Durham and Charlotte and that the supply
of both skilled and unskilled labor is quite tight in that region.
The South Carolina and Virginia economies for the most part are also
pretty strong, and even West Virginia is doing pretty well overall, I
think in part because of some relocations from other parts of the
country.
The main problem in our District I guess is the opposite from
your situation, Cathy. The northern part of our area, the Maryland
economy, is quite sluggish and, of course, the general economic
situation here in the District of Columbia is very bleak because of
current and prospective job losses. One anecdotal comment we heard
might be of some interest. We are in touch with an automobile dealer
in Maryland who is active not only in his own market but in one of the
national dealers associations and he gets good information about the
industry generally. He told us recently that auto dealers had been
surprised and burned three times so far this year--in January, April,
and now July. Because of that he thinks that dealers are going to
approach the new model year with considerable caution and only order
the minimum number of cars, what they need to represent the new models
to the public. If that turns out to be right, it could offer some
confirmation to your projection, Dave, that the cutback in assemblies
may extend through the third quarter and maybe shave a point or so off
GDP growth in that period.
More generally, the staff's near-term projections for the
national economy are certainly reasonable. They seem to me to be
closely in line with the private consensus projections. Like most
other people, I think the risks are pretty balanced on the up side and
the down side. Back in the spring, as you may recall, we in Richmond
were especially concerned about the downside risks in the outlook. We
are less concerned about them now, but I think we need to keep in mind
It seems to me the key is the automobile
that they are still there.
sector. If the weakness we have seen in auto sales were to persist,
that could extend the period of slow job growth, revive concerns about
job security, and put a lid on aggregate demand. But there are also
upside risks, and I think they are more pronounced now than they were
earlier this year with the strengthening in the economy that seems to
be suggested by some of the recent data. The main upside risk as I
see it is that once we get past the inventory correction, assuming no
unanticipated negative shocks, the economy could be operating at close
In
to full capacity in a number of key industries and labor markets.
that kind of situation with a recession having been dodged, people may
have an enhanced view of job security. If we were to get a situation
like that, the favorable wage picture that we have been looking at in
a period of relatively low unemployment could begin to dissipate. The
recent upward adjustment in bond rates may be reflecting that kind of
concern at least to some extent and maybe to a considerable extent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. As in the nation as a whole, the
Eighth District has experienced some slowing relative to 1994. That
was expected because the District economy had been growing faster than
could be sustained. The District unemployment rate was 4.7 percent in
June, holding at about a percentage point below the national figure.
Recent reports show growth in personal incomes in District states

-18-

8/22/95

centered in the 4 to 5 percent range. Job growth has continued,
though at a slower pace. Conversations with our directors and other
District business leaders indicate that the District is generally
operating at a high level.
In fact, forecasts of reduced auto
production at the national level are not reflected in the Eighth
District. The models produced in our District are popular, and the
auto companies are expanding capacity. Third-quarter motor vehicle
production is expected to be 3.6 percent above the level in the second
quarter and 13.8 percent above the level in the third quarter of last
year. Loan demand continues to be strong, and District banks have
increased loan portfolios by about 15 percent over the last year.
There has been an increase in the issuance of building permits,
suggesting that the District is sharing in the nationwide rebound in
the demand for housing. Many of the business people I have met have
reported pockets of labor shortages, especially for entry-level
workers but for some skilled workers as well. Nonetheless, as others
have mentioned, the labor market information has been mixed. On the
one hand, there have been some suggestions that wage pressures are
continuing to build. On the other, there has been a moderate
reduction of both overtime and employment of temporary workers.
I remain concerned about the outlook for inflation and our
inflation credibility. When I look at the pattern of inflation
expectations--for example, there is a table on CPI inflation
expectations in part II of the Greenbook that I think is quite
interesting--I see that expectations for future inflation continue to
exceed current inflation. Even the Administration's mid-session
review of the 1996 budget assumes that consumer price inflation will
continue in excess of 3 percent through the year 2005. This month the
Blue Chip consensus reported expectations that the CPI would rise 3.3
percent at an annual rate in the third quarter, 3.4 percent in the
fourth quarter, and 3.4 percent in 1996, fourth quarter over fourth
quarter. It is clear that the prevalent view is that inflation will
continue in the 3 to 4 percent range, which is less optimistic than
the view expressed by the staff. Even the lower bound of a 3 to 4
percent inflation range is certainly not price stability as I see it.
I am also worried that we, as well as the financial press and
others, are focusing too much on news reports about real economic
activity. By continually focusing on labor market reports, factory
orders, consumer sentiment surveys, and other real series, we
undermine our position that the best policy to promote long-term
growth and full employment is to achieve and maintain price stability.
Our words lose their force when we act on uncertain news about real
activity in the presence of expectations for inflation as high as they
are. The decline in bond prices since July 6, which Al mentioned a
minute ago, indicates that not everyone expects that the modest
acceleration in inflation that has occurred this past year will be
capped and that inflation will turn down. All said, I am concerned
about actual inflation and the high level of inflation expectations
that are embedded in forecasts and in longer-term interest rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. A general characterization of the District
economy, I would say, is the feeling that it is as good as it gets.
Certainly for the state of Ohio and for the part of Kentucky in our
District, people would say that these are the best times that anyone

8/22/95

-19-

can recall, and they would have a hard time imagining it improving
over that. That would not be the case in western Pennsylvania where
we have a number of counties that are still considered to have high
unemployment and sluggish growth. But I think the sense of optimism
and confidence about the future is really extraordinary. Yet, I don't
see it being accompanied by the kind of imbalances or any kind of
excesses or speculation that would worry me. The mood I get from our
small business advisory council, our small bank advisory council, our
board of directors, and the business people that I talk to is one of a
calm confidence that this is sustainable. Near term, Cleveland in
particular is looking forward to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
opening on Labor Day. They consider it to be a bigger event than the
Atlanta Olympics [Laughter] followed very shortly by the all-Ohio
World Series.
[Laughter]
We have been sold out of baseball seats for
over a month now; it is really extraordinary.
MS. MINEHAN. We take exception to the idea of an all-Ohio
World Series.
[Laughter]
MR. JORDAN. The industry- and sector-specific comments that
we hear would not be significantly different from what Mike Moskow is
reporting from the Great Lakes region. So, I am not going to go
through them. But I will relay a couple of anecdotal reports of note
related to motor vehicles and specifically trucks. One director
commented that he had seen a very welcome reduction in the amount of
overtime. With some relief, the companies--auto suppliers and
assemblers--feel that they will have fewer problems with labor now
that they are able to cut back on the amount of overtime. Talking to
business people about their efforts at hiring, it has been very
interesting to hear their comments about the lack of what they call
unskilled workers and how much they are having to pay in order to
attract unskilled people for entry-level positions. One company that
makes rubber products related to motor vehicles said that the nice
thing about today's technology is that they can hire people who don't
know anything at all and still afford to pay them $8 an hour even
though they are unskilled in his view. This says that there is
something about the productivity of these people that is not
consistent with usual notions about productivity. If he thinks they
have no skills and yet they are worth $8 an hour because of
technology, that is a different way of thinking about what the labor
market is contributing. One of our small business people in the
Columbus area said that people who are not working today in that area
are people who don't want to work. Bonuses are being paid and firms
are competing for unskilled or trainable workers. Another general
comment from directors and advisory people is how much they are
spending on training and how they achieve better results by competing
for workers by offering training programs rather than by raising
benefits or bidding up the wage structure.
With regard to health care, some of our directors in that
industry--including health goods and other health-related activities
such as a managed care company in the Dayton area that is adding new
members at double-digit rates--describe an industry that is so grossly
mismanaged that any organization, even one like the Post Office, could
improve the administration of hospitals and clinics. I asked them how
long the opportunities for improvement can go on, and they said the
introduction of better administration and technology could take until
well into the next century.

8/22/95

Turning to the national economy, the productivity numbers
that we see have interested me for some time.
Early this year or late
last year, I saw Board staff projections of productivity that I
thought were simply too low. But since I also don't think that the
output numbers mean much, it's hard for me to get too concerned about
the productivity numbers. The fact that those numbers are
consistently coming in so much stronger than people expected may tell
us something about the different nature of this expansion. That is,
it is not a demand-led expansion fostered by monetary and fiscal
stimulus, but rather it is the dividend from a gradual improvement in
the credibility of our commitment to price stability so that people
are putting more into those things that improve efficiency or what we
would call productivity. To test that idea, I have been asking
directors and advisory council members whether, if they were told that
they could not increase their prices for the rest of this century, the
cost increases they would have to incur--labor, benefits, raw
materials, and so on--would put them out of business. Almost all say,
yes, we can make it.
But some go so far as to say that such a price
outlook is the reality.
said that he
is operating above capacity but he has not had a price increase in two
years. I asked him why he didn't raise his prices. He said it is
impossible to do so; he can rely on rising productivity. He is
increasing his work force and training it, and he is adding
technology. I believe we have made a lot of progress on what I think
of as the issue of inflation--people's ability to compensate for cost
increases without raising output prices. We are seeing the benefits
of that in rising standards of living.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District economy
remains healthy and activity generally has picked up over the summer.
That pickup has been reasonably widespread across industries and
regions of the District. There have been some further gains in
employment. At the same time, labor does remain in relatively scarce
supply. That combination is interesting because it still has not
translated into anything resembling a broad-based-acceleration of
wages or even growing wage pressures. One interesting anecdote
bearing on this--and I would not argue that this is a widespread
development at this point--came from a fairly large employer in our
District who indicated that he was having a lot of trouble finding
workers. He said he has gone to outsourcing some of his back office
activities; he has contracted with a firm in Maine to do some of this
work. Apparently, labor is more readily available there and he can
get the work done at a reasonable rate. As I said, I am not
suggesting that such outsourcing is widespread, but we may see more of
it as time goes on.
One exception to this general picture of economic health is
the livestock industry; a second is manufacturing. For whatever
reason, manufacturers in our District feel business is soft and they
are not optimistic.
They believe they are going to be cutting output
further for some time.
I think that's a reasonable generalization of
their views.
With regard to the national economy, I am certainly in
general agreement with the contours of the Greenbook foreast. The
major surprise to me has been that things seem to be working out so

8/22/95

well, and certainly a bit better than I might have expected a month or
two ago. I think we are moving toward a foundation for a resumption
of sound economic growth. I anticipate that wage and price pressures
will remain relatively restrained. That is based in part on what I
see going on in the economy in terms of the difficulty of raising
prices and the reluctance to raise wages or other forms of
compensation. I don't see anything that is going to come along soon
to disturb that. So, I think we are in pretty good shape.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I want to take up Governor
Blinder's question and Dave Stockton's answer regarding the risks in
fiscal policy. This should not surprise you at all because fiscal
policy is what I have talked about all year.
I would like to start
off with two observations. The first has to do with the level of
deficit reduction we are talking about. Now, there are a lot of ways
of looking at budgets, and the word baseline has a lot of meanings.
I
like to think of baseline as being what we would be spending if we
adjusted for inflation and demographic changes without changing the
law. That number is $20 billion higher than the baseline that the
staff is using. So, when the Greenbook refers to a $30 billion
deficit reduction from the baseline, we are really talking about a $50
billion reduction from what I think of as a current services baseline.
When we talk about the House and Senate budget resolutions, which have
a $50 billion budget deficit reduction, we are really talking about a
$70 billion reduction. These are numbers that we have to keep in mind
because we are talking about more "real" money than we might think, to
use Senator Dirksen's phrase.
Second, when we look back at this, I
think we are going to be happy that the second-quarter pause happened
in the second quarter and not in the fourth quarter or the first
quarter of 1996 because I think the fiscal contraction we are going to
have coupled with random events such as an inventory correction, if
those happen coincidentally, would lead to much worse problems than we
thought. I agree with Dave Stockton that we don't have any particular
expertise on the fiscal side.
I don't think anyone has any real
insight into how this process is going to work out. But I decided to
be cynical about it.
I decided that our elected representatives may
have something on their minds other than purely the national interest.
So I talked to pollsters and political advisers of both parties,
actually most of them are independent.
I asked them for some poll
numbers so that you could see exactly what they are seeing and you can
make your judgments accordingly.
The first thing you hear when talking to anyone is the
importance of Perot voters. One only had to watch the parade to
Dallas to understand how important they are. So, I am going to focus
on Perot voters. They have been called the radical center--I don't
know if that's the right phrase. Demographically, they are more
middle class than most voters: 37 percent of them had incomes in the
$40,000 to $80,000 range versus 28 percent for all voters. They are
also less religious than other voters; 47 percent admitted not going
to church at least monthly versus 38 percent of all other voters, and
the percent of voters that go weekly was well below that for the
general public. Those are important characteristics to keep in mind.
They are also decidedly more anti-government than Republican voters,
and this is where it becomes interesting. When asked if the federal
government has too much power, Democrats thought yes, 63 to 24;

8/22/95

-22-

Republicans said yes, 79 to 17; Perot voters replied yes, 88 to 9. A
pre Ruby Ridge question was:
Would you actively resist the government
if you thought it was threatening your rights?
"Actively resist" is a
pretty strong phrase. Perot voters said yes, 57 to 34.
Do you think
the government is your partner or your opponent in your pursuit of the
American dream? Perot voters said it was their opponent, 71 to 23.
Does government hurt or help people like you? Democrats split about
evenly. Republicans said "hurt," 50 to 36, and Perot voters said
"hurt," 51 to 24.
How about the welfare state? There were two
choices:
government is there to take care of people who can't take
care of themselves; or groups like the Salvation Army and/or the
United Way would do a better job. Democrats like the government, 48
to 39; Republicans like the private sector, 61 to 25; Perot voters
like the private sector, 67 to 18.
Do we even need the federal
government to provide a social safety net? Democrats said yes, 53 to
33; Republicans said no, 60 to 36; Perot voters said no, 68 to 24.
In all these questions, the Perot voters are to the right of
the Republican voters. They are even more so in the case of
regulations. Do regulations cause significant job losses? Perot
voters agreed, 71 to 24, more than the Republicans. Does it increase
the cost of things we buy? The Perot voters said yes, 83 to 12, more
than among the Republicans. And this is something that maybe the Fed
should keep in mind: How much trust do you have in regulators to act
in the interest of most Americans? The split was a great deal or a
fair amount versus not very much or none. Among Perot voters the
largest category was none, and they were negative, 54 to 16.
On the
key spending issue of Medicare, the choice was:
Would you want to
tinker--to which most people said yes--leave it alone, or completely
redesign. The public in general split 21/20 on leaving alone versus
completely redesigning. Perot voters were for completely redesigning,
30 to 14.
When given the choice of reforming Medicare to control
costs or using money allocated for tax cuts for the rich to maintain
the current Medicare system, they split 3 to 1 in favor of reform over
using tax cuts for the rich. Those are the numbers that the
Republicans in Congress in particular are focusing on since these
voters are the ones that gave them the majority. Perot voters in 1992
split evenly among the parties; they went 2 to 1 for the Republicans
in the last election.
The first conclusion of the pollsters and analysts is that
the Republicans think they have to deliver on budget cuts to keep
these voters. The second is that the decline in the Republican
numbers since January is more a result of the budget-cutting process
slowing down than their doing the wrong thing. Independents, for
example, were asked whether Congress was stalling or going too fast.
They said stalling, by 43 to 30.
Third, GOP freshmen are by far the
most Perot-like. Secretary Rubin spoke to the freshman class to try
to talk them out of not approving the debt ceiling. He came away
shocked; that was the word I was given. There are now 160 members of
the House of Representatives who have signed their names to something
that says they will not raise the debt ceiling unless there is a
balanced budget resolution with it.
People in both parties gave me a
flat prediction that a debt ceiling bill will not pass the House of
Representatives unless there is also a balanced budget resolution to
go with it.
Fourth, specific bureaucratic cuts are not going to be
reduced. They are, as the numbers suggested, even more popular among
Perot voters than among Republican voters. Finally, shutting down the

8/22/95

government is perceived as posing very little risk. You might get a
sense of that by looking at the vote on the bill to limit the
authority to use the Exchange Stabilization Fund that the House passed
by over 100 votes.
The Democrats' constituency is best served by saying that
there is no problem, and that is in fact the case. Remember, the
Democrats we are talking about are the survivors and they don't need
to go after the Perot voters. Gephardt says that there is no problem,
for example, on Medicare and he is in fact angry that the President
said there was. When you look at the Democratic voters, you get a
sense that they really have to hold their base if they are going to be
re-elected. For example, 47 percent of the attendees of the last
Democratic national convention were government employees. The largest
group of those were teachers. As a result there is an incentive not
to cooperate in the process, which is going to be important both at
the beginning and at the end.
What we should expect in September, I was told by the
pundits, is a series of filibusters in the Senate over the
appropriations bills. If the Senate cannot act and we don't have
appropriations bills, the President can blame the Congress, and that
is the opening for him. I was told that one of the reasons for
Bradley's defection was that he became so fed up with this mess. What
Clinton is hoping to do is not so much get the Perot voters as to have
them not like the Republicans. The way to do that is to have Congress
not produce the appropriations bills, and that is the strategy. The
path of least resistance, according to the party leaders I talk to, is
to have something like the GOP level of budget cuts because they are
not going to get anything else through the House. But to achieve
presidential victories on issues such as abortion, where we already
have seen some, especially if Medicare cuts are incorporated into the
process, the President may have to compromise with the Republicans and
get the Democrats in the Congress to go along. They would not. The
final result may be that a bill will have a lot of difficulty passing
because there is no bipartisan support for a compromise. The final
caution in all this is that if a reconcilation bill is vetoed, all
the deals that were cut in getting the appropriations process are
nullified. You have to start the process all over again. A veto of
the reconciliation bill probably means that it is going to take weeks
and weeks and weeks and not a matter of hours or days to get a second
deal through. All that makes me very depressed, but it seems to me
that we are probably going to get much larger deficit reductions in
the form of spending cuts than the Greenbook is calling for, and I
think that should be a factor in our thinking.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The
recently released data show no clear-cut trend in the Second
District's economy. In the real estate sector, our contacts reported
declines in existing home sales and home prices in the Greater New
York City metropolitan area in July and August to date. In June,
permits for construction of single-family houses in the District fell
below year-ago levels for the fourth consecutive month. Unemployment
rates rose in both New York and New Jersey in July, but the payroll
reports were mixed. New Jersey reported moderate, broad-based job
growth while New York reported a contraction reflecting a decline in

8/22/95

-24-

On the more positive side, tax collection data
government employment.
suggested some underlying strength in personal income and retail
sales.
The considerable concern and pessimism regarding the
international situation that I mentioned at the last Committee meeting
has been lessened but only a little. It has been lessened slightly
because the Japanese have made some rather modest steps to encourage
economic growth and a more rational flow of capital from their
financial institutions. Much more needs to be done, however.
European growth is weak as demonstrated especially by recent German
data. In our own hemisphere, the major countries--Mexico, Brazil,
Argentina, and Canada--are working through very difficult macroeconomic situations, and that is likely to continue. So, we need to
continue to look at the United States domestic economy against the
background of a rather weak international environment.
I view the movements in exchange rates since our last meeting
as positive in that the dollar was weaker than it needed to be to make
the United States a very formidable exporter, and the strength of the
Japanese yen was a major source of concern, then and now, about the
basic financial stability of that country, especially its banking
sector. But I think the present exchange rate levels, given the
current fundamentals, are more rational and more likely to lead to
economic growth in Japan and Germany. And as I said earlier, I
believe the United States dollar is still at a level that makes us
quite attractive. I think that all or most of these exchange rate
moves would have happened if we had not intervened. As Peter Fisher
and others have suggested, the success of the intervention had a great
deal to do with the fact that the market was moving in that direction
anyway. You never know whether all of this would have happened if we
had just stayed home and relaxed, but it is important that we not get
confused into thinking that we can have exchange rates where we would
like them to be rather than where market forces say they will be.
I
certainly support the Chairman's wish to have everybody decide that it
is nice that we were successful; we were lucky three times; and now
let's cool it.
Domestically, we think, as all of you have suggested, that
the economy is bouncing back very much along the lines that we and
others have been forecasting for the last several months. We think
the downside risk has been reduced considerably and that the risks to
the forecast are now rather well balanced. Signs of strength:
Single-family housing starts are up 11 percent in May and June;
nonauto retail sales are strong; consumer confidence is strong; and
the stock market is quite robust. On the other hand, auto sales are
weak and, as has been suggested, could continue to have an adverse
effect on the economy in the fourth quarter. Employment is growing
but not very strongly. Our forecast and the Greenbook's are very
similar in terms of real GDP and the unemployment rate. We are
slightly less sanguine on inflation but just slightly less. We had
been considerably more concerned or at least we had a higher forecast
of inflation than did the Greenbook until now; we have been revising
our inflation forecast down. I think it's easy to get confused about
how much better the price data look because used car prices early in
the year pushed core inflation higher than it should have been and are
now making core inflation look a little too good. If you take car

-25

8/22/95

prices out of core inflation, it slows from around 3-1/2 percent in
the first quarter to about 3 percent in July.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Used cars only or total?

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Prices for both. I really applaud
the approach of the Greenbook. I think we have to be careful,
especially in New York, not to fight the tape and to accept the fact
that price performance is in fact better than we had thought it would
be. On the other hand, it's a little early to declare victory, and
therefore I applaud the decision of the authors of the Greenbook not
to say that the NAIRU is coming down from the 5.9 percent level.
I
think it would be very nice if we could conclude sometime in the
future that that has happened, but I believe it is smart not to reach
that conclusion quite yet. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is no doubt that
the Greenbook is not exactly correct. It never is; it can't be and
it's not expected to be. But that said, I think the staff did an
exceptionally good job this time around in assessing what I see as a
very tricky period. I find the economy that they project to be highly
credible. I also think that it's a very acceptable one at this time
but not permanently. By not permanently I mean that over the longer
term we still have to keep the inflation rate on a secular downward
path. We are not at price level stability yet, and we are still
determined to get there.
What do I mean by acceptable at this time? Well, I think
there are many very big questions out there whose answers are going to
have to unfold over the coming months. Virtually every one on my list
has been discussed this morning, and it's rather awesome. After all
the rhetoric runs its course, what is really going to be the deficit
reduction that we are going to have to deal with? Second, has the
NAIRU changed and if so by how much? Third, have productivity trends
really improved as many think?
If we are on a higher trend, how much
higher and is it a sustainable one? Fourth, a lot of the good results
that we are getting now, I don't know how much, has to do with the socalled traumatized worker.

How long is

the American workforce going

to remain quiescent without the compensation increases that it thinks
it should get? When employment is as strong as it is right now, I
don't think we can depend on having permanently favorable results in
that area. This has been a rather big key to the present happy macro
situation where we have a high capacity utilization rate and a
relatively low inflation rate. We all feel rather good about that.
Fifth, will households continue to take on more debt? That obviously
is the key to consumer spending. Consumer debt is rising again toward
its all-time high of several years ago. We all know that in many past
years we had a much lower level of consumer debt than we are carrying
now. One has to wonder if people are going to want to return, at
least partially, to those standards of prior years. Then, of course,
there is the matter of whether or not we are overstating inflation and
if so by how much. That was a very interesting but not particularly
critical question when we were at higher levels of inflation, but as
we begin to move into the zone that could be considered price level
stability, that question starts to become very important indeed.

-26-

8/22/95

The answers to all these questions, and more I am sure, are
going to have everything to do with shaping monetary policy as we go
along into the future. How is it going to shape up? I certainly
don't know, but the point is that for now it seems to me that we have
a good balance in the economy and we are moving toward an appropriate
degree of momentum. That puts us in good shape to await the unfolding
answers to some of these critical questions and in a pretty good
position, I would hope, to be able to react appropriately as those
answers start to become available.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The inventory
correction appears to be running its course and the adverse follow-on
effects that we talked about at the last meeting do not appear to be
about to beset us.
The economy could well be set to resume its growth
path at potential. Many of the areas of strength in the economy have
been mentioned. Both consumer and business spending have resumed.
The housing market has shown some renewed vigor. Employment still is
fairly strong, although the unemployment rate did tick up last month
and there has been some discussion about the volatility of the
participation rates.
The wealth effects of a stronger stock market
may support continued spending. The flip side of a strong stock
market is that we have a fairly low cost of capital, and that bodes
well for continued investment spending. Corporate profits have been
holding up reasonably well, and there appears to be a continued
commitment to improvement in productivity.
In view of this rather optimistic scenario, I have been
trying to assess the downside risks, the clouds and uncertainties on
the horizon. Larry has talked extensively about the fiscal impact on
the economy of dealing with the deficit, particularly since it appears
that there is considerable interest in seriously addressing it this
fall.
It's very hard to know what, if any, effects there will be from
a train wreck. I think we'll see a lot of national attention focused
on Washington as we approach the November showdown.

There also has been considerable discussion today about the
labor market. Although the unemployment rate is historically low, it
is difficult to assess the longer-term impacts of the re-engineering
binge that has been going on in the private sector and in some parts
of the public sector. A lot of displaced people are now employed, but
they may see their new jobs as temporary. On the positive side, this
does suggest that there may be more flexibility in the labor market
than is implied by the 5.7 percent unemployment rate. This may help
explain the dichotomy that we seem to be seeing between labor
shortages and the fact that there don't seem to be many upward wage
pressures. This uncertainty in the labor market or lack of confidence
among workers may well contribute to consumer spending vulnerability.
This vulnerability may be exacerbated by the fact that a lot of
consumers have taken on more debt in the last year and a half. On the
supply side, the auto market may not provide the same kind of growth
impetus that it has in the past. We have heard some mixed reports
around the table today about the auto market. Pent-up demand has
probably been worked off. The ownership holding period for autos
appears to be longer. Some of that is due to the improved durability
of autos, but it also may be simply that people can't afford the
higher sticker prices.
Income constraints may start to hold down auto

-27-

8/22/95

sales in the future and not provide the same kind of impulse that we
have had in the past. Of course, foreign competition may become more
of a factor as the impact of the dollar is felt.
On the inflation side, I do think that most of the recent
data are supportive of the hypothesis advanced at the last meeting
that the uptick in the first half of the year was really due to
temporary cyclical pressures. It is somewhat discouraging that the
outlook for inflation still seems to be in the vicinity of 3 percent,
indicating that we have some distance to go.
In sum, the economic reports that have come in since the last
meeting have been encouraging. The inventory correction appears to
have been more the proverbial air pocket on the way to the soft
landing. The financial markets seem reasonably consistent with this
outlook. The stock market has paused but it didn't tank. The slope
of the yield curve has steepened, implying that the risk of recession
is somewhat less. Yield spreads have not widened, implying that there
may be some lessening of concerns about asset quality in the markets.
Credit demand appears reasonably strong. So, it seems to me that a
growth outlook reasonably close to potential is quite likely and that
the risks are more balanced.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After all the praise
that the staff forecast has received, I am tempted to start by saying
that I think they have it all wrong. But I don't actually, so I
won't. I don't have any major quarrels with the Greenbook. I could
differ with it a little bit here and there, but those differences are
too small to bother anybody with. Like many people, starting with
Dave Stockton, I am troubled by the fact that it's a bit too good to
be true. We know it's not going to come in quite that well, but that
is in no sense a criticism of the forecast; you make your best guess.
A notable feature of the Greenbook forecast exercise, which
various people have indirectly remarked upon but I'd like to make
explicit, is that we have been seeing a successive writing down of the
staff forecast as I have observed at past meetings. That has now
stopped. I think the staff has stopped writing down its forecast, as
I have, for good reasons. Bob Parry mentioned several of them, and I
won't repeat what he said about the composition of the GDP in the
second quarter; that's much more important than the tea leaves that we
get from week to week.
However, as you could probably tell from the question that I
posed to Dave, I have some fear that all of us are going to be
revising our forecasts down again after the fiscal dust settles,
whenever it settles. We don't know what the dust is going to look
like, and we don't know when it is going to settle. But when I think
about the various scenarios, I have a much harder time thinking about
the economy coming out better at the end, or in the middle, of the
process than I do about it coming out worse. I just find it extremely
difficult to conceptualize a scenario that takes us through this train
wreck and has us coming out on the other side with stronger aggregate
demand than we had when we went in. There are two reasons for that.
One is the aggregate demand effect, which Larry Lindsey was
emphasizing. But we also ought not to forget about the potential

8/22/95

impact of this thing, whatever it is, on financial markets. The
foreign exchange markets, the domestic bond market, and the stock
market could truly be rattled by this event. Now, of course, none of
us can predict what is going to happen. I am just emphasizing this
because I think it now ought to be at the front of our screens, not at
the back. Two or three FOMC meetings ago it was at the back of our
screens, and now I think it really needs to be at the front.
The last thing I'd like to call attention to is a subtle,
barely noticeable, feature of the Greenbook forecast. You have to
look closely to see it. But I think it's important for the long run-not at all important for the short run--and also sensible.
In this
forecast, there is a small GDP gap at the forecast horizon, which
happens to be the fourth quarter of 1996.
GDP is below potential by
just a hair more than it is now, according to the staff's estimates.
It's not a very big gap, about .4 percent of GDP. That's a small
number, much less than forecasting errors for a six-quarter horizon.
But it's also about twice the estimate of the overshoot of capacity
that we had at the end of 1994 and the beginning of 1995, which was
minute. Much more important for the long run--and the reason I bring
it up--is that, if we look at the details of the forecast, that gap is
slowly widening over time. That is to say, GDP is growing just a tad
below potential. If we extrapolated that path into 1997 and 1998-after all, year-end 1996 is a very short time horizon for monetary
policy--we would be looking at a path with a slight upward tilt to the
unemployment rate and a slight downward tilt to the inflation rate,
neither of which is showing yet in the Greenbook forecast. They go
together, of course.
I said I thought this was a sensible, though very subtle,
feature of the forecast. It's exactly what one would expect if the
real interest rate is above the equilibrium real interest rate--which,
I think, is what we believed at the last FOMC meeting and what I still
believe. If that is the case, the gap between potential and actual
GDP, or between the natural rate and the unemployment rate, or between
3 percent and the inflation rate, will grow bigger as we go forward-and at an accelerating rate since this thing feeds on itself.
Finally, I think there is a reasonable probability that the
gap between the equilibrium rate and the real short-term interest rate
implied in the Greenbook path is bigger than in the Greenbook forecast
for two reasons, both of which have been mentioned. One is that the
fiscal contraction is bigger than in the Greenbook path and that
lowers the equilibrium rate. The other is the possibility that the
NAIRU is actually below the number that is being used in the
Greenbook, as has been mentioned several times. We don't know that
that is the case. Dave is absolutely right; I was quite happy with
the way he characterized it.
But I think the odds that the NAIRU is
higher than the staff number look extremely small compared to the odds
that it is lower. If that's the case, the divergence between the
equilibrium real rate and the actual real rate will grow faster than
an extrapolation of the Greenbook would presume. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the news that
has accumulated during the intermeeting period is almost entirely
favorable with respect to the outlook, both for real performance and

-29-

8/22/95

for inflation over the forecast horizon. While I, too, would like to
find a reason to disagree with the Greenbook, I find myself in
substantial agreement with the Greenbook's assessment of the data.
Most important to my way of thinking is that we now have mounting
evidence that the inventory adjustment under way is proceeding more
rapidly and with substantially less disruption of growth in final
sales than I had been fearing. The continued strength of consumption
and investment spending in the face of the inventory adjustment,
coupled with strong evidence of a rebound in residential construction,
substantially mitigates what I had thought was one of the most serious
downside risks. At this stage, as David emphasized, substantial risks
to the outlook for real growth remain, but I agree that they are much
more balanced than they seemed to me in July. As David also
indicated, it's possible to argue that there remains enough momentum
in aggregate demand to potentially rekindle inflationary pressures.
In that regard, I would simply point out that we have had a
significant backup in interest rates since our last meeting, coupled
with a significant appreciation of the dollar. I think that those two
forces are working to restrain this upside risk.
At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you argued that the
present level of the real funds rate is above the neutral or
equilibrium level that is needed for stable growth with a continuing
secular downtrend in the rate of inflation. The Bluebook for the July
meeting reinforced the conclusion that, particularly with projected
fiscal contraction, this neutral real funds rate would be declining
gradually over time. I certainly agreed with that conclusion then and
I continue, as Governor Blinder emphasized, to think that eventually
the real funds rate is going to need to decline to keep the economy on
track beyond the forecast horizon. I agree with Governor Blinder's
explanation that if we were to go beyond the six quarters in the
Greenbook, we would see initially a mild shortfall in growth below
what is needed to keep the economy operating at potential and then the
gap would begin to widen. It's in that sense that a decline in the
real funds rate is eventually going to be needed to keep the economy
on track. Nevertheless, over the forecast horizon I think that the
outlook has definitely improved.
On the inflation front, the news has also been quite
favorable.

Recent readings on producer and consumer prices along with

the appreciation of the dollar have lessened the concern that the
uptick in inflation that we saw in the first half of the year could
presage a higher inflation trend. And as David Stockton emphasized,
the continued moderation in the growth of benefit costs and
compensation is a favorable factor in the inflation outlook. It may
be too soon to break out the champagne, but it seems quite likely to
me that we will succeed in capping the inflation rate in this cycle
and preserving the gains that have been made on the inflation front in
the 1991 recession and the ensuing recovery.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
available at this stage.
MR. BERNARD.

Thank you.

I assume we have coffee

It's available.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Kohn, you have the floor.

-30-

8/22/95

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As it turns out, my
I'll be
comments begin where the last two commentors left off.
organizing my comments this morning around the real federal funds
rate.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is there a particular reason why you use
a one-year forward expectation of the price index deflator with
overnight funds?
MR. KOHN. First of all, I don't know what the overnight
inflation expectation is.
To make a guess about inflation over the
short run, it's pretty reasonable to assume that people would look at
inflation in the recent past, so we use a one-year backward-looking
inflation measure.
It does not give a significantly different result
from the Philadelphia Fed's one-year ahead inflation measure. We
don't have any shorter measure of inflation expectations. I do think
that if folks are trying to guess at what inflation is going to be
over the next few months, those guesses are not all that different
from their guesses about inflation over the next year or what
inflation was over the last year. But I'd be the first to admit that
our measures of expectations are highly imperfect. I took a little
comfort from the fact that both the backward-looking and the forwardlooking measures gave roughly the same answers, though I think the
forward-looking measures are-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Except now, if you use a two- or threemonth moving average, won't you get virtually a full percentage point
higher?
MR. KOHN. A full percentage point?
three-month moving average.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
last three months?
guess.

I guess if you use the

What has the inflation rate been in the

MR. KOHN. I would say 2-3/4 percent if I were going to
I am using the last 12 months.
This has 3.1 percent built in.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand that. You are not using
the core rate; you are using the total CPI, is that right?
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

MR. STOCKTON. The total CPI has averaged about .2 a month
for the last three months.
MR. KOHN. That's closer to a 2-1/2 percent rate, so it would
be about 1/2 point perhaps.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Don?

MR. LINDSEY. Suppose your objective was to maintain nominal
GDP in calendar 1996, and suppose on November 7th we got protracted,
torturous messes on Capitol Hill and in the bond market.
Suppose we
got a contraction of government spending somewhere around 3/4 percent
of GDP, and again it was messy in the bond market. Which would be
more effective as far as influencing nominal GDP in 1996: to have a

-31-

8/22/95

sharp cut in the fed funds rate at that time or to have gradual
reductions leading up to it?
MR. KOHN. The premise of the question is that somehow on a
given day you knew the size of the shock and it was huge relative to
GDP. So there was no uncertainty going forward about how long the
shock would persist and what its size would be.
MR. LINDSEY.

The issue is resolved on that date.

MR. KOHN. My first thought is that if the issue is resolved,
you know what the resolution is and where things are going, and
everybody else knows--this isn't some inside information the Fed has-I don't know why you wouldn't reduce your rates right away rather than
gradually. I'm not sure I see the advantage of gradualism in the case
of an identified shock whose effects I am quite confident that I know,
provided that the rest of the world sees the situation the same way so
they don't misinterpret your policy actions. Governor Blinder was
shaking his head "no."
MR. BLINDER. I thought the question was whether to move in
advance.
Isn't that what you just said, Larry? You got the right
answer but not to the question that you asked. [Laughter]
MR. KOHN.
that the question?

If I knew now that this was going to happen--is

MR. LINDSEY. If you knew now that this was going to happen
and the objective was the same. Maybe, Governor Blinder, you can help
me out in phrasing my question. You are right; I don't think Don
answered my question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Am I grading these papers?

[Laughter]

MR. LINDSEY. No, I'd rather he grade the papers.
If that
was what was going to happen, would it be more useful to wait until
the event and have a sharp reduction on that day or to have a
reduction sooner than the event?
MR. KOHN.

If I knew what was going to happen but the markets

didn't?
MR. LINDSEY.

Right.

MR. KOHN. That's the key because, as I think Mr. Simpson
demonstrated last time, if the markets know what will happen they will
take bond yields down and that acts basically as an automatic
stabilizer. It doesn't matter quite so much how the Fed validates it.
Eventually you have to validate it, but the timing of our moves is not
so important. If you knew today that there was going to be a major
contraction beginning on November 7th, you would have to proceed
somewhat gingerly because there would be a problem if the markets
didn't know it. They wouldn't know how to interpret what you were
doing even if you stated what you were doing. If they didn't believe
you, there could be a potentially adverse effect on inflation
expectations or a lot of confusion and volatility in the markets. So,
you have set up a very difficult problem where the central bank does
have inside information, while the rest of the economy doesn't have it

-32-

8/22/95

and might or might not believe the central bank if it provided that
inside information. So, I think you would have to proceed very
cautiously in that kind of situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Just a quick comment and a quick question.
The comment is that I noticed some changes in the way the Bluebook was
constructed and the way you presented some of the information, which I
thought was useful and constructive, Don. The question I had: We
have had a significant backup in long-term interest rates over the
intermeeting period, 35 basis points at the long end of the yield
curve. There wasn't a whole lot of discussion about that. I
interpret that backup as being in part, and maybe largely, a change in
inflation expectations and psychology in the market, albeit a shortterm one. It's hard for me to see how real rates would move that
quickly. Much of this took place in a very short period of time-shortly after the data began to come in stronger. Do you see it that
way?
MR. KOHN. I would say, President Broaddus, that I see it as
much more of a mixture, perhaps with a little more emphasis on the
real rates but not exclusively the real rates. That is, I think the
information that hit us and the market over the intermeeting period
was that real growth was stronger at those old interest rates than we
had been expecting. In classroom jargon, the IS curve was out a bit
further than we thought. That to me would suggest that in fact real
interest rates need to be higher over the business cycle to keep the
economy at its potential. If you look at the pattern of forward
rates, a lot of the bulge in forward rates over the intermeeting
period is at business cycle frequencies of three, four, five years.
At the same time, I think we probably can never settle this because we
don't have inflation-indexed bonds. Given that the economy was
stronger, I think it's logical that inflation expectations might have
been revised up at least a little, but I would put much more emphasis
on the real side than on inflation expectations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Don, first of all I wanted to comment that I
really appreciated the remarks you made with respect to the Bluebook.
I must say that I read the discussion of real rates in the Bluebook
and got a headache! I think what really both red me about it is that
I view real rates, like any other real variables, as something we
can't influence in the long run as well as something that we can't
observe. So we are describing policy actions in terms of something we
can't affect and something we can't see. That's why I got the
headache. Now, there is an easy solution to that: get inflation down
to zero, keep it there, and we won't have to worry about it. We have
just cut short rates 25 basis points and have seen long-term nominal
rates go up 35 to 40 basis points.
In that light I was going to note,
particularly with regard to a policy option such as alternative A,
that it is incomprehensible to me that we somehow could cut short
rates again based on our forecast of inflation, which the market
doesn't know about, and keep real interest rates in general from
rising, let alone foster lower real rates. This is very similar to
the example you were giving in response to Larry's question. The
Greenbook inflation forecast is not supported by most other forecasts

8/22/95

and many surveys of longer-term expectations. Real rates, as you
suggested in your remarks, are a helpful thing to look at over longer
periods of time, but I don't know what to make of the analysis of a
short-run policy option based on what would happen to real rates,
particularly to real rates across the yield curve.
MR. KOHN. I don't think I can help your headache. [Laughter]
I can try to explain what I was thinking about. I think that the
Federal Reserve can affect real rates by changing the federal funds
rate, real and nominal, since the two are about the same because
inflation expectations don't change in the near term. I think
expectations about what the Fed will do with interest rates do have an
effect on real rates, at least through the intermediate part of the
term structure. I believe that's the primary channel of Federal
Reserve policy to the economy. In 1979, 1980, 1981 this institution
raised real rates to very, very high levels and had a major effect on
economic activity. Those real rates rose at short- and long-term
maturities in order to put slack in the economy and reduce inflation.
So, I think the Federal Reserve can affect real rates, at least over a
business cycle. I agree that in the long run productivity and thrift
determine the long-run real interest rate. The premise of our meeting
here and making policy changes is that in the short run we can affect
real rates and lean against business cycles.
Perhaps we don't do a
perfect job all the time, but I think the evidence of the last 15
years shows that we have done a pretty good job on at least a few
occasions in smoothing through these cycles by changing real rates.
With regard to alternative A, I believe that if you were to
lower the nominal funds rate, you would have an effect on real
interest rates at least through the intermediate-maturity spectrum.
People would change their idea of what this Committee was going to do
with interest rates. What would happen to nominal rates is a bigger
question and one that we debated amongst ourselves in writing that
particular paragraph. That is, if our policy was not credible, if
people thought that lowering these interest rates would simply provoke
more inflation, then nominal intermediate- and long-term rates might
very well do nothing, in which case the inflation expectations part
would rise even though the real rate was lower, or these nominal rates
might even rise. My view in the end was that the FOMC has a lot of
credibility and that if the Committee lowered rates and in particular
if you said that you lowered rates because you had an optimistic view
on inflation, that would carry some weight in the market at least for
a while. If I remember the paragraph, it would only be if the
incoming data failed to confirm the Committee's expectations that
rates would then back up. But I agree it's entirely a guess as to
where inflation expectations will come out if you do that.
MR. MELZER. I thought it particularly difficult in the
context of our most recent experience to make that argument. Let me
just leave it there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, there is no question that you are
right on the longer-term rate spectrum, but if hypothetically we just
The
squeezed reserves out of the system, two things would happen:
nominal rate would go up and the inflation rate would go down, and the
real rate would have to go up. But I think that is not true in the
longer run, which is where we can't affect it.

-34-

8/22/95

MR. MELZER. It's not true in the longer run. I get troubled
when we start extending that out the yield curve and making judgments
as to how it affects the long end of the curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it is not true in the long run,
and it is not true in a long-term forecast of the real funds rate, if
I may put it that way. But for a short-term forecast of the real
funds rate, I think Don is exactly right on that.
MR. MELZER. In terms of the funds rate, yes. What troubles
me is going out the yield curve and making a general application.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Or a long-term projection of the real
overnight rate--in other words, what the funds rate is going to be
three years or ten years from now.
MR. MELZER.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Blinder.

MR. BLINDER. Don, I want to ask you a question that came up
when I scribbled my notes last night, notes which were much less
extensive than yours. I was thinking about the difference between the
real Treasury bill rate, or any interest rate that really matters to
somebody, and the real fed funds rate, which doesn't matter to anybody
but us and a few banks that trade fed funds.
If I am not mistaken,
when we looked at this a while back, it was somewhat puzzling that
nominal fed funds rates were higher than Treasury bill rates on
average over long periods of time.
Is that right?
MR. KOHN. Yes, but there are two differences. One is the
taxation. Treasury bills aren't subject to state income tax.
People
often use a New York resident as the marginal holder, so it's a
nontrivial tax rate like 10 percent. The second point is that one is
the obligation of someone who hasn't defaulted--at least until a few
weeks from now--and the other is a private rate. There is a different
risk premium.
MS. MINEHAN.

Yes.

MR. BLINDER.

Different risk?

SPEAKER(?).

MR. BLINDER.

Sure.

Yes, but that goes the other way.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No.

MR. KOHN. Fed funds rates are higher than bill rates because
banks are riskier than the government.
MR. BLINDER. I am sorry. Am I right that the average gap
over a very long time is in the range of 75 basis points with fed
funds higher?
MR. PARRY.

That's too high.

-35-

8/22/95

MR. KOHN. That sounds too high to me as well. Dave is
saying 50 basis points.
In the Financial Indicators package there is
a one-year real funds rate; I don't know whether that's helpful in
terms of the point you are getting at.
MR. PARRY.
yield curves?

He's talking about the two nominal effective

MR. KOHN. Yes. The difference is about 30 basis points now
and it looks like the average may be about 50 to 75 basis points.
It
was low for a long time.
MR. BLINDER. What I was getting at is this:
On the question
of the real rate relative to historic averages, I think you get a
little stronger case that it's on the high side if you look at, say,
Treasury bills.
MR. KOHN.

Treasury bills?

MR. BLINDER.

I think that's more correct than if you look at

funds.
MR. KOHN.
Committee.

I will have it plotted and distributed to the

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else? At the last meeting and
at the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, as Governor Yellen suggested, I
indicated that the maximum risk of a short-term recession was probably
past.
Indeed, the data that have emerged since then have increased
the probability that the risks of recession have eased. A significant
part of this is unquestionably the fact that we are not seeing a
weakening in final demand despite all the evidence that clearly points
to a far more rapid pace of inventory adjustment than we had
contemplated at the last meeting. The lead times are continuing to
fall and the inventory adjustment process is still going on. It may
be a bit premature to presume that the adjustment is complete at this
stage or approaching completion. There is no question that we are
beginning to see order patterns that are stabilizing, but the
adjustment has been too quick and the timeframe too short for us to
believe that we are through it as yet. I would not be surprised to
see industrial production sagging for a number of weeks or a month or
so before we work our way through this. Nonetheless, I think the
evidence clearly is emerging that the underlying structural weakness
that concerned us is dissipating. The evidence of much stronger
growth in output is lacking but, as I think Dave Stockton said, the
probabilities of that occurring have gone up.
Indeed, while the
anecdotal evidence around this room has pointed with surprising
unanimity to a pause, the Districts are doing better now as we go from
one to another than they were three months ago.
I think that probably
reflects the fact that the economy is coming back and growing at a
faster pace, but real pressure on the up side seems a good distance
away, judging from all of the numbers we have at this particular
stage. When we look at the individual company data and the anecdotal
data on orders, it is clear that conditions are improving overall, but
it is a mixed bag. It is not the straightforward universal strength
that the economy exhibited in the latter part of 1994.

8/22/95

-36-

Whatever forecast we are looking at, I think a smooth pattern
is not going to be the actual outcome. Our forecasts are going to be
It is not selftested by the fiscal crunch we are all talking about.
evident to me that the crunch will involve a major contraction in
federal spending. I think there are two sides to this issue. First
of all, it is pretty obvious that if the debt limit blocks spending-and indeed, as Larry Lindsey said, the chance of getting a debt limit
extension through the House without a balanced budget in place is very
small--we will have a dramatic shutting down of the government.
I am
inclined to the view that, when push comes to shove, we are going to
get consecutive one-week extensions of the debt limit rather than
allowing it to push the economy down. And the ambiguity with respect
to the question of how appropriated but unspent funds are employed in
various authorization bills, when there is indeed no authorization for
the period after September 30, leads me to conclude that the rate of
reduction in discretionary spending will be modest in the short term.
We will get very significant cutbacks in certain budgets, but overall,
if entitlement spending continues as indeed it does in this particular
context, the contraction in spending will be modest in the early
stages. It would be severe if a debt limit is allowed to go into
effect.
If in this process we end up with a very sharp reduction in
federal spending, the fiscal drag issue will arise, especially if it
is presumed that the decline in expenditures will be temporary. Under
those conditions we will not get offsetting pressure from falling
long-term yields, but we will get a contractionary effect from a
reduction in incomes. That will require very difficult policy
judgments on our part because I don't recall any historical precedent
It may well be that everyone will see
telling us how all this works.
the decline in income as temporary and hence the saving rate will
collapse but expenditures will not. Nominal GDP will stand up except
for the effects of liquidity constraints, of which there have to be
some. But there is no doubt that until we get a sense of that, we
will not be quite sure where it will come out.
There is also the distinct possibility--although hopefully at
this stage it is a very small probability--that we will run into a
situation in which the outlook is for materially less budget deficit
reduction. If the outlook for substantial deficit reduction does not
look as likely as it does now, markets are going to react very
adversely. We will get a significant rise in long-term rates because
very clearly there is sizable deficit reduction embodied in the longterm rate structure. If that were to happen, the stock market would
come down very dramatically. Therefore, it is possible that this
fiscal outlook can create negative real effects on the economy if the
budget deficit reduction is too much or if it is too little. It is
very difficult to know what the probability distribution looks like.
The one thing that is clear is that the budget process is now
moving forward to some form of crunch. It just is not conceivable at
this stage, at least as I see it, that there can be a resolution
before October 1st. I find it highly unlikely that continuing
resolutions will simply be adopted as they have in the past. Some
variations of continuing resolutions and debt limit extensions may
occur, but they are surely not going to apply universally. That means
that there will be some impact of an order of magnitude and a nature
that I don't think we can get a sense of at this particular stage. We

8/22/95

can judge that better after Labor Day as we begin to see whether in
fact there are going to be filibusters on the appropriations bills in
the Senate.
If we don't get appropriations bills, we can be certain
that we will not get majority votes for continuing resolutions.
Therefore, there will be no budget and no legal authority to spend.
In the Budget Act that was passed around five years ago, Congress
narrowed very significantly the ability of the President to define
threats to life and property as reasons to invoke expenditures to
protect them.
So, we have emerging an extraordinary set of events that
belies the tranquility of the Greenbook forecast. It is not terribly
clear precisely how the fourth quarter is going to come out. The one
thing I am absolutely certain of is that it is not going to look like
the Greenbook forecast. However, I would not know which numbers have
a higher probability of being realized because I think that the
Greenbook forecast may be the maximum likelihood estimate. But then
who knows what the distribution looks like on each side of that
forecast?
I conclude from all of this that we don't know how the budget
debate will be resolved. We will have another shot at it at our next
FOMC meeting, which fortuitously occurs just before October 1st.
I
think we will know a good deal more about how things are evolving at
that stage. As a consequence and in the context of our discussion in
July, I agree with Don Kohn that the real federal funds rate is a good
starting point to get a sense of where we are. Other things equal,
that rate is probably somewhat higher than we are likely to want it to
be somewhere down the track or over the longer run, with "down the
track" being on the other side of the fiscal train wreck, to keep this
analogy going. In the immediate period ahead, it strikes me that the
general outlook is extraordinarily benevolent and one that I view at
the moment as pointing to no change in policy. That is, "B" and
symmetrical seems to me the most sensible approach until the next
meeting. By the next meeting, I suspect that we are going to have to
make a number of contingent decisions. I will be very surprised if we
do not have several telephone conference calls in the month of October
as this budget situation evolves because there will have to be
coordination between the Treasury and ourselves to ascertain what is
going on and to take measures that, to whatever extent possible, will
mitigate the secondary consequences of this fiscal process that will
loom ever larger as we move into the fourth quarter. Tom.
MR. HOENIG.

Mr. Chairman, I support your policy proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

Governor Lindsey.

I support your policy proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

As do I, Mr. Chairman.

Governor Kelley.

As do I, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Minehan.

-38-

8/22/95

MS. MINEHAN.

As do I, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

I support your proposal.

MR. BOEHNE.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.

President Forrestal.

Ditto, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

The same.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. BROADDUS.

MR. JORDAN.

Governor Phillips.

I also.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Yellen.

I support your proposal, too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Moskow.

I support it, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLINDER.

President Jordan.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

President Broaddus.

Me, too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. MOSKOW.

President Stern.

I support it as well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MS. YELLEN.

President Melzer.

I support it, Alan.

MR. MELZER.

MR. STERN.

President Parry.

Governor Blinder.

So do I.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have I run out of people?
[Laughter]
lunch earlier than usual!
SPEAKER(?).

We'll have

It's those sharks!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Why don't you read the relevant

language?
MR. BERNARD. I'll be reading from page 14 in the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for

-39-

8/22/95

price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
more moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan.
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Blinder
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
President Minehan
President Moskow
Governor Phillips
Governor Yellen

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting is on September 26 and
I think we'll have a very interesting meeting. We adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING

