Prefatory Note
This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files.
The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted.
In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions.
The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable.
Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text.
All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
CONFERENCE CALL
January 6, 1993

PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Mr. Mullins
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, and Forrestal, Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Dewald, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and
Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Allison, Assistant to the Board for Federal Reserve System Affairs, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
Mr. Moore and Ms. Werneke, Special Assistants to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Siciliano, Special Assistant to the General Counsel, Legal Division, Board of
Governors

-2Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
January 6, 1993
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon and a happy New Year to
you all. The basic purpose of this telephone conference is to respond
to a letter from Henry B. Gonzalez, and I will ask the Secretary of
this Committee, Don Kohn, to lead off the discussion.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee has gotten
copies of the letter to Chairman Greenspan and of the press release
In addition, Chairman
[See Appendix.]
issued by Chairman Gonzalez.
Gonzalez introduced some legislation yesterday which has a bearing on
this, and in a second I'll ask Don Winn to summarize that particular
part of the legislation.
Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of things to put on the table
for discussion. My suggestion is, first, that you respond to Chairman
Gonzalez with a letter noting that the letter you [previously] sent
him did reflect the discussions and views of the Committee and in fact
was reviewed by members of the Committee and incorporated their
comments before being sent to him. The letter would go on to say
that, nonetheless, you've forwarded Chairman Gonzalez's letter to the
presidents and governors and asked them to make their own views known
In responding to Chairman Gonzalez, the
to him if they wish to do so.
situation is a bit confusing--I find it is anyhow--from a couple
perspectives. One is that the letter to you, Chairman Greenspan,
simply talked about detailed minutes and didn't say anything about
when they would be released. However, the accompanying press release
I
sticks with the [proposal that they be released after] 60 days.
think we can probably logically view the letter and the press release
as a unit and assume that he meant there would be detailed minutes and
that he intended to have them released in 60 days. So in some sense
that's the proposal he has on the table now.
MR. FORRESTAL.
you still on, Don?
MR. KOHN.

This is Atlanta, we've lost something.

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE.

So have we in Philadelphia.

MR. MCTEER.

Dallas too.

MR. KOHN.

Are

Well, I'm sorry.

I'll go back a few steps, then.

MR. FORRESTAL. We were up to you when you said you were
somewhat confused by the [situation].
MR. KOHN. Well, I think there are a couple of confusing
aspects here. One is that the letter talks about the memorandum of
discussion but does not mention a timing for its release. But the
press release does talk about a 60-day release timing. So, my
suggestion was to treat the letter and the press release as a unit and
assume that the Gonzalez proposal on the table is for a memorandum of
Secondly, we have the
discussion to be released in 60 days.
I
legislative proposal, which Don Winn will summarize in a second.
don't think we need to respond to that directly in the letter although
implicitly, of course, whatever you say would have a bearing on the

1/6/93

Fed's position on that and you ought to keep that in mind as you are
responding.
Another aspect is that Chairman Greenspan's response to
Chairman Gonzalez did not explicitly say anything about our concerns
about protecting the confidentiality of any memorandum of discussion
for a sufficient period of time.
To the extent you object to putting
together a memorandum of discussion and certainly if you object to

releasing it early and have qualms about the degree to which it could
be protected for a number of years--if that is your view--I think you
probably ought to say that.
We ducked that issue in our letter partly
because we were concerned about the implication that maybe a law could
be passed to deal with that and we didn't want to give him that
opening.
But if this is an important issue as you consider whether
you're in favor of something or not, without necessarily suggesting a
law be passed you ought to say that you have problems under the

Freedom of Information Act if this memorandum is produced and can't be
protected for an appropriate period of time. Perhaps Don Winn can
summarize the bill.
MR. WINN. The bill Chairman Gonzalez introduced yesterday
does address this issue very explicitly. There are two provisions
that deal with the issue of disclosure. One says that there should be
minutes, a transcript, and a videotape--all three--of the meeting that
would be made publicly available within 60 days.
Secondly, there is a
provision that says that any determination, decision, directive, or
other conclusions by the FOMC must be made available to the public
within a week of the meeting. So, this one-week provision is a new
angle that had not been mentioned in his earlier correspondence or
press releases but is now a part of this new legislation.
Let me also
say that I have just finished a written detailed summary of what is in
this bill, and I will be putting that in the Pouch to you tonight
along with the text of the legislation and a section-by-section
summary that his staff did. I don't know if the disclosure provisions
that I've just described shed much light in terms of how we should
deal with the letter.
It does show what is on his mind.
MR. KOHN. My view, Mr. Chairman, would be that it's not
necessary or even desirable to respond to that legislation through
these letters. You weren't asked to do so; you were asked to respond
to the previous letters.
But this would be valuable background
information for the Committee to have.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I would basically suggest that you
limit your responses to the nature of the questions that were asked
unless you want to engage in extended future correspondence because
the issue here is that we have a bill before the Congress and we don't
have to testify. And while it is useful to be fully responsive to
Chairman Gonzalez's questions, I don't think it is appropriate to go
beyond them. Should you do so, I think you merely extend the general
[scope of the] letter [and of] the various elements of agreement and
disagreement.
I think that [the issues raised in] the legislation
Chairman Gonzalez has introduced probably should best be left to our
[future] response to the specific [provisions] of the legislation.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I very much agree with what you
said. I just want to ask a question. If one were to say that he is
sympathetic to the idea of reintroducing the memorandum of discussion,
provided it is released after a long, long period and then indicated
that we would need [legislative] protection, that does seem to me to

1/6/93

raise the [broader] issue that some legislation is necessary. And
that is a fairly important issue. We would be saying that we might
want some form of legislation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I would suggest that we have two
choices. You can either say that you're basically supportive of
verbatim transcripts released after a protracted period but are
concerned that the existing statutes do not protect that position.
That is a much weaker statement than [the other choice, which is]
saying that we need, and indeed are recommending, legislation. These
are comparable responses to the question, but one need not go forward
and basically advocate such a statute, unless in fact one does.
MR. SYRON. I agree with what you are saying. It is true
that getting into it is the basic problem; I understand. But the
existing statutes aren't there and that would be their natural
I think we're right back to that burden of having them say:
response.
"Well, what would you need in the way of statutes?"
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, in that respect I think we have
very little choice. A decade ago, in fact, we as an organization were
supportive of legislation that would indeed do that. And unless we as
a group are against the release of minutes in any form, then the
The
How do we all respond to that question?
question essentially is:
Kohn
Don
as
be
evasive,
to
is
all
of
do
least
to
thing we want
essentially said. There are certain things that [follow] when pressed
on this. Once you say that you are not against detailed minutes, as
any individual might--and some of you did say you were not against
detailed minutes provided there was a sufficient time lag before they
were released--then there is a set of logical questions which
necessarily follow. And once you take that position, I think of
necessity you are obligated to respond to that. The only thing I'm
suggesting is that there is a difference--not a great difference, but
a difference--between stipulating that you are actively supportive of
producing minutes and you need legislation to protect them, which is
position one, or that you are not necessarily against them, but if
they should be forthcoming you think a protective statute is required,
which is position two. Now, you may say there's no substantive
difference between those positions; I tell you that there is,
politically.
MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, do you think that we're all going
to have to reply individually sooner or later or do you think that
there are any advantages to not replying individually at all?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that it would be appropriate to
respond. But if, having reviewed [my] original letter, you happen to
agree with it, one response is that you have reviewed the original
letter and that it reflects your views or something like that.
MR. BOEHNE.

It totally reflects my views.

I want to ask
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, this is Tom Hoenig.
once again
responding
to
merely
given
Don if there was consideration
that the Committee as a whole thought it best to respond as one body
and not get into [a position where] some of us were responding and
[Individual responses could result
some of us were not responding.

1/6/93

in] having different views coming out now as Chairman Gonzalez has
introduced legislation.
MR. KOHN. That's clearly an option. I guess I was reacting
to his letter and assuming that if we did [respond as a group], we'd
get another letter back and we'd be in an endless loop.
But that may
be better than the alternatives.
So, I wouldn't rule that out, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would disagree with that.
I think
until that issue is resolved, until we actually respond
[unintelligible], all we are doing is creating problems for ourselves.
My only concern about our answering individually in the beginning was
that we did not have the occasion to interact amongst ourselves, with
our different degrees of knowledge, to in fact [reach] a System
understanding of what the particular issues are. But having done
that, I think we should respond. If we chose not to respond, we would
merely be throwing fuel into a fire of dispute, which I don't think
really gets us very far or serves any particular purpose.
MR. MULLINS. But in Don's recommended response we would
point out that the earlier letter did reflect the deliberations and
consensus of the Committee.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Oh, indeed.

Yes, certainly.

Yes, absolutely.

MR. MULLINS.

That is correct.

MR. KELLEY. One other thing that might be a good idea would
be to set a time when we would all try to send a response so that they
arrive more or less at the same time.
It might be a mistake if they
all were sent in one packet, but they should arrive more or less at
the same time rather than be strung out over a couple of weeks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that and I would suggest
that we should all have our letters in by next Friday unless somebody
sees some problems in doing so.
MR. KELLEY.

Friday a week, or Friday the day after tomorrow?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Friday a week.

MR. KOHN. May I also suggest, Mr. Chairman, that each of you
send a copy to Norm Bernard when you send one to Chairman Gonzalez?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Indeed.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn. The transmission
is a bit rugged so I may have missed something.
There are those of us
who are just opposed to taking verbatim minutes; if so, I assume that
ought to be our position.
MR. ANGELL.

I didn't hear you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Si, would you repeat what you just said?

-5-

1/6/93

MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. The telephone hookup is bad,
and I missed part of what you said earlier. But if there are some who
are just opposed to taking verbatim minutes and prefer to say so, I
assume that's a reasonable position to take.
I was basically
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Certainly, just say so.
saying that I concluded from the earlier discussion that there was a
difference of opinion on this particular question. I think some of
the members were against taking verbatim minutes under any conditions.
The remaining members were perhaps in favor of it provided that there
was statutory protection such that premature release was not
available. Now, my impression at the meeting--and I think we
suggested that in the letter [to Mr. Gonzalez]--was that those two
positions included every member of the Board and all the presidents;
we all took one of those two positions. And there's nothing that I
can see which suggests that those of you who are in fact against it in
principle should not say so.
MR. ANGELL. The original letter to you, as I recall, did not
ask for individual replies from the Board of Governors.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's right.

MR. ANGELL. And, as I recall, since I've been a member of
the Board there has never been a time when we've been requested as
members of the Board to give an individual reply. Now for me this is
somewhat problematic because I've never been involved in as serious a
discussion on this issue with members of the FOMC, whereas in the
Board meetings I clearly have been involved as one who is not a
middle-of-the-roader on this question of openness and Government in
the Sunshine. So I just want the members of the FOMC to know that I
recognize that my position is not in the consensus; it is not in the
majority at the Board. I did not bother to argue the issue because
there are so few who hold the position that I hold that I thought it
would be a waste of my breath to do so. But I do want to make this
warning that my view is not mainstream.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't you just say that. And
you can confirm the fact that the consensus of the Board is quite
different.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, I will do that.

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, may I clarify a point of
I'm not sure
nomenclature? You used the term "verbatim minutes."
about Governor Angell's position, but I don't think anybody was in
In fact, the
favor of absolute verbatim minutes released at any time.
responses that Mr. Neal got in 1977 indicated that [only] a very small
minority of those respondents were in favor of verbatim transcripts of
any sort. There were, however, more people in favor of something
called the "Memorandum of Discussion," which is not verbatim but is a
summary. So, there may be Committee members who are in favor of a
memorandum of discussion type document but not the verbatim minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an important qualification. To
read actual verbatim minutes would convey far less than a summary
memorandum. Indeed, I would suggest to you that it would convey far
less than what we do now. We are interpreting what it is we say and

1/6/93

believe in a manner which I think would be difficult for someone with
a transcript to figure out.
MR. LAWARE.
I was going to ask the same question about
whether it was necessary for each of us to answer this letter. But I
think the suggestion was that one could answer simply by saying that
you had shared with us the text of the letter that you wrote to him
and that one is in concurrence with that letter. That's a
satisfactory answer?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.
that or something?

Perfectly satisfactory.

Is there a feeling that everyone needs to say

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you have to send a piece of
paper to Mr. Gonzalez or he will send you another letter, and you can
keep down the postage cost-MR. LAWARE.
Suppose you mark it "Not known at this address"
and send it right back!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I bet you'd get his attention. Anything
further that anyone wishes to raise relevant to this question?
MR. PARRY. Not to beat a dead horse, Mr. Chairman, but if we
send those in and different views come forward, even if they are
modestly different, will we not also be adding fuel to the fire in the
sense of generating letters that say:
So-and-so thinks that's a good
idea and so-and-so thinks this is a good idea. Now explain to me why
you have these differences among you given these other views?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

The answer is "yes."

Okay, thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, it is not only "yes" but that's
the purpose of the whole exercise.
MR. PARRY.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.
Anything else, anybody?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Alan, this is Jerry. We talked
about this whole set of questions a couple of months ago. My
recollection is that you were putting together an ad hoc committee to
be chaired by Dave Mullins that was supposed to be looking at other
aspects of this question.
Is that correct or is it now moot? Or
where does that stand?
MR. MULLINS. Don, would you like to give an update on where
we stand on our subcommittee deliberations?
MR. KOHN. The subcommittee met and I'm in the process of
summarizing its deliberations.
It met for a couple of hours,
actually, went through a number of these alternatives, and listed the
pros and cons and whatnot. So, the subcommittee is definitely in

1/6/93

existence and intends to give at least a preliminary notion of its
conclusions at the February FOMC meeting.
Part of the objective of the timing was to
MR. MULLINS.
hearings.
the
Humphrey-Hawkins
prepare for
Is there
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I clearly understand that.
anything that could be said, particularly in response to the concerns
that Tom Hoenig and others have raised, apropos that you could
[unintelligible] this subcommittee, have the record somehow or other
[unintelligible] outflanked by events between now and February?
MR. KOHN.
breaking up.

What was that last phrase, Jerry?

Your words are

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Actually, the connection is terrible
for everybody. I was asking whether there is anything at all to be
said for getting on the record right now, prior to that Committee
meeting in February, so that events don't completely pass us by in
terms of an ability to think about what the subcommittee has to say-MR. KOHN. We thought about that, Jerry, when we were
Our concern about saying something
formulating the initial response.
directly about the subcommittee at that time was twofold. One, we
anticipated that Mr. Gonzalez would ask us for a verbatim transcript
of everything the subcommittee was talking about and had done and all
the background papers and we'd get caught up in that. One of the
notions--if Governor Mullins wants to talk about this--was that we
should do this on our schedule and try to do what was right by this
issue and not necessarily be driven by Mr. Gonzalez and his time
schedule. And telling him about the subcommittee simply would invite
him to insist on decisions, on background memos, and things like that
[prepared] for the subcommittee. So, we tried to hint at it
indirectly by saying in the December 24 letter to Mr. Gonzalez that
the subject is under continuing review; but it was very indirect.
That was our thinking when we drafted the original letter; it was not
to tell him about the subcommittee.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I agreed with that thinking at the
Is that
time. But I guess now that I'm facing the question I wonder:
thinking, however right it was then, still right today?
MR. SYRON. I think Jerry has a point. If we respond
collectively on the 15th--and if one were to assume for a moment that
all our responses are not absolutely identical--he may well have
called someone up to testify between the time he gets our responses
It may not be
and the time of the Humphrey-Hawkins [testimony].
likely, but anything is possible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, you know there is an out for this
sort of thing. I think we're all aware that the risk involved here is
whether we have an objective evaluation of the Federal Reserve System,
its structure, and its particular means of functioning. While each of
us may have differing views with respect to how the System should
function, I would venture to say that if any of us were called up
there, we would not argue a position that would be detrimental to the
System. In a sense I think if any of us goes up there we should try
to represent the views not only of ourselves but of our colleagues.

1/6/93

And then, rather than divide and conquer--which I think is the basic
purpose and which you're suggesting, Dick-MR. SYRON.

I think that is the purpose.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Of course it's the purpose. And,
frankly, I don't think that serves the public interest. So I would
suggest to you, should such a situation arise, that it is incumbent
upon each of us to make certain that we don't allow ourselves to be
divided [given that] our fundamental views of the nature of the System
are as close to identical as one can imagine for a group as diverse as
this group is.
One need not worry about that issue if in fact we
basically recognize what the purpose of such a divide and conquer
procedure is.
One could very readily work against it.
MR. SYRON.

Thank you.

MR. KOHN. Having reviewed what was said at the meeting and
received your comments on the letters, I guess I'd be surprised if a
letter sent by any of you directly contradicted the letter that
Chairman Greenspan sent. Governor Angell may be excepted here, but
taking account of what was said at that FOMC meeting I'd say there may
be nuances [in the views] about when a memorandum of discussion might
be released, though I don't think anyone is going to have a view which
is greatly at odds. There was remarkable consensus on the broad
issues among members of the Committee, although there were some
disagreements about whether a memorandum of discussion, for example,
should ever be done. But I don't think anybody advocated releasing it
very quickly, which is what he's advocating.
MR. ANGELL. And even I, Don, am much closer to the Committee
than I am to Representative Gonzalez.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

Any further questions or observations?

We need a new phone system!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
all very much.

What did you say?
END OF SESSION

[Laughter]

Thank you

