FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
CONFERENCE CALL
November 10, 1993
PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. LaWare
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Ms. Phillips
Mr. Stem
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, Jordan, Oltman, and Parry, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey and Siegman, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account
Mr. Checki, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Beebe, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
November 10, 1993
MR. BERNARD. Let me mention once again that this meeting is
being electronically recorded.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As differentiated from what?
[Laughter]
There have been two developments in coming to grips with the details
of the issue of the support for Mexico that we discussed previously.
Fundamentally there has been little change, but since the details are
not quite [final but] significantly close to being final I thought I'd
ask Ted Truman, who is now back from his sojourns abroad, to bring us
up-to-date on the behavior in the markets so far today with respect to
the peso and to outline the developments of the last 24 hours.
MR. TRUMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As for the financial
market developments, in light of the response to the debate and/or the
sharp increase of about 3 or 4 percentage points in short-term
interest rates, depending on which rate you choose, the peso
appreciated today from about 3.27 to 3.21. And the stock market is up
by a remarkable 4.2 percent in Mexico. It has a tendency, as the man
from the Bank of Mexico just said to me, to overshoot--to be either
over enthusiastic one way or over depressed [the other].
As far as the arrangements are concerned, I think the most
useful thing to do would be to go through the outline of the approach
that we now envision on a contingency basis, most of which I think was
described yesterday. A couple of points are new and important. It
has now been decided to ask the BIS to try to put together a package
from the other G-10 central banks and Spain. So, we are now shooting
for an overall package of
a short-term credit facility,
of which $6 billion would come from the United States and
would come from the BIS. Half of the $6 billion would come from the
Federal Reserve and half would come from the ESF. One change from the
way we described things yesterday is that up to one-third of the total
package would be made available upon request from the Mexicans. That
means in our case for the $3 billion that we would be putting in, up
to $1 billion could be drawn. Any disbursements in addition to that
would require the mutual agreement of Mexico, the United States, and
the BIS on behalf of their piece. All the disbursements, with one
qualification, would be in proportion to total commitments. And there
would be no disbursements made after December of this year. This is
envisioned as a short-term credit facility designed to deal with the
run up to the NAFTA vote and the immediate aftermath. Drawings would
be repayable three months later and the entire facility would expire
on March 31, 1994.
It would have standard interest rate terms. We
would get the U.S. Treasury bill rate. There would be a link to a
favorable indication about Mexico's policies coming from the Managing
Director of the International Monetary Fund.
Because one of the changes from what you thought about and
talked about yesterday is that
one then has to ask
oneself the question:
How are we going to assure that we would be
repaid? The mechanism we have outlined is that Mexico would commit to
maintain $2 billion of reserves on deposit at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York and $2 billion at the BIS, though with mutual agreement
those reserves could be drawn down lower. Thus, in effect--

11/10/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
mutual agreement.

I think you ought to say "only" with

MR. TRUMAN. Only with mutual agreement could the reserves at
those two institutions be reduced below that level; that includes our
agreement.
If there were an outstanding balance at the expiry of the
facility in March 1994, the standard condition of these arrangements
is that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York could sweep in all
deposits of Mexico that are available at the Bank to repay any
outstanding balance. That would take care of our repayment.
In addition, Mexico would commit to consult with other
participants on its financial developments and policies in the event
that its gross reserves decline
That is a
checkpoint of a sort, to make sure or remind them at least if we think
they are wasting too much money in this effort.
Now, there is one qualification with respect to timing. The
aim is to put the overall facility in place as soon as possible.
However, it is recognized that it is easier and quicker in principle
to put the U.S. component of the facility in place rather than the BIS
component of it.
So, assuming that we could get everything done and
we were requested by Mexico, the United States would be prepared to
announce its credit arrangement before the overall facility had been
agreed upon. And the U.S. announcement might indicate that efforts
are under way to develop a larger multilateral facility. That is the
outline of the terms and conditions as we now envisage them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.
at this point?

Do we have a formal request from Mexico for this

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
McDonough?

Are there any questions for Ted?

We do not.

Excuse me, I forgot to tell you.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. TRUMAN.

Bill

Yes, Ted.

You have had a call, right, from Governor

Mancera?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Yes.
Governor Mancera, who is the
head of the Bank of Mexico, called me and did request a central bankto-central bank facility.
MR. LINDSEY.

Does that mean the answer is yes?

MR. TRUMAN.

Yes.

MR. ANGELL.

With a specific amount?

MR. TRUMAN. Just the framework--[a request to] try to work
something out within this framework.

11/10/93

MR. KELLEY. Bill, in addition to creating the standby
[facility], would they go ahead and draw down the first tranche of $1
billion?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Miguel Mancera said was

That is not at all clear.

What

Therefore, even though
they would have the right under the facility, as Ted Truman described
it, to draw down in our case up to the amount of that first billion
dollars, it is not at all clear that in fact they would do so.
MR. TRUMAN. In fact in my conversations with the Mexicans,
they have indicated that the current intention would be not to do so,
though they have not ruled out the possibility.

[provide]

MR. ANGELL. Ted, does the ESF have the liquidity to
the $3 billion?
MR. TRUMAN.

I think so.

MR. ANGELL.

That about puts them up to their--

MR. TRUMAN. Well, they have the liquidity to provide the $1
billion, which is all they need to do at this point.
MR. ANGELL.
do $3 billion?
MR. TRUMAN.

All right.

I have not checked the balance sheet.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

So they do not have the liquidity to

I doubt if they have $3 [billion].

I thought they did not have the liquidity.

MR. TRUMAN. As of six months ago they did not, but I am not
sure what the situation is at the moment.
MR. LINDSEY.
appropriation?

Does that require [a Congressional]

MR. TRUMAN. No. To do something more it does; but to use
the funds for this purpose does not require an appropriation.
MR. LINDSEY. But if they have $1 billion and only $1
billion, how would they go to $3 billion legally? How would they
acquire the rest?
MR. TRUMAN. There are lots of ways they could do it.
In the
meantime, they might sell some of their other foreign exchange and
acquire dollars as a consequence.

11/10/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's all they have to do; it is the
dollars they need. They obviously have a very large stock of foreign
exchange.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. ANGELL.
as it is not a repo.

Of foreign exchange, I see.
I would not object on a permanent basis, as long

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason I am skeptical that they have
it is that I have not seen any diminution in their foreign exchange
holdings in any one period.
MR. TRUMAN. We looked at this last March--that's the last
time I saw their balance sheet--and they had, as I remember, about
$2.7 billion at that time. The question is whether the accumulated
interest has raised it any more between then and now.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, do I understand that if we were
to vote, this would be released next Friday?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am not requesting a vote yet because
this is still in the discussion stage.
MR. BROADDUS.
This is Al Broaddus. Could I ask on this
first $1 billion drawing whether we have any risk of loss or are we
completely covered for that under the $4 billion I gather the BIS will
be-MR. TRUMAN. We think, because of this mechanism of the
reserves being held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and our
consent being required for them to draw down those reserves, that we
would in effect be covered for that $1 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, it requires our assent
basically to draw against that account.
If we do not give our assent,
then that account is in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
unavailable [to them], except to repay the drawing.
MR. MULLINS. As a practical matter, under what conditions
would we ever decline to let them draw on that?
MR. TRUMAN.

I think as a practical matter--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think the question should be reversed.

MR. TRUMAN. That's right. I cannot anticipate all [that
could happen in] the future. That is why we have set this up so [it
requires] mutual agreement if something happened.
I do not think we
can completely anticipate all the developments that might take place
over the next seven days or the next seven weeks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I will say this:
In the event that
something emerges that is even close to that, this Committee would be
informed.
MR. TRUMAN. The way we would set this up it would require
mutual agreement on two [specific aspects of the overall] agreement.

11/10/93

Any drawing beyond the first third would require mutual agreement.
And there would have to be agreement to draw down the [remaining]
balances at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
MR. ANGELL. But at the same time it seems to me that we
should be aware that our setting up the facility, which might thereby
be announced, and then our being unready to meet that outgo could have
certain market repercussions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but remember what we are talking
about is something in the area of $18 billion in reserves that they
have to go through before they even come down to the base. My
impression is that before we get even remotely close to the triggering
point where our funds become exposed in any respect, there will be all
sorts of additional events.
MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me that the monetary policy
regime that is in place in Mexico is a very sound one. That they are
asking for this with such large reserves is to me an indication that
they have moved into another realm of central bank operations, and I
think we should recognize that. I feel that it is quite unlikely that
they are going to need [to draw on those funds], given their
willingness to push real interest rates where they have and to produce
such a significant slowdown in the Mexican economy that is already
under way. They have in place a monetary restraint which makes it
somewhat unlikely that they are going to need-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it is extremely unlikely. What
we are trying to do here is to convey a major element of moral
support. It is clearly not an internationally altruistic event
because if something adverse occurs in the financial system in Mexico,
our export trade to Mexico will be very significantly affected. And
that is obviously something we have to be very much concerned about.
So I think what we want to do is to be as supportive as we can and to
address the issue they are addressing. But in this context what they
are asking for is really fundamentally moral support, not financial
support.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

I fully agree with that analysis.

MR. ANGELL. I understand. But at the same time, however low
the probabilities are, I believe we have to be aware before we make
this move that in the unlikely event they would need to draw that
money down, it could be a somewhat disruptive event for us to say "no"
at that point in time.
MR. TRUMAN. That is why we proposed that they would be able
to draw at least the first tranche. That is the point. Although
there would be protections, that [tranche] could be drawn free and
clear. Their own stated intention, as the Chairman has said, was not
to get themselves in a situation of overly defending an exchange rate
or not defending it enough with monetary policy so that their reserves
would be drawn down so much that they would even come close to the low
levels that we are contemplating. So they might draw, but they are
most likely to maintain. That is what the
number comes
from. At least
in gross reserves, they would have to
reconfigure--even if they already have been--what they think their
overall policies are going to be.

11/10/93

MR. ANGELL. My statements have been made in the context of
my being a supporter of what you are asking.
taken.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think [your points]
Any other questions for Ted?

are well

MR. MCTEER. Bob McTeer in Houston. I gather that the
restrictions on the use of this were suggested by the Mexicans rather
than [requested] by others from them?
MR. TRUMAN.

There was mutual recognition involved, I think,

Bob.
MR. MCTEER. Would you say that we are treating them less
favorably than we would other countries under similar circumstances or
we would be treating them the same?
MR. TRUMAN. This is a little different than most of the
things we have done in the last decade, where the previous ones we've
been involved in actually were bridge loans to some [other source of
financing].
This is more of a "traditional" use of the swap line--as
we saw it used in the past--where there were short-run pressures,
capital flows, and so forth and so on. With that qualification, and
therefore a slightly different question about where we look for
sources of repayment, I think this is well within the basic parameters
of how we have treated Mexico three times since 1982 and how the
Treasury, in their own operations, has treated other Latin countries.
MR. MCTEER. Yes. I would just hope that we do not leave the
impression that we are treating them as second class world citizens in
some way.
MR. TRUMAN. I think the discussions that we have had over
the last 24 hours, or at least those I have been a party to, have been
quite warm and cordial. In fact, Larry Summers at one point said we
do have to understand that this is a continuing relationship and we do
not want to do things now that would jeopardize [that relationship] in
the future or would jeopardize it now. So there is a sense of trying
to strike a balance here.
MR. MCTEER.

Okay.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. That's certainly consistent with
the tone of the conversations [I've had].
The two I had today with
Governor Mancera were exactly the kinds of conversations that one of
us would have had with one of the major central bankers of Europe.
MR. MCTEER.

That's good.

MR. HOENIG. Ted, it may be too soon to know this, but you
mentioned these other countries and the negotiating on the rest of
this arrangement.
Is that proceeding well or do we know at this
stage?
MR. TRUMAN.
that they go out more
Spain to participate,
Starting with Canada,

Before we and the Treasury suggested to the BIS
formally to ask the other G-10 countries and
I did contact the four biggest players.
for obvious reasons, the United Kingdom, France,

11/10/93

and Germany, it is fair to say that in each case I got some questions,
both on strategy as well as detail. In the first three of those four
countries, I got an on-the-whole favorable reaction. Germany was
tough. In recent years it has always been tough to convince the
I basically was asking
Bundesbank to go along on these arrangements.
the authorities of those central banks, including the Bundesbank,
whether they would recommend to the U.S. monetary authorities that
they not try to put together a G-10 facility because we all recognize
that if they thought it was a nonstarter and we tried and that got
out, then that would not necessarily be helpful to the Mexican
authorities.
In no case, including the Bundesbank, did I get that
kind of advice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Ted?
If not,
let me just indicate that what we are talking about here is something
which is in process and may never actually materialize if the markets
come around. Rather than take a premature authorization vote, I would
prefer not to do that until we get a specific need to do so.
What I
would request is that the members make sure that Norm Bernard knows
their whereabouts at all times. Who is involved in this?
MR. TRUMAN.

The Secretary.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Make sure that Norm knows where you will
be at all times so that in the event we need a telephone poll, we can
do it expeditiously. Should that become necessary, I will ask for two
authorizations at that time. One would be to authorize the
establishment of a special swap line with the Bank of Mexico in the
amount of $2.3 billion, subject to the Chairman's determination that
the appropriate terms and conditions have been met. The second would
be to authorize the Subcommittee to approve drawings on the special
swap line and the regular $700 million swap line, subject to the
Is that adequate
appropriate terms and conditions having been met.
for everybody?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. KELLEY.

Yes, sir.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Then I would request that we keep
in contact.
There is a not unreasonable possibility that the worse
could be behind us. I think the odds probably are less than 50/50,
but they surely are not negligible.
In the event that the markets
stabilize and some restoration occurs, we will not have to move
further on this question.
MR. LINDSEY. If Bill is going to ask for a request,
procedurally what is he going to tell them?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we have at this stage is authority
to move forward in the negotiations. If we get to the point that a
legal action is required, then we will move to get it implemented in a
telephone call.
Okay? Thank you very much, everybody.
END OF SESSION

